Resumption of the session
I declare resumed the session of the European Parliament adjourned on Thursday , 5 November 1998 .
Approval of the Minutes
The Minutes of the sitting of Thursday , 5 November 1998 have been distributed .
Are there any comments ?
I should like it to be explicitly recorded in the Minutes that I said in Brussels that it is not only for reasons of principle that I am no longer voting in roll-call votes - which I have not done for some time - , but also for taxation reasons .
I repeat : Dutch taxation reasons .
I should like this to be recorded .
Thank you , Mr Janssen van Raay , that will be done .
Mr President , I do not want to speak about the Minutes , but I would like to ask you when the new parliament will be completed .
Is the IPE4 , which is still a ' forbidden city ' , something out of a science fiction novel ?
We are still here today in this lovely Hemicycle , which we are , of course , attached to , since we cannot sit in the new building .
We hear rumours here and we wait .
When will the inaugural sitting be held ?
Will it be in December , February or the summer of 1999 ?
Why are there such delays ?
We accept the argument that the complex process of moving in must be as well organised as possible , but I sincerely hope that it not a matter once again of politicking against Strasbourg .
Mr President , we expect a clear response explaining all this wavering that damages Parliament 's image of rigour , efficiency and credibility .
What I can tell you , Mr Striby , is that the building is not yet ready for occupation .
Clearly , the company which had the task of constructing of the building should have made it available to Parliament last January .
Parliament is not responsible for the fact that it is still not ready , since it has not yet been certified by the relevant authorities or the architects .
For our part , we are doing our utmost to cooperate with the city of Strasbourg and the French Government so that it can be completed as soon as possible , in accordance with the regulations which apply .
Once this has been done , we shall carry out our share of the dataprocessing work for Parliament and inaugurate the building as soon as possible .
However , I cannot give you a date . That is outside our control .
Mr President , I took the liberty of writing to you last week on the situation in Central America .
As each day passes it becomes clearer that the loss of life and physical damage experienced in that region have indeed been of biblical proportions .
The citizens of the Member States - Spain , for instance - are making an enormous effort to express their solidarity with the people of Central America . In keeping with this effort , I suggested in my letter to you that the Members of the European Parliament should open a special account .
Members could pay their own contributions into such an account , and also any donations made through reputable non-governmental organisations to help rebuild the area . This symbolic gesture would supplement the effort the European Community is already making to respond to the situation .
I believe that on this occasion Members of the European Parliament should show they are on the same wavelength as the citizens and join with them in expressing solidarity with the victims .
I wonder , Mr President , if you are now in a position to voice your response to this letter I sent you last week .
Thank you , Mr Carnero .
The matter was put before Parliament 's Bureau , as you requested in your letter .
The Bureau felt it was not appropriate for it - or , indeed , for Parliament - to open such an account , and that problems could well arise in connection with the Financial Regulation . However , if one or several Members were to take up your suggestion , we would publicise their initiative , drawing it to Members ' attention so they could contribute if they wished .
I am sure many of us have already made a contribution through these organisations , as have large numbers of our fellow citizens in the Member States . Nevertheless , the sort of initiative you suggest is always welcome and worthy of commendation .
However , it must be undertaken on an individual level . It is not for a parliamentary body to launch it , though every assistance and support should of course be offered .
Mr President , I would like to speak at this public sitting this evening in my capacity as chairman of Parliament 's Delegation for relations with Japan . In the framework of the bilateral exchanges and meetings organised by the European Parliament , particularly by Parliament 's sessional services , we are receiving an official visit from an important delegation of seven members of the Japanese Diet and four members of the Japanese Senate , including two former ministers , this week in Strasbourg .
According to the agenda , there are votes being held on Thursday morning .
But on Thursday morning we also have a meeting that is authorised by the sessional services , which was even organised by Parliament 's sessional services , during the votes on Agenda 2000 .
Therefore , I find myself caught between two stools . This is not a serious problem for me personally , as I have accepted my responsibilities and have decided , as chairman of the delegation , to attend the meeting , but there is a risk that I might be there on my own .
Short of cutting themselves in two , my colleagues are , in fact , either going to have to appear impolite towards our Japanese guests or show a lack of consistency with the decision we had taken not to plan any meetings of Parliament 's official bodies during voting time .
I am in a situation where I feel totally schizophrenic and , although I am a doctor , I am having trouble sorting myself out .
I would like to have a response on this matter , Mr President .
Normally there are no votes at that time on Thursday , Mr Pompidou , except in the case of those on the budget .
This is a quite exceptional situation because of the large number of votes to be taken on Agenda 2000 .
That could not be foreseen when the time was fixed for the meeting of your delegation .
We shall look into the matter and see what can still be done at such short notice , and I will keep you informed .
Mr President , would you please have it recorded in the Minutes that today I found my office ransacked and full of broken glasses and a radio missing , even though I had locked the office doors after the last part-session and , interestingly enough , found them locked again today .
Would you please also record the question I am now putting to you in the Minutes : when will we finally be able to get on with our work without fear of the kind of violent attacks that occurred in Brussels or break-ins into our offices ?
Mr Nassauer , I hope you have informed the security services of this incident .
I should reassure you that to date , Parliament 's security services have almost always resolved such incidents successfully .
I trust this will not prove to be an exception and that the culprits will be identified .
Should it appear necessary to tighten up on security , the appropriate measures will of course be introduced .
Thank you for informing us of the incident .
It will be noted in the Minutes and the security services informed so that they can take appropriate action immediately .
Mr President , I would like to ask the Commission when they propose to deal with the report which was commissioned by DG XIV - reference PEM / 306 - concerning the physical interaction between grey seals , fishing gear and the abnormal predatory conditions of the seals in the North Atlantic , the North-West Atlantic and now penetrating into the South Atlantic .
It is about time that the Commission had the courage to present that report and its scientific findings to Parliament so that we can deal with that particular matter .
Predatory behaviour of seals around the Irish and Scottish coasts amounts to the total allowable catch plus one quarter .
Something has to be done soon and we have to face up to it .
I ask the Commission to act with haste .
Mr Killilea , you know perfectly well that that is not the way to put a question to the Commission .
There are several ways of putting your question .
This is not the right time to ask it .
You can ask it in one of the different ways provided for in the Rules .
Mr President , I would also like to make a point concerning working conditions because for the second time my trunk has not arrived .
Each time I put all the files I need here in the trunk and when I arrive , I find out that it is still in Brussels .
This is very inconvenient because all my documents for work are in that trunk .
What is happening is that my office is on a corner and it must clearly get in the way , because people put it away in the photocopying room .
When the removal men come , they obviously forget the trunk .
I therefore took it out of there and put a label on it to let people know that when my trunk is put away in the photocopying room , it is not taken to Strasbourg .
I presume that the removal men saw the second part of that note saying that it is not taken to Strasbourg .
And I still do not have my trunk !
We shall take that up with the department which is responsbile , Mrs Guinebertière .
Mr President , I must first apologise for my somewhat late arrival . Unfortunately , due to the considerable difficulties involved in reaching Strasbourg by air , many Members have arrived three hours late .
Secondly , I should like to express my group 's concern over the arrest in Italy of Mr Abdullah Ocalan , who is in danger of being extradited to Turkey .
We are all aware of the European Parliament 's policy on supporting human rights , political rights in Turkey and the rights of the Kurdish people . My group believes it would be appropriate to take the necessary action to ensure that Abdullah Ocalan , who declared a unilateral cease-fire some months ago , is not extradited to Turkey from a European country .
Mr President , as you are aware , recently I presented a report to Parliament on the banana regime .
It was overwhelmingly supported with quite a lot of common consent within this House and was passed on to the Commission .
We now have complaints from the United States in the guise of Chiquita , who are attacking the Commission and the proposals that the Commission finally brought forward after the original complaint from the WTO .
As a matter of concern , would the Commission be willing to come and explain to us how they are dealing with Chiquita 's complaint ?
Mr Thomas , I just told Mr Killilea that is not the way to put questions to the Commission .
You know the way to put questions to the Commission , so use it .
I did follow the procedure you just outlined and put down two questions - one to the Commission and one to Council - on building costs in Strasbourg and Brussels ...
( The President cut the speaker off )
This is not the time to put questions to the committee , nor to the Council .
You cannot have the floor .
Since there are no further comments , the Minutes are approved .
Order of business
The next item is the order of business .
Mr President , I just wanted to make a point of order .
I have heard that Question Time to the Council is to be deleted this week .
I regard this both as an infringement of Rule 41 ( 1 ) of the Rules of Procedure and as an infringement of the Treaty , which specifically guarantees us the right to put questions .
The right to put questions is one of the most important , individual parliamentary rights and I believe no Conference of Presidents , not even in this House , can simply cancel that right ; we have a right to a monthly Question Time to the Council .
I and many other colleagues have tabled important questions to the Council within the deadline .
Let me insist that we have this Question Time .
If the Council wants to make statements , which are often merely upgraded press conferences , that is fine by me , but not in the place of Question Time , which is a key right of every Member of Parliament .
Mr President , I have no objections to the draft agenda for Monday , but I would like to know if it is true that the Conference of Presidents has taken a decision concerning the legal basis of the Fabra Vallés report .

Yes , Mr Dell 'Alba , and the Conference of Presidents has established that Article 206 was not the appropriate legal basis for the report .
This report will therefore be put to the vote by simple and not absolute majority , and will not entail either approval or rejection of the Commission 's management .
The Conference of Presidents instructed me to convey to the president of the sitting its wish that this should be made very clear when the vote is taken .
However , I am grateful that you have given me the opportunity to do that now .
Tuesday :
The PPE Group has asked for the Ferri report on supplementary pensions to be brought forward from Thursday and placed after the Añoveros Trias de Bes report on promoting innovation through patents .
Is there a speaker from the PPE Group in favour of this request ?
Mrs Oomen-Ruijten has the floor .
Mr President , we made this request because the Ferri report goes very well with and the Añoveros report , I and II .
It is a very difficult report covering very complex issues relating to pensions .
It is better to be able to count on the largest possible presence when voting on it .
( Parliament approved the request )
Wednesday : no changes
Thursday :
The Group of the Party of European Socialists has asked for the Commission statement on the results of the Buenos Aires summit on climate change to be postponed .
It has also requested the inclusion , after the report by Mr Wiebenga on displaced persons , of the report by Mr Lehne on airport transit arrangements which is currently entered on Friday , so that the agenda for Thursday would be as follows : from 9.30 a.m. to 1 p.m. , 3 p.m. to 4 p.m. and 6 p.m. to 8 p.m. we would have first voting time , and then the Wiebenga report and the Lehne report .
Between 4 p.m. and 8 p.m. there would still be the topical and urgent debate , reduced to two hours and without returning to the normal length of three hours .


Is there a speaker in favour ?
Mr President , let me justify my motion to postpone the Commission statement on the Buenos Aires climate conference on the grounds that I and the Members who took part in this conference on behalf of Parliament decided , after talking the matter over , that it would be more sensible to prepare carefully for this discussion in the appropriate committees ; that would allow us to conclude with a motion for a resolution which was not drafted in haste , straight after hearing the outcome of the conference , but was based on careful and detailed preparation .
I would ask the House to endorse my group 's motion , so that Parliament 's views can have some substance , rather than being put forward in a rush .
Mr President , I led the Parliamentary delegation to Buenos Aires .
I absolutely endorse the proposal that we take our time in responding to what was a very complex outcome in Buenos Aires .
It missed failure by a very narrow margin .
It was Mr Linkhorst 's suggestion , as one of the other members of the delegation , that rather than going straight to a debate in plenary we should attempt to have a discussion in at least the three committees most clearly responsible , draft a careful resolution and come back either in December and January .
That is certainly the opinion of Commissioner Bjerregaard , so I endorse the idea .
Mr President , we addressed this question last week in a perfectly normal manner .
It was handled positively at the meeting of General Secretaries and at the Conference of Presidents .
Anybody who has looked at the media today and also over last weekend will know that it is now and not in January that the public debate is taking place .
It is inconceivable to me that the European Parliament would not be able to make an initial political assessment of the outcome of Buenos Aires last week .
If we wait until January to come up with a very searching , very balanced and very detailed response , we will find that nobody is listening any more .
On the basis of the information currently available we are perfectly able to adopt a brief , well-founded political position this week while the matter is still in the news and not when it is past history .
It is now that we must react , it is the European Union which has shouldered its responsibilities on this issue and it is this European Parliament which must now make its voice heard .
Thank you , Mrs Aelvoet .
I put to the vote the request from the Group of the Party of European Socialists
( Parliament approved the request )
Friday :
The Group of the Party of European Socialists has requested the removal of the debate on the oral questions on BSE in Portugal .
Mr President , I should like to express my view as chairman of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development .
This issue has already been discussed in committee , first in the presence of Mr Heine when the Veterinary Committee arrived at its decision and more recently , just a few days ago , when the Commissioner himself was present at our committee meeting .
I am not aware of any further developments that would justify this request for inclusion on the agenda .
As far as we are concerned , this would serve no useful purpose .
Mr President , I asked for this oral question to be included in the agenda since , in my opinion , the situation in Portugal is sufficiently serious to justify that .
After all , despite our meetings in the Committee on Agriculture , the decision on the Portuguese meat embargo was taken at an extraordinary meeting for which I did not receive - nor did some of my colleagues - the respective agenda containing the item on the statement by Dr Heine , even though the Chairman of that committee told us here that it was sent to all Members .
Dr Heine made a last-minute appearance to announce the reasons for the embargo .
Everyone knew that many Members of the European Parliament would be unable to attend as it was an extraordinary meeting arranged at the last minute . That is why I have asked for a debate to be held here .
It should be made clear that this is not only an issue for the Portuguese but also relates to how the Commission acts in this kind of situation , a very serious situation for all Portuguese meat producers .
That is why I tabled an oral question on behalf of my group .
Thank you , Mr Rosado Fernandes .
Do you wish to speak in favour or against , Mr Graefe zu Baringdorf ?
Mr President , I am in favour of keeping this item on the agenda , and would add that our oral question has not been included in it .
However , we have been told that it will be included in the final version of the agenda .
So we also have an oral question on BSE , and I am very much in favour of debating this item .
Thank you , Mr Graefe zu Baringdorf .
I put to the vote the request from the PSE Group .
( Parliament approved the request )
MED Programmes
The next item is the report ( A4-0404 / 98 ) by Mr Fabra Vallés , on behalf of the Committee on Budgetary Control , on repercussions in the case of the MED programmes .
Mr President , the Spanish Secretary of State for Development Cooperation , Mr Fernando Villalonga , published an excellent article in the press last week entitled ' Felling the rotten tree to save the forest ' .
This age-old idea encapsulates the thinking behind my report .
Through the resolution dated 31 March this year , Parliament entrusted me with its preparation , and I can assure you that it has been one of the least pleasant duties I have had to carry out in my 20 years as an elected representative .
Clearly , it is not and never has been the intention of Parliament , its Committee on Budgetary Control , or myself as rapporteur to obstruct the policy for decentralised cooperation with Mediterranean countries .
Such cooperation aims to strengthen direct contacts with universities , cities , local groups and journalists in those countries , enabling the peoples on both shores of the Mediterranean to become acquainted , exchange views , and understand each other better .
Our intention has always been to preserve such important cooperation , and to strengthen and improve its foundations .
In this context , I must remind you that it was not Parliament but the Commission - Commissioner Marín himself - that ordered such cooperation to cease at the end of 1995 . In my opinion , this was entirely justified , following as it did a most critical report from the Court of Auditors , whose investigation had revealed very serious irregularities .
Since this report became public , Parliament has done everything necessary to restore the credibility of this policy and allow it to be relaunched , from the month of April .
I am grateful for the Commission 's efforts in this regard , Mr Liikanen .
Nevertheless , it also has to be said , Mr Liikanen , that if we really want to save the forest we have to be sure to fell all the diseased trees .
And , before felling them , we also have to be sure that we have identified them all first .
In this connection , I want to make it quite clear that on the basis of the documentation received and studied , it does not appear that there are grounds for bringing criminal charges against those in authority at the Commission 's ' North-South ' Directorate- General .
Thanks to the information made available by Mr Marín , we know that the Commission has paid ECU 600 000 for the projects to be audited .
You are aware of this too , as you have had the findings on your desk since September .
On the basis of the European Commission 's own criteria , experts at the London firm that carried out the audit have identified costs totalling ECU 4 million that ought to be recovered .
They have also identified a further sum of over ECU 20 million and additional checks will have to be done in this respect , not to mention the total of ECU 2.2 million to be recovered from the technical assistance firms .
A further and as yet unknown sum must be added to this total . The exact amount will become known when we receive details of the audit from financial control concerning the MED-LINK aid offices .
Commissioner , I am about to conclude , but I must first call on you to show some courage , courage enough to recognise that you have been mistaken or misinformed as to the true extent of the problems and the sums concerned .
You now have the opportunity to inform us that you are going to pass the whole file on to the judicial authorities .
I urge you to take advantage of this opportunity , because it is not for the European Commission or for Parliament to decide whether or not punishable offences have been committed .
That is a matter for the judicial authorities .
It is a simple and fundamental principle that Parliament confirmed once again in its resolution on the discharge on 31 March this year .
Furthermore , it is an obligation the European Court of Justice in Luxembourg has confirmed by case-law .
It is not only an obligation , it is a necessity , because it is a very complicated file , and many individuals are involved . Given the resources and rights it has , or rather does not have , at its disposal , UCLAF cannot successfully undertake an investigation of this magnitude without the support of the judicial authorities .
If matters take this course , I shall be able to say that I am in favour of granting the discharge where this issue is concerned , and at the same time , you will have the chance of restoring the credibility the Commission has been losing over the last few weeks .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , nobody , including this Parliament , comes back to the same question twice without reason .
We are not doing this to avoid boredom or because we do not know how to spend the day .
It would have been better if we could have clarified everything that needs clarifying in a report .
But in our view some important points were not clarified , and nor have they been in the meantime , unfortunately .
I am emphasising this again , although Mr Fabra Vallés has already made the point .
If we assume that only a court or the appropriate judicial authority can decide whether the facts of the case constitute grounds for criminal proceedings , then the judicial authorities must be in possession of all the information .
But then ' all ' unfortunately really does mean all , because who could make a selection ?
The Commission 's relationship with the Member States ' judicial authorities is simply different from the situation that would apply within a Member State .
A special relationship , or perhaps a too poorly defined relationship , exists between the Commission , the Commission officials , the buildings , the documents in the possession of the Commission and the other European institutions on the one hand , and the individual national judicial authorities on the other - and obviously only national judicial authorities can consider the case .
We are aware of this difficulty , as is the rapporteur , who has taken it into account in his report .
Nevertheless , we must urge that decisions are taken in the place where they belong , namely by the national judicial authorities .
So let me ask again , and for the last time in this form , please make all the files available to the judicial authorities and do not say , as also happened again with ECHO : first the Commission decides whether there is a case to answer , and then it also decides what facts are relevant to resolving or clarifying that case .
We would not be so persistent - as shown by my reference to ECHO - if this were a one-off case .
But it is a problem we have been facing for quite some time .
Hence our persistence here , the persistence of the rapporteur but also of the Committee on Budgetary Control and , in the end , of the House itself .
We all regret having to keep doing this .
We hope we will come to a conclusion now and take a decision .
I think perhaps we will , and we must also undertake to review these questions in depth in connection with the discharge .
We must be prepared to do so , the Commission must be prepared to do so , but so must the Court of Auditors .
I think we will also be discussing our relations with the Court of Auditors today and considering how rapidly we can deal with the questions that arise from this .
After all , this report also shows that there is no point spending too long and too much time on formalities .
We have asked enough specific questions in committee and had to wait too long for answers .
That is another reason why we have had to come back to the same question twice in the space of about a year .
We shall have to find other ways ; they will be more precise and will certainly not involve any lesser degree of care .
Let me perhaps make a final point on a question arising from this report but which has also come up repeatedly in the past . If someone criticises the implementation of a particular policy , it is always assumed that they are criticising the substance of that policy area .
I believe that is unacceptable .
It is done by public opinion , but it is also done here in this House , and I think the two are often confused during the debates .
Mr Fabra Vallés said it all at the outset . It was in our interest to resume the MED programmes .
We did all we could to enable the Commission to resume the programmes .
That was our priority .
But this could not detract from , or in a sense overshadow the fact that we are also looking at how they were implemented in the past , because our criticism of their implementation is fundamental and concerns the management of programmes in general and personnel management in general ; then , in a sense , the affair of the MED programmes is merely an example of something we are criticising on principle .
Then ECHO is merely an example of something we are criticising on principle , the tourism case was an example of a matter of principle , and we must all learn that we can criticise general structures on the basis of one example , and that this criticism goes far beyond the report .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , did we not all believe , or at least hope , that we had finally got to the end of the long saga of the MED programmes and that the Commission had taken action , after adopting a resolution on it more than a year ago and emphatically repeating key points of it when we postponed the discharge in the spring ?
We were well wide of the mark !
As Mr Fabra Vallés has explained , instead of improvements , we have seen new information come to light which seems to show that the financial damage is far worse than we had hitherto assumed .
This was discovered by a British auditing company which - and we grant the Commission this - was commissioned by Brussels to investigate completed MED programmes and projects .
The auditors are looking into about half the completed projects and believe that some 4 million euros can be reclaimed .
Let me ask the Commission : how much money has it actually recovered so far ?
Have the rest of the projects been examined now , and what amount of repayments does that come to ?
What conclusions does the Commission draw from the serious defects found by the auditing firm , such as over-subsidised projects , evidence which had disappeared and so on ?
Why was UCLAF not brought in promptly , as the rapporteur says ?
As regards the financial management of the Agency for the Trans-Mediterranean Networks - ARTM - the UK auditors make a devastating assessment , as did the Court of Auditors in its special report No 1 / 96 .
This brings us to one of the two main problems that led to the postponement of the discharge for 1996 , namely the question of whether criminal fraud may be involved here , in addition to serious irregularities .
For the Commission to entrust ARTM , an international association under Belgian law , with the financial management of the MED projects without any legal basis and without obtaining the opinion of the legal service or of financial control , for the management board members also to be managers of the technical assistance agencies and to be involved in awarding some project funds without tenders and thereby secure themselves a large slice of the cake , that is to say fat contracts , is to say the least an overlapping of interests , as is also the view of the Court of Auditors and UCLAF .
Evidently the Commission has until now disregarded the clear advice of the Court of Auditors to the effect that these kinds of facts are punishable under Belgian law .
But this matter can only be settled by the courts , which is why we call on the Commission for the third and last time to forward the entire file to the judicial authorities , so that they can at least examine the question of their competence and then , where appropriate , bring proceedings !
The second question in relation to the discharge for 1996 is how the Commission handles disciplinary proceedings .
We believe that administrative inquiries and processes are no substitute for disciplinary proceedings and are not the appropriate way to prove the innocence of a possible suspect .
Mr President , let me begin by thanking the rapporteur for his cooperation .
In particular , I have been very pleased with the support there has been for a number of amendments we have tabled , and I am glad that we are agreed on an approach which is aimed at placing the responsibility on the Commission and not singling out particular officials , but insisting that it is the Commission which accepts the political responsibility for the situation .
It must in fact be the case that the Commission must neither cover up for its officials nor hide behind them , but simply accept the responsibility for the fact that things are as they are .
This is a very serious matter that we are dealing with today .
How much time and effort we have spent on this which we would rather have used on other things !
I can only deplore the course of events , because the fact is that we cannot close the matter with this report , but once again have to call on the Commission to take action and once again say what steps we in Parliament will be obliged to take if the Commission does not comply with our requirements .
I would therefore ask the Commissioner if we can have a clear answer here and now as to whether the Commission will respond to paragraph 3 of the report and take the specific action which is being requested .
Let us be clear today if it is willing to do so , or if it is simply going to cock a snook at Parliament 's requests .
If there is one thing that can shake our citizens ' trust in the EU system , it is the suspicion that certain things are not happening in accordance with the rules , that irregularities are occurring , or that some people are engaging in a cover-up .
For that reason , Commissioner , I cannot urge strongly enough that we should bring this matter to a conclusion and see that the necessary action is taken , so that we can all honestly say that we have rectified the mistakes and the shortcomings , as well as the procedures which are necessary to enable the Commission to live up to its responsibilities .
Mr President , I am speaking here on behalf of Mr Giansily who has been detained at another meeting .
In spite of the serious and expert work carried out by Mr Fabra Vallés , we find the report on the repercussions of the MED programmes affair highly unsatisfactory .
In fact , we believe that , far from clarifying the debate on the 1996 discharge , this report only makes the issue more confusing .
The irregularities discovered in the management of the MED programmes , which meant that these programmes were suspended until the Commission relaunched them in April , involve more than a third of the appropriations used and the financial loss is much greater than was first supposed .
As the rapporteur has clearly shown , the management of the MED programmes shows evidence of serious management problems for which the Commission is entirely responsible and for which it must accept the consequences , as provided for in the Treaties .
This whole matter falls within the framework of the discharge procedure , which will be on the agenda in December .
The instruments the European Parliament has at its disposal to mark its disapproval , or to punish the Commission , are the refusal to grant discharge and even the censure procedure .
Further debate , in my view , is likely to weaken Parliament 's position in the vote in December and I regret the fact that consideration of the MED programmes is not an integral part of the general report by Mr Elles on the discharge .
Secondly , the petition to the Commission in the rapporteur 's resolution is of little use when the European Parliament should judge the Commission on its financial auditing rather than following it through the maze of its administrative inquiries that are not sufficiently transparent .
It is unfortunate that the rapporteur has not included any mention of the link between the irregularities discovered and the refusal to grant discharge , which is , however , at the heart of the debate .
For our part , we are hoping for an objective debate on the discharge for the 1996 financial year .
We hope , on the one hand , that genuine and frank questions will be asked regarding the irregularities and the fraud committed in the implementation of the MED programmes , for which responsibility lies with the Commission .
And we hope , on the other hand , that Parliament shows no sign of weakness in exercising the powers of which it is guardian on behalf of Europe 's citizens because , when all is said and done , is it not our citizens who have been deceived in this affair ?
Mr President , we agree with the rapporteur as regards both his assessment of this particular case and the criticism that he levels at the Commission . We also go along with some of his proposals .
This is not an issue on which we are giving our opinion for the first time . In the light of its seriousness , in that it refers to a collapse of the Union 's financial resources - undoubtedly far greater than was initially thought - , it is politically embarrassing for the Commission .
It is therefore to be hoped , in this case as in others , that there might be signs of rigour and commitment of a different kind for preventing irregularities and fraud .
We might expect far more firmness and swiftness in starting disciplinary or judicial procedures against those responsible for the irregularities and fraud . Whenever there are suggestions that fraud has taken place , we might expect far more transparency and , in particular , an attitude of cooperation with the European Parliament , and especially with the relevant judicial authorities in the Member States .
At this stage , we think it is very important that the Commission should forward the whole MED case-file to the Belgian , French and Italian courts or the European Parliament should act in its stead , making available all the evidence at its disposal and forwarding it to those national authorities .
The Commission should do this as quickly as possibly , by 1 December , as our colleague Mr Fabra Vallés has asked .
In any case , it should do so as soon as possible and if it does not , in my opinion , I do not see how we would grant the Commission the discharge .
When assessing the discharge , a lot of things have to be taken into consideration , including whether or not the Commission has met our demands concerning this vital issue .
Mr President , I should like to thank Mr Fabra Vallés for this excellent report .
Many of us , both in the Green Group and in Parliament as a whole , are extremely upset about events surrounding the implementation of the MED programmes .
It is not their content that is in dispute , but the way in which they have been administered .
One of our foremost duties towards our electorate and the citizens of the EU is to act as a supervisory body .
It is up to us to ensure that matters we discuss in this House are taken forward in a proper manner .
The EU Treaties clearly give us the task of exercising this supervisory role .
Since the MED programmes were last examined , new facts have come to light .
Yet the Commission has still not produced the information we asked for initially - and which we need in order to fulfil our remit as a supervisory body for the EU .
We must have the data if the Committee on Budgetary Control is to do its job . This is a serious matter .
People could end up thinking that the Commission has something to hide . There is , after all , a possibility that its own officials might be involved in activities which could - at worst - entail criminal prosecution .
The only way for the Commission to allay such suspicions is to come forward with the relevant documentation .
We in the European Parliament need the material , and so do the judicial authorities . This is the last chance for the Commission .
The Green Group naturally supports the tough - but patently necessary - conclusions drawn by the rapporteur .
Mr President , last month the Committee on Budgetary Control had tabled a report by Mr Bösch , on the basis of Article 138b of the Treaty .
The Presidency had to make it change the legal basis .
This month it is retabling a report by Mr Fabra Vallés on the basis of Article 206 and the Presidency has told it that another legal basis must be adopted .
I think that this is a bit of a mess and I feel I must draw attention to it because , in my opinion , if it is acceptable once , we will have to be more careful in the future before presenting reports before the House .
The Court of Auditors has drawn up around 40 special reports over the last four or five years and Parliament has given its opinion on 10 reports in this House .
As far as the MED affair is concerned , we have already had two reports and , in practice , we force the Commission to meet such short deadlines - by asking it , for example , to present documents within 10 days - that there may well be a third MED report .
As a result , alongside Dynasty or Dallas , we will also have the MED soap opera with all the publicity it entails .
I believe that Parliament has important control instruments at its disposal and that it must handle them well .
It must not , in my view , resort to some sort of therapeutic persecution that hardly enhances the institutional balance or , more particularly , our own role .
We have these instruments , and we must keep them . But please let us try to put an end to this saga .
Our resolution of 31 March informing the Commission of the postponement of the 1996 discharge stated , in particular , that the Committee on Budgetary Control was to draw up a new report on the MED programmes on the basis of a report by the Commission on the financial audit of these programmes .
It would appear today - and this has already been said - that the loss to the Community budget is significantly greater than had been originally assumed : a figure of almost ECU 10 million is mentioned .
Indeed , the subsidies that were wrongly allocated are not spread evenly over all the projects ; there are certain projects where more than 50 % of the subsidies paid are in serious doubt .
The report by financial control not only confirms the appalling quality of the service provided by the agency the Commission entrusted with financial control of the trans-Mediterranean networks , but it also provides a great deal of information about how this agency was run and the relations it had with the Commission .
We thus learn that when the two board members of the agency who were also managers of two technical assistance agencies were called on to resign from the board in order to put an end to an obvious conflict of interests , they made their resignation conditional on their firms being awarded new technical assistance contracts , and this condition was met by the Commission .
Financial control 's inquiry provides clear evidence that the selection procedures could have been rigged to make sure that the contracts did in fact go to the firms of the board members involved .
So a whole network of firms largely managed to bring the implementation of a whole policy under their control , and they were able to do so because this was tolerated , if not encouraged , by Commission officials .
The Commission can no longer claim that these are individual cases of fraud ; we are most certainly dealing with an established system that has allowed firms to gain extensive access to Community funds .
As such , we must now look at this in the context of the refusal to grant discharge and I am calling on the general rapporteur for the discharge to propose a decision to this effect .
Mr President , let me first congratulate the rapporteur Mr Fabra Vallés on the energy he showed in drawing up and preparing this report , which was solidly supported by nearly all the members of the Committee on Budgetary Control .
It should be realised that the Committee on Budgetary Control addresses such issues because there are special reports by the Court of Auditors and these are becoming more numerous .
Their number has increased significantly and it is impossible for the European Parliament not to react to those reports and to what they denounce .
So it must be made clear - particularly to the Commission - that whilst we are neither the police nor detectives , we have to face up to our responsibilities in relation to denunciations by an official institutional body of the European Union .
The details of the matter have been examined , in particular the role of the well-known Belgian companies which the Commission uses and seems to have used quite extensively to deal with things like the MED programmes .
The general conclusion from this whole affair , Commissioner , is that there will have to be a structural change in the internal organisation of the Commission , a thing which all these phenomena show to be more necessary than might appear at first sight .
The way the Commission functions must be reformed and restructured , because nobody in this Assembly wants to downgrade or debase the Commission .
What irritates us is what I might call an apathy , a lack of reaction by the Commission to what both the Court of Auditors and the European Parliament are complaining about .
Please react , and please do so in the right way .
The MED cooperation programmes were initiated in 1990 .
The Council approved the legal basis for them in June 1992 .
The aim of MED programmes was to promote contacts and the transfer of know-how between the actors in the civil societies on both shores of the Mediterranean .
Between 1992 and 1995 the Community financed 496 decentralised projects involving 2 000 participating operators .
A total of approximately ECU 53m was allocated to these projects .
What conclusions should we draw from this ?
I would draw the conclusion that never have so many small projects been financed with such limited funds and limited administrative resources .
The aims and the administrative requirements of MED programmes were not in line with the human resources that the Commission had at its disposal .
There was significant pressure from Parliament to use the allocated credits quickly .
The Commission signed a management contract with a Belgian organisation , ARTM .
In October 1995 , as has been mentioned here , a preliminary report by the Court of Auditors alerted the Commission to the alleged existence of irregularities in the management of the projects by ARTM .
The Commission decided immediately to suspend the execution of MED programmes and the contract with ARTM in order to clarify the facts surrounding the alleged irregularities .
On the basis of the audits carried out by the financial control of the Commission and the final report of the Court of Auditors published in May 1996 , the Commission instructed its anti-fraud unit , UCLAF , to carry out an inquiry within and outside the Commission .
UCLAF 's final report of May 1997 could identify no cases giving rise to suspicion of fraud involving Commission officials .
The rapporteur asked the Commission to submit the whole MED file to competent national judicial authorities by 1 December .
There are , however , provisions governing the transmission of documents to judicial authorities .
A sufficient presumption of fraud has to be established and this is the task of UCLAF .
In its inquiries no sufficient presumption of fraud could be established .
I will come back to this later .
In order to shed light on the alleged mismanagement in the MED programmes , the Commission launched an administrative inquiry .
I would like to stress that mismanagement is not the same thing as fraud .
The latter would imply that the misappropriation of funds was intentional .
The aim of an administrative inquiry is to establish facts for the appointing authority .
The inquiry is carried out by a higher-ranking official or officials than the official who is the subject of the allegations of mismanagement .
The outcome of the inquiry is a report that is submitted to the appointing authority .
The administrative inquiry does not replace disciplinary procedure .
It only establishes the basic information .
The appointing authority decides on the opening of the disciplinary procedure as laid down in Article 87 of the Staff Regulations .
In the case of the MED programmes an initial inquiry was carried out by one Director-General of the Commission .
His report depicted a situation where Commission officials , highly committed to their aim of running the programmes under considerable political pressure , were always stretched because of the lack of appropriate resources .
This situation had led officials to breach the principles of sound financial management , in particular when using the services of ARTM .
In order to get the most complete picture of the programme management the competent Commissioners decided to complete the inquiry at the initiative of the Director-General for Personnel .
A complementary inquiry was carried out by three DirectorsGeneral .
They concluded in their report that there had been a failure to adhere to the principle of sound financial management .
It was also noted that there had been a failure to recognise the risks of delegating administrative and technical tasks .
In view of the difficult circumstances surrounding the management of the programmes , these three Directors-General did not recommend that the disciplinary procedure should be opened .
The Commission endorsed the findings and conclusions of the report .
A letter signed by the Secretary-General on behalf of the Commission was sent to the officials concerned expressing the dissatisfaction of the institution with their management performance .
Both of these above-mentioned reports have been transmitted to Parliament .
The rapporteur asked the Commission to submit to Parliament the minutes of the hearings carried out in its administrative inquiries .
In this we must be careful to strike the right balance between two requirements .
Firstly , the people who are questioned in an administrative inquiry have the right to confidentiality .
Secondly , Parliament has a responsibility to monitor the implementation of the budget and the right to be provided with information as laid down in Article 206 of the Treaty .
In order to reconcile these two imperatives , the Commission has approached Parliament with the aim of the two institutions drafting a code of conduct together on access to documents .
The first meeting between the representatives of the institutions is scheduled for this week .
The purpose is to involve the legal services of both institutions in the process .
The Commission hopes that an agreement can be concluded at the highest possible level .
In addition to the abovementioned measures related to management of the programmes the Commission also ordered , as has already been said , an external audit with the aim of helping to identify all the expenditure that is not strictly in line with contracts or the rules of accounting .
The audited projects equal 70 % of the net expenditure used .
This audit was carried out by a firm of auditors .
A private firm cannot decide whether the expenditure is appropriate .
That is for the authorising services , under the financial control of the Commission .
On the basis of the external audit report submitted at the end of August this year , authorising services have begun to examine , project by project , the information gathered by the external auditor .
The results of this examination will be verified by the financial control of the Commission as a whole .
The Commission will submit an interim report of the results to Parliament by 1 December .
Taking into account the huge amount of work involved in examining the 233 audited projects , the interim report will cover approximately 50 to 70 projects , leading to the first issue of recovery orders .
The work will have to continue and the services of the Commission expect it to be finalised by the end of January 1999 .
If expenditure is found to be ineligible , recovery orders will be sent out .
The Commission will do everything in its power to ensure as much money as possible is recovered .
Should there be any suspicion of fraud in relation to any operator , the case would be referred to UCLAF .
If UCLAF then finds sufficient grounds for suspicion likely to lead to criminal charges , the file would be transmitted to the competent national judicial authorities .
In any case , any operator who has not met his contractual obligations will be excluded from receiving financing for new programmes .
Thank you , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Combating fraud - Protection of the euro - Action against organised crime
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , there are two mistakes which people make that seriously hamper us in our fight against organised crime .
The first mistake is to say that we are dealing mainly with drugs-related crime .
The second is to say that we are dealing mainly with the most serious crimes , such as murder .
In fact , organised crime is crime that is organised on the basis of a division of labour , on a systematic , daily , hierarchical basis , rather like the way a company is organised , but using illegal means .
The problems arise because of the sum of the damage , not the individual damage , and they arise because ill-gotten gains are channelled back into the normal economic cycle through money-laundering operations .
One example is fraud with non-cash means of payment - in short , plastic money and credit cards .
I can illustrate this with an example . If a briefcase is stolen in Brussels , this may be an individual act by a criminal who wants money , perhaps to buy drugs .
But it could also be part of a process : specialists , groups of pickpockets , are flown in from Latin America - there are special schools there to train them - work the city and then disappear again in the evening by plane .
The stolen credit cards are flown on by plane to other parts of the world the same night and used there to buy goods , which receivers of stolen goods then convert back into cash , which is then channelled back into the normal economic cycle through money-laundering operations .
As far as we know , credit-card crime is usually organised crime and crime that operates internationally in the way I have described .
The damage worldwide comes to about USD 3 billion a year , of which a quarter falls to the European Community 's account .
So there is a need for us to act , and it is therefore a good thing that the Commission has submitted proposals for a joint action .
These proposals are aimed , firstly , at harmonising the law , because we have totally different criminal laws for the crimes I have described .
To give one example : in my country , neither the manufacture nor the possession of forged credit cards was a crime until April this year .
So I could have opened a factory to make them and could have marketed them freely .
Nobody would have said a word .
The Commission wants to close these legal loopholes , and we welcome that .
Secondly , we very much need to make means of payment such as credit cards more secure .
The market does not automatically guarantee maximum security ; the sector weighs up the goods and carries out a cost-benefit analysis between security on the one hand and the cost of security on the other .
That is why the result does not provide maximum security , but only precisely the level determined by the cost-benefit calculation .
But it is important to society to have a high standard of security if it is to combat organised crime consistently .
That is why , in my report , Parliament submits a number of proposals .
Let me draw your attention to three of them , which are obviously reasonable . In future , we want a better method to be found for issuing credit cards , because sending them by post , as is usually done now , is too unsafe .
These credit cards have security marks .
Every credit-card issuer uses a different one .
No cashier can remember them all .
So we want to see them standardised .
Thirdly , in the long term there is no alternative to replacing the signature used for paying by plastic card with a numerical code , as in the case of the Eurocheque card , and a chip .
Another problem we will have to tackle is counterfeit coins and notes .
Here again , we must distinguish between two cases . There are what are known as home-worker counterfeiters , who try to counterfeit notes using a colour photocopier .
We are less concerned with them .
But then there is large-scale money counterfeiting , carried out by organised crime .
Introducing the euro as cash will create special risks .
Firstly , this is because the euro is a new currency whose appearance people are not yet familiar with .
Secondly , it is because organised crime predominantly counterfeits what are known as reserve currencies , which means currencies that can be placed globally .
Thirdly , it is because criminal prosecution authorities and the police in the various Member States of the European Community have different experiences , because , conversely , there are also currencies that have hardly ever been counterfeited in the past .
That is why the national authorities have little experience there .
So we welcome the fact that the Commission is presenting a communication and putting forward proposals .
Much of it we endorse .
But our specialist committee does not approve the special role the Commission has assigned itself in this communication in relation to combating counterfeiting of the euro in future .
Underlying this special role is the assumption that , as in the case of fraud against the Community , the interests of the Member States as such are not really affected .
Fraud against the Community is after all , according to this view , money lost to the Community budget and not the national budgets .
But in the case of counterfeit money , things are different .
Here the Member States certainly have a marked interest .
We have serious reservations about allocating too much responsibility to UCLAF in this respect when we look at the Bösch report , which described the situation of UCLAF clearly enough .
Let me put it in somewhat provocative terms , Mr President : the euro is too important for the matter to be left in the hands of UCLAF .
So we suggest retaining the existing and proven system of cooperation between criminal prosecution authorities , police forces , central banks and cash acceptance points and supplementing this system by organising the rapid exchange of information and by giving Europol new responsibilities .
Mr President , it was a year ago that the European Parliament considered the action plan to combat organised crime .
The focus then was on ' acute ' intervention .
This was to be enforcement-oriented , but I pointed out at the time that preventive action was just as necessary .
Anti-crime strategies require a long-term perspective and this was one of the areas where I found the Council 's approach wanting .
Civil society has a key role to play in strengthening people 's sense of identity , helping them to resist temptation and say no to crime .
The family also bears responsibility for passing on decent values to children .
Citing my report as the trigger , the Council has now come back with a proposal for a preventive strategy .
This is a novel occurrence in the third pillar area and I commend the Council 's initiative .
We now have some scope for constructive debate and a fruitful exchange of ideas .
What a pity Commissioner Gradin cannot be here .
Although we all appreciate the need to set priorities , a key person 's absence on a particular issue can only reflect the degree of importance which is attached to it .
Perhaps this is primarily a Council matter .
It is certainly good to see the Council represented , but I would have liked Commissioner Gradin to be in attendance too .
I note with pleasure , however , that Commissioner Liikanen is here with us .
There was a remarkable show of consensus in committee , and I would thank my colleagues for their positive contributions .
What we need is a strategy to develop a truly European civil society , alert to how early in life criminal behaviour is engendered and how fast it spreads . We can then take appropriate measures at national , local and regional levels to nip in the bud any drift towards a criminal lifestyle .
Voluntary organisations , churches , schools , friends and family - all these make up civil society . And it is to civil society that we should look in order to derive the strength to resist crime .
It is no good leaving everything to politicians and letting people think that the State will right all the wrongs .
Social engineering , rather then protecting against crime , tends to weaken resistance .
I have seen this happen in my own country , Sweden .
We must be aware of the danger of ' everyday ' crime and be ready to react before the petty offender becomes drawn into serious , international crime .
People should take responsibility for one another , and this means empowering individuals so that they want to care .
To put it figuratively , we need to create the software to be used with the hardware of law enforcement .
It is vital that Member States ratify the existing conventions .
Full use is not being made of the instruments at hand .
Nor has the action plan to combat organised crime been sufficiently developed .
There were 30 points in the original text and barely half have been implemented . Progress is still awaited in 18 areas .
We can learn from each other and promote those crime prevention measures that have proved effective . Everyone would like to live in a society where they can feel safe and secure .
This is particularly relevant in the case of the applicant countries , where the crime problem is worse than here .
Worst of all , though , is the transformation in attitudes that takes place in a society where crime becomes generally accepted as part of everyday life . If criminal behaviour becomes the norm in a community , that community is in trouble .
The applicant countries should be encouraged to develop long-term crime prevention strategies ; the impact will be felt across the Union .
We need to vaccinate ourselves mentally against crime .
Our societies will become less susceptible once the fundamental values we all share become more firmly enshrined through increased public awareness . Work will need to be done at both practical and ' human ' levels .
Some of the EU states border on countries with crime levels that are inconceivable to us here in the West .
The prevalence of protection rackets is an example .
In one country not so very far away from here , up to 70 % of companies pay protection money to crime syndicates .
Once criminal activity is allowed to penetrate so deeply into an economy , both democracy and market principles are under threat .
Fundamental values go overboard and policy-making in other areas loses its meaning .
If we lose our grip on crime , we shall be destined to fail elsewhere too .
Pressure on each and every Member State must be maintained .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , let me begin by thanking you for giving me the opportunity today to visit the European Parliament 's plenary .
As a member of the government who does not belong to any political party but will soon be able to look back on eight years of experience as Minister for Justice in the Austrian Republic , I have particular respect for the activities and responsibility of the Members of the European Parliament and very much appreciate the significant role the European Parliament plays in the pursuit of justice and democracy within the process of European integration .
Accordingly , the Austrian Presidency is endeavouring to cooperate closely with the European Parliament in its activities .
Let me also use my visit here as an opportunity to make some comments on the subjects of this joint debate from the Austrian Presidency 's point of view .
Turning first to the non-cash means of payment : the possibility of obtaining services from third parties without having to carry the corresponding cash - generally by using a debit card - not only makes life easier and things more flexible , but also paves the way to new forms of abuse .
The Commission recognised this risk early on and submitted proposals on how to reduce it .
The presidency welcomes the Commission 's initiative , because we too realise that action is certainly needed here .
The working group on Community law and national criminal law has already held an initial exchange of views on the matter .
Without wishing to anticipate the working group 's conclusions , I do regard it as very helpful with regard to our further progress that the Commission chose to forward its communication to Parliament quickly , thus enabling Parliament to give its opinion at an early stage and the Council to take due account of it in its deliberations .
The subject of the Commission 's second communication , protection of the euro against counterfeiting , on which Mr Schmid has drawn up his report , is equally important for the future .
The Austrian Presidency agrees with the Commission and the European Parliament that we must do our utmost to protect the euro against counterfeiting .
On the one hand we must give special attention to the appropriate preventive measures , and on the other we must also ensure that we have sound measures for prosecuting counterfeiters from the moment the euro coins and banknotes are issued .
One key question here will probably be how to demarcate the responsibilities of the various institutions involved - where , as I know , there are different views - clearly and carefully enough to ensure effective protection of the euro ; here , I believe , Europol will also have a major role to play .
With regard to criminal law , I can tell you that the Council working group responsible has already embarked on the necessary preparatory work .
First we must gain an overview of the provisions in force in the Member States and establish to what extent we need to approximate the legal provisions .
On the basis of this preparatory work , we will then have to propose a legal act , aimed at approximating the Member States ' legal provisions .
The aim will be to ensure that certain forms of conduct are regarded as punishable offences in all the Member States .
However , the presidency regards it as rather difficult and not very useful to approximate the penalties so long as the general penal provisions , especially the prosecution system , the list of penalties , the imposition of penalties and the conditions governing mitigation are based on different systems .
What we must ensure , however , is that we do not prevent the Member States from cooperating effectively in relation to mutual assistance and extradition provisions
Let me conclude with a word on the resolution on prevention which the Council intends to draw up .
We followed with great attention the European Parliament 's in-depth consideration of the action plan to combat organised crime .
The presidency took the European Parliament 's resolution of 20 November 1997 as an incentive to propose an amendment to the Council in the important area of the prevention of organised crime .
That is why we also forwarded the presidency 's draft resolution on preventive measures to combat organised crime to the European Parliament for information , although even the Amsterdam Treaty does not make provision for Parliament to be formally consulted on draft resolutions of the Council .
The multidisciplinary group on organised crime has discussed the draft in depth and will probably adopt it at the Justice and Home Affairs Council on 3 and 4 December .
This resolution seeks to address all aspects of preventing organised crime in a comprehensive manner .
Special emphasis is placed on the need to coordinate state measures with civil society in any attempt to reduce the incentive to commit crimes and take preventive measures against organised crime .
In line with the horizontal nature of prevention , it addresses areas in the first and third pillar of the European Union , although emphasis is also placed on the Member States ' responsibility at national , regional and local level .
In this context , we attach great importance to the preparation of national preventive programmes , the creation of interdisciplinary and interinstitutional crime prevention councils and , above all , the evaluation and assessment of preventive activities .
I believe this resolution is a first major step forward , which I hope will be followed by others .
Let me end on that note - I thank you for your attention and hope for further good cooperation between Parliament and the presidency !
Mr President , I should like to compliment both rapporteurs - both our colleagues have done a good job - and to make one preliminary remark .
I think it is appropriate to point out that the House is now discussing for the umpteenth time matters related to the somewhat new institutional exercise of fighting for lawfulness , in other words against crime .
I was very pleased to hear the President-in-Office stressing the value of Parliament 's role and contribution .
Now , post-Amsterdam , Parliament is playing a very important leading role in some ways , particularly in respect of an initiative which has perhaps been somewhat underestimated , namely the newly created area of freedom , security and law .
These are new issues , but that is perhaps why Parliament 's contribution is so significant , as the Minister clearly acknowledges : we are not restricting ourselves to requests and aspirations , but are attempting to identify tangible means of implementing aims and objectives which are of deep concern to the citizens of Europe .
I emphasise this point because I think that both rapporteurs rightly draw attention in their reports to the very important proactive role being sought by Parliament .
I would dwell in particular on the question of crime prevention , as dealt with in the Cederschiöld report .
I believe that this is the key point picked up by the Council from the first report on organised crime and proposed afresh in its draft resolution , given that any steps taken collectively by a society or community to reduce - if not avert - outbreaks of crime count as prevention .
A range of measures therefore exists ; we need only think of corruption .
As far as corruption is concerned , most of what needs to be done is preventive : the culture of political back-scratching and patronage must be combated ; the guiding rule in relations between institutions and citizens must be the transparency of operations .
We have raised all these aspects of prevention in an amendment , calling for a code of conduct and attention to new occupational groups which can easily fall prey to corruption or organised crime .
We have done so in order to stress the importance of preventive action when faced with change .
I would however point out here - as we state in another amendment - that preventive action is also very much a matter of partnership between institutions and civil society .
I would remind you all of the concept of educating people to remain within the law .
Two years ago , our committee held some remarkable consultations with an Italian organisation - called ' Libera ' - which is an umbrella organisation encompassing some 600 civil associations .
Its members described the work they are doing to combat organised crime in Italy , and told us how they were attempting to stamp it out in the worst affected regions .
We heard from Rita Borsellino , the sister of Judge Borsellino , whose commitment testifies to the importance - not only for the sake of her brother 's memory , but in order to combat the mafia - of a struggle based on a deep commitment by society to conveying the message of lawfulness .
I would just refer finally to preventive action against urban crime and petty crime .
Here I think that there is now greater awareness : it has been understood that repression , where it is necessary , must be combined with prevention .
The work being done on the ground , in a joint effort by institutions and civil society , inspires hope that it will be possible to reduce this huge amount of crime , this enormous sense of danger which is making our cities and citizens feel unsafe - according to a recent survey , 33 % of people felt unsafe in cities in 1996 .
But what is to be done ?
Should we put police on every street corner ?
No , that would serve no purpose ; it would probably be both wrong and impossible .
We must establish a close link between prevention , work on the ground , concrete measures , monitoring and controls .
Mr President , there can no longer be any doubt that the Single Market , the information society , technological inventions , the Internet , financial services and electronic commerce have revolutionised the use of non-cash means of payment .
Turnover for payment cards alone exceeds $ US 2 000 billion a year throughout the world .
This huge market has also given rise to new forms of computer piracy and crime specialising in fraud and counterfeiting , or so-called cybercrime . Something therefore needs to be done to protect the interests of those issuing , using , being paid by or acquiring these new means of payment .
That is why we need to harmonise the systems of controls and penalties in the Member States to guarantee the euro 's credibility and security , even in the intermediate phase from 1999 to 2002 .
The Commission should be congratulated on the initiatives that it is taking and , generally speaking , the rapporteur , Mr Schmid , deserves our support .
But now allow me to turn to the report itself .
There are , however , some points for concern .
For example , on the subject of combating the falsification of euro notes and coins , the Commission statement calls for close cooperation and mutual assistance between UCLAF , the ECB and Europol .
But the future role of UCLAF still has to be clearly defined and , in the wake of cases of fraud at ECHO , the President of the Commission , Jacques Santer , has just publicly announced the Commission 's intention to transform the UCLAF into OLAF , a body completely independent of the Commission , extending its inquiries and investigations to all Community institutions . That would then leave it for the Commission to focus on the legislative proposals and coordination with the Member States in the fight against fraud , in the interest of the European Union , as would be the case of counterfeiting the euro .
But doubts linger and this lack of definition needs to be cleared up .
In the end , who is going to supervise what ?
Will it involve UCLAF , OLAF or the Commission ?
We must in any case continue to compile , assess and update data on money counterfeiting practices , circuits and networks if we are to protect the euro .
It is therefore very worrying that there is no specific idea of the type of information to be included in the database , but we hope for a joint effort on the part of those actually responsible for issuing the coin , the courts , the police and financial bodies .
In other words , we are looking into it .
But time is short .
These legislative instruments need to be adopted at the latest at some time in the year 2000 so that the comprehensive euro protection system can be operational as of 1 January 2002 , in order to be tested before the euro notes and coins are brought into circulation .
Mr President , I would firstly like to thank the two rapporteurs for the work they have both done on this issue .
The fight against fraud and the need to establish a comprehensive system to prevent the counterfeiting of means of payment is of key importance , not only for governments but also for all the citizens of the European Union .
The Commission 's communication on the counterfeiting and protection of the euro along with the amendments adopted are a positive and practical contribution to the fight against fraud .
It is a start , but it is not the end .
One of the main objectives is to ensure that these cases of fraud are treated as criminal offences in all the Member States .
We also need an efficient system to protect the euro .
The most important element is to make sure that the euro has a uniform level of protection throughout the entire Union .
Europol 's responsibilities in combating counterfeiting should be extended .
The euro has a very high potential circulation , which means that there is the risk of counterfeiting both within and outside the European Union .
We are therefore going to call for an information system for the rapid exchange of data between the authorities responsible for combating counterfeiting .
It is very unfortunate that the implementation of the action plan to combat organised crime is so far behind schedule .
The Council must ensure that all its recommendations enter into force and become effective by the end of next year .
The only aspect of the report by Mrs Cederschiöld that concerns me is the link between the measures to prevent organised crime and electoral procedures .
That has no place in this report , which , apart from this , has my full support .
Mr President , I have three points to make on this report .
Firstly , it is common knowledge that any real semblance of control over movements of goods around the Union has gone , demonstrating that the much trumpeted vision of a Europe without frontiers is a dangerous illusion .
The whole enterprise merely encourages criminal dealings .
Experience has shown that free trade is not undermined by proper and efficient border controls . The free trade system should facilitate lawful activity , not crime .
We therefore need effective controls for goods and persons at the EU 's national frontiers .
My second point concerns corruption and mafia-style activities .
Perhaps we could contribute to the fight against this type of crime by introducing a system of open government and public accountability . This is not something people necessarily think of in such a context , but the Nordic countries are committed to the principle of public access to official records .
Ordinary citizens , as well as journalists , have a right to consult documents and paperwork produced by public authorities . This means that the general public is able to monitor financial management within government departments .
I believe that the low levels of corruption we find in the Nordic countries can partly be attributed to this system of open access to documents .
As well as enabling facts to be uncovered , the system also has a deterrent effect in terms of crime .
Lastly , the EU now boasts three groupings operating in the field of police cooperation : Schengen , Interpol and Europol .
I wonder if we should be splitting up our anti-crime effort in this way .
Mr President , I should like to begin by thanking the two rapporteurs for the work they have done .
Democratic societies do indeed have a duty to make maximum efforts to combat organised crime and corruption in all their guises .
Yet a balance has to be struck between effective anti-crime strategies , on the one hand , and the freedom of the individual and legal certainty on the other .
We cannot allow ourselves to become a Big Brother society .
My group has been highly critical , for example , of the holding of detailed files on individuals under the umbrella of Schengen and Europol .
I also have reservations about the widespread use of global interception systems . These may well yield results in terms of combating crime , but the effects on democracy and civil liberties are not to be countenanced .
I commend the way in which Mrs Cederschiöld has managed to find a balance between ends and means in this report .
I fully support her call for more work on crime prevention , and she is right to point out that the proposals still fall short on specific prevention measures .
I agree on the role of civil society and the importance of setting long-term targets , and transparency and public accountability are essential in this context .
Yet there is another dimension if we want to stop the rifts that already exist in our societies from widening . We need more job opportunities , better education provision and a fairer distribution of resources .
I have one final point .
Mrs Cederschiöld talks about combating crime at European level , but we know that organised crime reaches beyond the frontiers of Europe .
I am therefore in favour of working with Interpol and other international bodies too .
Mr President , the report by Mrs Cederschiöld must be congratulated for having highlighted the often subtle distinction between organised crime and less serious crime and between prevention and repression , despite the complexities all these concepts involve .
We will certainly vote in favour of this report , even though it appears to be somewhat reliant on a political magic wand .
We must of course - and I am merely quoting here - encourage citizens to cooperate with the judicial authorities , guarantee the protection of witnesses , and promote policing at a level that is closer to citizens . We need a reduction in factors that encourage and a promotion of factors that discourage crime .
We must promote the integration of marginalised groups . Everyone will be in complete agreement with these issues .
There is one specific area that needs to be defined here , and that is the prevention of repeat offending , which falls somewhere between prevention and repression .
Prevention is an extremely important factor and is linked to the quality of penal institutions and their ability to assist the social reintegration of offenders .
Significant efforts must be made in this area and they must be targeted .
They are going to cost money and will require a great deal of imagination and intelligence . Whatever else happens , we must at least be prepared to agree to make this effort .
Let us remember that .
Mr President , the European Union only has legitimacy when it acts more efficiently than the Member States acting individually .
Organised crime is the very type of harmful activity that calls for action at European level .
The report by Mrs Cederschiöld rightly stresses the need for the Council to propose concrete measures and to involve the applicant countries that hope to join the European Union in whatever prevention measures might be established by the Council .
Unfortunately , we know that those countries , and particularly the countries of central and eastern Europe , have been left in a dreadful state of moral and economic decline by Marxist-Leninism .
It is therefore highly desirable that from now on they should be involved in the work we ourselves can do within the European Union .
The rapporteur also rightly emphasises the need to involve civil society in the prevention of organised crime .
Prevention from within society is necessary but its effectiveness depends on society 's general state of mind and on the promotion of values that are all too often scorned , such as a sense of responsibility , of duty , of honesty and of work .
In short , it is also a matter of how civilised we are .
The prevailing relativism , the loss of reference points , a libertarian idea of freedom , individualism taken to its extreme , and the puerile desire to reject what are known as supposedly middle-class social conventions are all elements that , in fact , fuel everyday crime , which itself undermines the foundations of civil peace and acts as a basis for organised crime .
Mrs Cederschiöld has also rightly highlighted the damaging effects of poor town planning .
We will support her report apart from the elements that relate , strangely , to voting rights and the prevention of crime .
Mr President , Commissioner , Mr President-in-Office , I share your concern about the problems raised in the Schmid report .
There can be no question that we need a coordinated approach at European level here .
Some time ago I put a question to the Commission on protecting the euro from counterfeiting , but only received a rather evasive answer .
The fact that the rapporteur believes that the euro will act as a magnet for criminal activity and that the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs also believes that the euro will be an extremely attractive target for counterfeiting confirms me in my view .
The overall package of proposals to protect the euro from counterfeiting and fraud does , however , seem to be a useful instrument for tackling these problems .
Here I wish to highlight the new regulatory system for harmonising criminal law , which I regard as very useful .
I see the idea of laying down the framework , determining the crucial features , but leaving it to the Member States to formulate them in terms of their own criminal law systems , as a step forward in the right direction .
Past attempts to formulate case materials on a Europe-wide basis , as in the corpus juris , gave rise to a great many problems and conflicts between systems .
I believe that the legislative method which has now been proposed for approximating the Member States ' different , historically based legal systems is a better one , and we approve it , as we do all the other points made in the report .
Mr President , I congratulate the two rapporteurs on their two reports and the three accompanying resolutions .
Mr Schmid and Mrs Cederschiöld have done an important job here in dealing with issues that are vital to the future of the European Union .
I am talking about combating fraud in the non-cash sector , combating counterfeiting and action against organised crime .
Most of the points I want to make are in relation to Mr Schmid 's report .
There are three main points .
Firstly , it is a wonderful opportunity , with the switch-over to the euro from national currencies , to catch those who have currently got large sums of illgotten gains hidden under the bed or somewhere else and are going to have to switch from deutschmarks or francs , from pesetas or lire into euros .
What I hope we are going to see is some coordinated action at European level to try and take advantage of this opportunity .
We need special reporting requirements on currency exchanges around the time of the switch-over to the euro and we need a European-wide organisation of police and customs officials working together to see how much of the grey or black money we can detect when criminals have to move across from their own national currencies to the euro .
Secondly , with respect to non-cash fraud : I am pleased that in the report we complain about the fact that the banks do not worry very often because they offload the cost onto the customers .
We should be looking at using new technologies for identification to help protect the customer - via new biometric patterns for example .
Retinal patterns are very successful in allowing you to identify unambiguously the owner of a car .
That will be something that can be used at cash points .
But , secondly , we should be allowed to use the highest available means of encryption that cannot be broken to protect these transactions .
At the moment I understand the Commission is apparently negotiating with the US Government to limit our ability to encrypt electronic transactions .
This is very foolish in the light of this particular report .
With respect to cash fraud , the euro will be reasonably well-protected .
We have a problem with the euro coins , where we are allowing national characteristics on coins .
Unless we have a plan to sort out those coins and send them back to their countries of origin , the average shop , after a comparatively short period of time , will have to deal with recognising 120 different coins if we are going to have six coins from the 15 states of the European Union , and added to that coins from Andorra , Monaco , San Marino , the Vatican City and Gibraltar .
That seems to me to be complete nonsense and we should try to remove it later with legislation to enable shops to have a fairly small number of coins to identify rather than the enormous number that the rather foolish earlier decision will lead to .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , we know from a reliable source that about 30 % of all crime is now organised crime .
Given that the business of organised crime now extends from credit-card fraud to traffic in human beings and to money laundering , there is obviously an absolute need for action not just in the Member States but also by the European Community .
We must give absolute priority to combating organised crime , as both the rapporteurs say .
What we need , without any doubt , is a combination of repressive and preventive measures .
Let me just take up three points which I see as especially important in terms of combating crime .
The first is that we , the European Community , must finally transpose the measures and the action plan which the Community has adopted .
We must set aside national animosities in the interests of Europe-wide cooperation in combating crime and make efficient use of the instruments we have at our disposal , such as Europol and UCLAF .
The second point concerns expanding judicial cooperation .
We are still at the beginning here : we have proposed some useful steps forward , but what we need to do is to harmonise criminal provisions relating to new types of offences , such as credit-card fraud , money laundering , environmental crime and gangs .
The third point , which I think needs very special emphasis , is that we must export security to the applicant Central and Eastern European countries that are seeking to join the European Union .
We should help them to implement these programmes in the interest of Europe and in their own interest .
The fight against organised crime must be intensified and expanded .
That is what our citizens expect of the European Union , and it is absolutely vital to the security of the European Union as a whole .
Mr President , I am very pleased that the European Central Bank is set to establish an Analysis centre for counterfeits .
The relevant statistical and technical data will be stored as a database to which national central banks will have full access .
As of now no more precise details have been given by the European Central Bank but I am sure these will come in due course .
I welcome the fact that the Central Bank is taking this initiative at such an early stage of its inception .
This is important because 13 billion euro banknotes will be printed by January 2002 when they will be brought into circulation within the 11 Member States encompassing a population of some 290 million people .
It is very important that this Analysis centre for counterfeits should work closely not only with national central banks but also with Europol and the national police forces within the 11 Member States participating in the new single currency regime .
The Amsterdam Treaty is giving more powers to Europol in the area of judicial and police cooperation and this Treaty is set to be ratified shortly .
Parliament must ensure that any financial resources which will be required by the Central Bank for the working of this new Analysis centre for counterfeits should be supported so that the evil of this prospective counterfeiting of euro notes is defeated .
Mr President , we all - I believe - agree on the need to combat crime effectively . But I must add that we must not be too naive about the real effectiveness of the various preventive measures summarised in the second report we now have before us .
The simple reality is that in many large and medium-sized towns in Europe there are whole streets and neighbourhoods which the police no longer dare enter , where there is virtually no longer any public transport and where the plucky citizens who remain , those who lack the resources to move elsewhere , are exposed to the laws of the jungle .
In other words , we must have the courage to acknowledge that this prevention policy of ours has failed .
Out there , in these neighbourhoods , it is well past the eleventh hour . The time has come to crack down hard and to take repressive action in order , if necessary , to restore law and order by force .
First things first .
Prevention is important but I believe this tough approach must take first priority , contrary to what is stated in this report .
I also regret that Parliament is afraid to speak out clearly when it comes to the subject of crime committed by foreigners .
The second report just beats about the bush .
We all know that , regretfully , 90 % of so-called street crimes in the major towns and cities are committed by uprooted people , uprooted foreigners , often second or third generation immigrants .
We are not going to solve this huge problem by continuing to deny its existence or by trying to falsify the statistics by means of more flexible naturalisation procedures .
We will also certainly not solve it by granting active and passive voting rights such as this report , to everyone 's surprise , I would imagine , dares to propose .
The only short-term solution is a courageous policy which presents those involved with a choice .
Either integrate yourselves into our society , and thus respect its laws , customs and culture , or opt for supported and accompanied return to your cultural home where you will no longer be uprooted .
Just because this solution has been declared taboo does not mean that it is not a decent and proper solution .
Mr President , I am glad to be able to make a few more comments on the problem of preventing organised crime .
Repression and prevention are two equally valid means of combating crime , including organised crime .
However , we must realise that the traditional concepts of prevention will not work here .
Let me explain this : the common belief that we can do something about organised crime by combating poverty and unemployment overlooks the real problem .
Organised criminals are not usually poor people - on the contrary !
There are some chances of success in the field of technical prevention , that is to say technical precautions to prevent crime .
These include the prevention of car theft by fitting immobilisers , preventing credit-card fraud by making this means of payment more secure , introducing better rules with regard to some areas of what is called hi-tech crime , and introducing better data comparison precautions in fields such as social security fraud , as are widely found in the United States .
Another question concerns the drying-up of markets .
Organised crime often involves the supply of illegal goods and services .
We will not manage to combat that in all cases .
With regard to drugs , for instance , there are good reasons for not legalising them .
On the other hand , there is no reason whatsoever for the state to retain its monopoly on gambling .
Nor is there any reason for driving a system which has obviously been a social need for centuries , namely prostitution -whatever we may think of it as such - into the grey area of the semi-legal , which would only turn it into a seedbed for organised crime .
Mr President , I should like to comment briefly on matters related to the euro .
I am particularly anxious to speak about this issue because I am concerned about the way this debate is developing .
The euro needs to generate confidence .
However , the debate has not been particularly helpful in this regard . Too many speakers have expressed concern about the risks of counterfeiting even coins , which is in fact quite difficult to achieve .
The first thing that should be said is that the European Central Bank guarantees the notes and coins issued . Furthermore , Interpol , Europol , the police forces of the Member States and the Member States themselves now have at their disposal means of controlling fraud and counterfeiting through the legal and penal systems .
This should boost confidence .
Our role is not to be alarmist nor to think of the arrival of the euro as the very opportunity for deceit all the European mafias are eagerly awaiting .
Our role in this House is to support the Commission and the European Central Bank , and to facilitate their task . For instance , we should try to ensure that Europol has arrangements in place to coordinate the attack to be launched by all the national police forces and by Interpol .
We must also support the Commission once it has prepared more detailed proposals and presented them to Parliament .
The citizens need to know that we are aware of the possible risks of counterfeiting , but they must also know that in this instance , 15 police forces will be working alongside Interpol and Europol .
Our task is to enable appropriate legal provision to be made to ensure that detailed particulars on the type of offences are readily available , as stated in the report .
We should do all we can to promote confidence in the euro . It does need it .
Fortunately , control does not depend solely on us , as we shall be assisted by many others .
Mr President , the Commission is very satisfied with Mrs Cederschiöld 's report on ways we may best prevent organised crime from taking root in society .
We have to get to the core of the problem and devise a strategy for the prevention of problems , with all parties in the Community taking part at national and local level .
Ridding ourselves of crime can only succeed if we make use of all the means available to the constitutional state .
The rapporteur justifiably stresses the need to support common measures taken by citizens against organised crime in the constitutional state .
In the area of money laundering the Commission has applied legislation under the first pillar to prevent the circulation through laundering of money obtained from selling drugs .
At the start of 1999 the directive will be broadened to cover suspect business activity linked with smuggling , other than drug-smuggling .
In the area of telecommunications the Commission issued a communication in May 1998 on the protection of minors and human dignity in general in audio-visual and Internet contexts .
This is a good example of a case where national legislation is not enough to ensure that we are rid of crime , but where action at Union level is needed .
As Members of Parliament know , the Commission has initiated a number of projects under the Falcone programme in conjunction with the Member States and NGOs .
The rapporteur made special mention of the need to support employment , health , family , and social policy , so that the security of the immediate environment of our citizens might be improved .
The Commission fully supports these objectives .
Similarly , there is support for citizens ' local services .
The issue has been raised in a communication on city policy , which is to be presented at the Europaforum Wien Centre for Urban Dialogue in Vienna at the end of November .
Crime in our cities is a real problem , as it is based on organised crime , which threatens cross-border social order .
The unambiguous aim of the Commission is to create a pan-European area where freedom , safety and justice prevail .
With the ratification of the Treaty of Amsterdam this goal has moved a lot nearer .
The heads of state and government have already agreed to meet in Tampere , Finland , in October 1999 , to discuss priority aims and deadlines in this important area .
The report by Charlotte Cederschiöld will form part of the foundations upon which the Commission 's work will be built .
Moving on to Mr Schmid 's report , I would like , on behalf of the Commission , to congratulate the rapporteur , who , in very clear terms , raises the issue of the connection between the Commission 's proposal on fraud and counterfeiting in non-cash transactions with fraud and counterfeiting specifically in respect of the euro .
The amount of fraud in non-cash transactions is growing fast .
Payment card fraud accounts for around ECU 2.7 billion in losses a year .
At the same time the legal authorities in the Member States are able to combat these types of crime only semi-effectively simply because there are no laws on the matter .
The aim of the Commission 's proposal is to correct this situation .
It calls for joint action to ensure that all fraud in non-cash transactions is looked on as a punishable offence in all EU Member States .
Mr Schmid 's report opposes the inclusion in the proposal of provisions on money laundering and mutual assistance .
He believes that satisfactory results will be achieved in these important areas only through horizontal regulation covering all forms of crime .
The Commission agrees , but as , unfortunately , there is not yet enough of this sort of regulation , legislation needs to be created jointly .
The Commission cautiously supports all the proposals for action put forward by Mr Schmid and the other agencies concerned and will take them into consideration in future planning .
The other subject covered in Mr Schmid 's report is protecting the euro from counterfeiting activity .
This is an important matter that needs to be addressed urgently .
We expect the euro to be legal tender internationally .
That being the case , it may well fall prey to internationally organised crime .
The Commission thus believes that before the euro is allowed to circulate we must devise an effective system to prevent the manufacture of counterfeit euros .
The Ecofin Council has itself emphasised that an effective protection mechanism must be in place for the new currency before its introduction .
Ecofin also stressed the role of Europol here and urged the Commission to continue with its initiative .
The main protection targets will be set out in a Commission communication to be issued in July , reflecting the Commission 's views .
It will focus on the following : education , information , communications systems and databases , cooperation and mutual assistance in investigations , defining what constitutes criminal counterfeiting activity and the introduction of penalties that will act as a deterrent .
The Commission believes that the institutions concerned each have their own job to do : the European Central Bank , Europol , the Commission , especially in its capacity as the initiator of legislation , the Member States , their central banks , their police forces and their courts .
Finally , I would like to say a few words about Europol .
Much has been spoken about how the workload should be divided between Europol on the one hand , and the European Central Bank and the Commission on the other .
Each will have its own job to do in any future system .
The sole guiding principle in making decisions will be how effectively we can protect the euro .
As we know , difficult compromises had to be reached before the Europol Treaty was introduced , relating to the delicate issue of cooperation in matters of crime and punishment when it comes to combating international crime , as these issues are regarded as too tightly bound up with the notion of national sovereignty .
The protection of the euro will be the responsibility of both the Community and the Member States , however .
For that reason , we need a properly functioning legislative framework , which might go further than the Europol Treaty .
Until then we must give Europol the necessary authority to act to prevent counterfeiting activity in respect of the euro within the limits of its present powers .
I would once more like to thank the rapporteurs for their thorough work .
Thank you , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Safer use of Internet
The next item is the recommendation for second reading ( A4-0377 / 98 ) , on behalf of the Committee on Civil Liberties and Internal Affairs , on the common position adopted by the Council ( C4-0535 / 98-97 / 0337 ( COD ) ) with a view to adopting a European Parliament and Council decision adopting a Multiannual Community Action Plan on promoting safer use of the Internet by combating illegal and harmful content on global networks ( Rapporteur : Mr Schmid ) .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , there is a saying that goes : ' knowledge is power ' .
If that is true , then we are currently witnessing a shift in power from those who have to some extent enjoyed a monopoly to the many people who have gained access to unheard-of power through the Internet .
The Internet offers an enormous opportunity .
But we also know that it involves risks .
The Internet contains content that can be either unwanted or criminal .
So the Commission was right to propose a programme to deal with this problem .
We approved the core of this programme at first reading , but tabled some amendments .
Most but not all of these amendments were accepted .
Our committee is therefore retabling some of the amendments from the first reading .
Basically they can be divided into two groups . The first groups is addressed to the Commission , and concerns the implementation of the programme or things that we do not necessarily have to incorporate in a legal text , but which the Commission can ensure are done .
Firstly , these are actions to prevent the Internet from being misused any longer for trafficking in women or children .
Secondly , and in particular , we want preparatory studies to be carried out with a view to making it clear to all concerned what is needed in the way of harmonisation of legislation .
This is important , because any criminal prosecution , for child pornography for instance , is in fact bound to fail so long as we have different age limits for the protection of children , so long as a server can be operated anonymously , or e-mail sent anonymously .
If the Commission makes a satisfactory statement on implementation during this debate , I can withdraw Amendments Nos 1 , 2 and 6 , with the committee 's approval .
That depends on what Mr Liikanen tells us in a moment .
So I would ask the President to allow me to speak again briefly at the end of the debate , in response to the Commissioner .
The other group of amendments is addressed to the Council .
Here we have managed , in cooperation with the Austrian Presidency , to find some compromise formulas which both we and the Council can endorse .
Firstly , they concern the idea of a quality label for Internet service providers who voluntarily adhere to a code of conduct agreed within the sector .
That will make it easier for parents to decide which Internet provider 's services to use .
The other concern was to use as little paper as possible for the awareness actions and , wherever possible , to opt for cheaper electronic information .
As I said , we have reached compromises with the Council .
This means that we are withdrawing Amendments Nos 3 , 4 and 5 in favour of Amendments Nos 8 , 9 and 10 , which we have tabled as compromise amendments in accordance with the Rules of Procedure .
There are other amendments , which I reject without exception , because if we were to accept them we would have to go into a conciliation procedure .
By handling the matter as we have so far , namely reaching agreement with the Commission and the Council , we avoid the conciliation procedure and save about three months of time .
For that reason alone , I would advise against accepting the other amendments , from No 12 onwards .
Furthermore , the importance and quality of these amendments is not such that not accepting them would significantly harm the programme .
I am pleased that we have made such progress with this action plan , and I would like to compliment the rapporteur on what is an excellent report .
The Internet is first and foremost a wonderful invention , which breaks down boundaries and opens doors on a scale we could not possibly have imagined only ten years ago .
In this sense , the Internet is part of a revolution which enables us to communicate with people throughout the world .
However , if the Internet is organised in an anarchical way , it also means that dishonest and criminal individuals will more or less have a free hand to disseminate illegal images or text , for example child pornography or incitements to racism .
This is very difficult to stamp out , as we all know , and I am glad that we are proceeding with this European action plan , which can try to prevent the spread of illegal material .
Users of the Internet will have full control and be able to filter out this kind of material automatically , and so there should be complete transparency .
However , it is very important for us to distinguish between what is illegal and what is offensive or morally damaging .
Who is to decide what is damaging , and whose morals are the best ?
The great thing about the Internet is precisely that there is no censor in the middle of it .
In the opinion of the Danish Social Democrats , therefore , we should not have a quality label , awarded by the Commission .
The Commission should not have a monopoly on deciding what is morally correct .
Nor should we be harmonising civil law in the Member States , but rather working and cooperating to combat such things as child pornography .
This is illegal in all the Member States , and we can all agree that it is damaging to children 's rights .
So let us begin a joint action to combat child pornography as soon as possible and extend the competence of Europol , so that we can combat international networks which produce , sell and distribute pornographic material of this kind .
Mr President , the Internet was virtually unknown a few years ago .
Now , nearly all of us make use of it every day .
Wherever in the world we happen to be , there is a good chance that we will be able to follow the news and keep ourselves up to date .
In this sense , the Internet is bad for dictatorships and good for democracy .
Many of us connected to ' Sarajevo on-line ' at a time when that city was otherwise cut off from the world .
This might sound exaggerated , but I believe that the Internet will one day go down in history books alongside Gutenberg 's printing press .
As to the specific proposals in the report , I am in favour of websites which offer information and assistance on unlawful material coming over the Internet .
I particularly support the idea of self-regulation for service providers .
I myself suggested a system of quality labelling to reward those who observe the sector 's code of conduct , and I hope that the Commission will go along with this .
There appeared to be some reticence in the beginning , but I sense that both the Commission and the Council have now been won over .
Let us hope that we will reach an accommodation on this issue .
Since we are dealing with an international problem , I remain convinced that effective self-regulation is the best way of achieving sustainable results .
It must be possible both to offer the necessary safeguards regarding personal integrity and to halt the spread of unlawful or damaging material .
I should like to congratulate Mr Schmid on his fine report .
It has been a pleasure to work with him , and he deserves praise for the excellent results he has achieved .
Mr President , it is a pity that the Council of Ministers is not present to hear me say how much I deplore the decision not to accept the proposal on judicial cooperation .
I would encourage the Commission to pursue the matter and exploit the possibilities offered by the Treaty of Amsterdam .
I also have high expectations of the fifth RTD framework programme , which we have often discussed here .
Many important proposals are likely to be forthcoming as regards safe use of the Internet . This is only right and proper if people are to have faith in the system .
Copyright too will need protecting . And coordination between this action plan and other measures is vital .
We are confronted by a twofold problem . Individuals want to know that it is safe for them to pay their bills via the Internet , to send messages and so on .
Equally , society has a duty to intervene where necessary .
The first step is to win people 's confidence by ensuring that the Internet is safe .
The Commission could do a great deal to facilitate the use of encryption .
One Member State actually prevents the unfettered sale and use of encryption services . The US is also putting obstacles in the way of trade .
Action by the Commission is particularly necessary if the Internet is to become safe to use .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , there is no surprise here .
We are witnessing how a great invention such as the Internet is growing .
There is an increase in the number of people using it and in the attempts to control and censor this brilliant invention , and Mr Schmid , our rapporteur , is acting as their spokesman .
My group will oppose this report because it is not by claiming to defend groups that are particularly vulnerable - we have mentioned here the victims of paedophiles and victims of drugs - that we are going to tackle these problems .
We know very well that the problem of drugs can be tackled by giving the State the opportunity to regulate and legalise this phenomenon .
We also know very well that paedophile rings - rings that the judicial authorities in many countries , including Belgium , are failing to clamp down on - do not work via the Internet , and we are attacking something that has nothing or very little to do with these crimes .
I therefore believe that we must look at the problems facing us and begin to tackle the real issues .
Mr President , in an earlier life I was chairman of a film censorship committee in Manchester .
In my time on that committee I never voted to censor a single film .
I am in favour of minimal censorship but not of none .
Certain material needs to be kept out of the hands of children ; certain material needs labelling so that those who , if you want , investigate it know what they are getting .
Certain material - paedophile material , pornographic material of certain kinds , particularly snuff movies , and certain racist material - should be banned .
If it is illegal in written form , it should be illegal on the Internet .
I know the librarian argument : a librarian does not know what is in every book . But when you point out what is in some of the books , you expect them to take action .
The same should be true of service providers on the Internet .
I also want to say that STOA conducted a study recently on the subject of whether material on the Internet can be controlled technically .
Slightly to our surprise , as a member of the STOA panel , there seemed to be good technical means for controlling what is on the Internet , for example , pornography , so that you can signal areas which you need to investigate and look up .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the vast increase in the use of the Internet is prompting outpourings from many opinion-leaders which are comparable to the reactions 500 years ago in response to the advent of printing .
Then too there were claims that this new technology would sow confusion among the more vulnerable souls and undermine established values and practices .
It is to the credit of the Commissioner , the Council and Parliament that the multiannual action plan for safer use of the Internet is based more on information , increasing awareness , self-regulation and voluntary codes of behaviour than on repression and censorship .
The Union has not yet given way to what is said to be a Marxist principle - but I leave that to those who say it - which claims that trust is good , but control is a lot better .
That said , I am not so naive as to believe that this is the reason why the Council has omitted any reference to cooperation in the field of justice and prosecution .
This omission indicates that it is mainly with words that the governments of the Member States are urging a joint approach to combating cross-border crime , while shrinking from even considering such cooperation in practice .
Simply calling with words for more security , while refusing to prepare the necessary action , let alone actually taking it , will only increase the sense of insecurity and threat among our citizens .
That , ladies and gentlemen , is ultimately very damaging to democracy .
Mr President , Parliament has expressed the wish for changes to the common position .
The Commission has no difficulty with the substance of most of these amendments .
In order to be consistent with its position on first reading and its original proposal , the Commission cannot accept Amendments Nos 1 , 3 and 13 .
The Commission can accept the remaining nine amendments .
However , time is now of the essence .
I urge Parliament to consider carefully the proposed amendments so that delays that would occur in the conciliation procedure can be avoided .
There is little doubt that there is overwhelming support for the action plan ; there is no substantial disagreement that should prevent the action plan from being adopted without further delay .
In three cases - Amendments Nos 1 , 2 and 6 - the Commission proposes dealing with Parliament 's concern by making the following declaration : ' Liability of intermediaries for Internet content will be dealt with in the proposal for the directive on certain legal questions relating to electronic commerce which the Commission has undertaken to bring forward .
Counteracting violence and the abuse of women and children is covered by the Daphne programme .
The Commission will ensure that due account is taken of Parliament 's concerns in implementing action lines 1 and 3 with respect to violence and the abuse of women and children on the Internet .
As a follow-up to the crime study and in conjunction with the forthcoming Commission communication on computer crime , the Commission will arrange for studies on the issues of substantive provisions of criminal law , referred to in Amendment No 6 by the Committee on Civil Liberties and Internal Affairs , subject to the availability of budgetary appropriations and to obtaining the necessary approval under the Financial Regulations . '
I hope that this will enable an agreed text to be voted and so allow the action plan to be implemented as soon as possible .
In the light of the sad evidence this summer , with child pornography on the Internet receiving much attention , everybody agrees that there is an urgent need to act .
Adoption now is vital if the European Union is to maintain its lead in dealing with illegal and harmful content on the Internet .
I wish to thank the rapporteur , Mr Schmid , for his very constructive approach to the proposals contained in the action plan .
Mr President , following the Commission 's statement , I am authorised by the committee to withdraw Amendments Nos 1 , 2 and 6 .
They are redundant .
Let me point out again that we are withdrawing Amendments Nos 3 , 4 and 5 in favour of the compromise wording of the Council 's Amendments Nos 8 , 9 and 10 .
I should like to make another formal comment . There is an Amendment No 7 which concerns the entry into force of the programme by 1 January next year , since the date of 1 January this year is now obsolete .
That obsolete date is repeated elsewhere in the programme , so the amendment obviously applies there as well .
Thank you , Mr Schmid .
Your explanations will be taken into account tomorrow during the vote .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Clinical trials
The next item is the report ( A4-0407 / 98 ) by Mr Amadeo , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection , on the proposal for a European Parliament and Council directive on the approximation of provisions laid down by law , regulation or administrative action relating to the implementation of good clinical practice in the conduct of clinical trials on medicinal products for human use ( COM ( 97 ) 0369 - C4-0446 / 97-97 / 0197 ( COD ) ) .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , a long-awaited directive is coming before the House today ; it is a very important one because of its implications for the use of medicinal products , and therefore because of the substantial health benefits to be gained by citizens and patients in Europe .
It may seem surprising that , at a time which I would describe as a significant one in the life of the European Parliament , a nonattached Member is presenting a report .
I consider this to be a most noteworthy sign of the democratic , respectful and impartial nature of this Parliament , and I am grateful to all my fellow members of the Environment Committee , in particular its chairman Mr Collins , and to the coordinators of the political groups : they not only allowed me to draw up this report , but pulled out all the stops to improve its content through a series of well-considered , sincere and truly valuable amendments .
It is now my duty to report to the House on the background to this presentation in the plenary and on the content of the directive .
I shall comment first of all on the working method .
Having noted immediately the importance of and expectations concerning the implementation of good clinical practice in the conduct of clinical trials on medicinal products for human use , I considered that my task should mainly be one of meticulously and objectively coordinating a series of proposals from experts in the field . I therefore held a number of meetings with European consumer groups and associations , patients ' groups of different nationalities , representatives of ethics committees in various countries , independent voluntary bodies , groups of university and hospital researchers , and European representatives of drugs companies .
At the same time , I took on board the views of all those - individuals or groups - who approached me either in person or in writing with particular comments and considerations . In short , in the explanatory statement and the amendments , I have attempted to summarise all the different opinions I have heard , so as to bring to bear the greatest possible measure of democratic spirit , openness and active participation on a proposal which must not be handed down from above , but rather should be the fruit of concerted action on the part of everyone .
The basic aim was as follows . The adoption of this directive could give a major boost to the long-standing eager expectations of the Union 's scientific community , provided that it really does bring about harmonisation .
In other words , all 390 million European citizens , exercising the same rights and duties , should be in a position to benefit from the outcome of clinical trials on human subjects .
It is likewise imperative that research institutes as a whole , whether public or private , in all 15 Member States should enjoy equal opportunities and compete with one another on proper terms .
At present , the guidelines on good clinical practice are intended purely for information and not enforced in the same way in individual Member States , which are responsible for legislative regulation .
Our task is to convert the principles and guidelines into a binding Community legislative act to regulate an activity now largely carried on at trial sites , often operating in different Member States .
My first remark is that the directive contains proposals relating to the conduct of clinical trials of medicinal products on human subjects and the implementation of GCP .
This text acknowledges the need to harmonise within the Community the administrative procedures and documents used , especially in multi-centre trials .
Its stated aim is to rationalise the administrative procedures required for the launch of a clinical trial , thus making Europe more competitive as compared , for example , to the United States , whilst maintaining a high level of protection for trial subjects .
Secondly , it is necessary in our opinion to provide a simple , unambiguous legislative frame of reference for European clinical research .
Europe should improve its ability to supply clinical data needed to develop and register pharmaceutical preparations , for instance by stipulating that replies and documents requested must be produced within standard time limits , thus enabling trials to be conducted in several countries at once .
Rapid access to clinical trials , however regulated , is ethically beneficial to the extent that it allows patients , especially those suffering from serious diseases , to be treated at an early stage .
Moreover , trials are scientifically beneficial , since the researchers involved can publish and discuss the findings of their experiments and in that way further their careers .
Lastly , clinical trials are economically beneficial because they can attract substantial corporate investment which can also be used to fund basic research in the centres concerned .
Thirdly , the technical aspects of the proposed directive must be harmonised with documents already issued or currently being drawn up , and in particular those relating to the ICH , those on GCP and those on pharmacovigilance .
Fourthly , one particular weakness in the current proposal for a directive is its provision for two possible procedures , one based on authorisation and the other on notification .
After lengthy deliberations , we resolved that harmonisation must be based on one procedure only , and the Environment Committee expressed this view when voting on the amendments .
In our opinion , when an application for authorisation is submitted to the ethics committee , the regulatory authority should merely be notified and would then have 30 days in which to raise objections , should it think fit .
Under that procedure , patients would be doubly protected - by the ethics committee and because the regulatory authority would have the option of intervening - but clear-cut and brief time limits would be laid down , and time is , at present , the most decisive factor where clinical trials in Europe are concerned .
All countries must make the same undertaking : to harmonise - that is , to determine a single procedure based on the system of notification .
Such a procedure would ensure , firstly , scrupulous protection for patients , in that GCP rules must be complied with , the green light must be obtained from the ethics committee and the Member States may put forward any reasoned objections within the 30-day period ; secondly , certainty as to the starting date of the trials ; and , thirdly , uniform procedures in all the Member States .
In conclusion , our task as the European Parliament goes beyond single market and competition issues , and encompasses a human dimension that should be a matter of particular concern to us all .
It is to be hoped that Parliament will manage to provide the democratic impetus to persuade the Commission and Council to lay down a single clear-cut rule for all the Member States .
I have one brief final point , Mr President .
Amendments Nos 29 and 30 have been resubmitted so as to ensure that trials can also take place in centres engaged in research other than for the registration of medicinal products .
Amendment No 14 should , in my opinion , be put to the vote after No 31 , which is more comprehensive and which , if adopted , will cause No 14 to fall .
Amendment No 35 should be put to the vote before No 16 because , if adopted , it will cause the last paragraph of No 16 and the whole of No 17 to fall .
Thank you , Mr Amadeo .
Since you were so courteous , at the beginning , as to thank all the groups for having permitted you to draw up this report , I allowed you three or four brief points at the end , and not just the one .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , in the approximation of these provisions , we must pursue two aims .
The first is to ensure the protection of the patient , which is the prime concern of good clinical practice .
To that end , the Committee on Research , Technological Development and Energy has called for it to be made absolutely plain in the wording of the directive that an investigator means a doctor and not , as proposed by the Commission , a person responsible .
Another means of improving patient protection is to ensure that resources allocated to pharmaceutical research are not squandered on obsolete trials or trials also carried out at another site .
If the standards established through good clinical practice are observed , we shall be able to avoid that kind of duplication .
The second point is that we must bear in mind the interests of the pharmaceutical industry which is conducting the clinical trials .
These trials are essential to bringing new medical products on to the market .
The extent to which the pharmaceutical industry can be innovative depends largely on the efficiency of the administrative procedures that have to be gone through before trials can be conducted .
The Commission has taken a major step towards tightening up these administrative procedures by obliging the authorising authorities to decide within 30 days whether or not a clinical trial may be conducted .
In some Member States , such as Germany , it has already been shown that it is quite possible for the authorities to take an informed decision within that period .
The procedures have been tightened further by allowing the decision on the conduct of certain clinical trials to be based purely on a notification procedure .
Another important aspect is that the directive approximates good clinical practice rules with the guidelines laid down by the International Conference on Harmonisation , because clinical trials conducted in Europe must not be subject to stricter requirements than those carried out in the rest of the world .
At the same time , however , they must comply with international requirements in this field .
That is what we proposed , and I warmly thank Mr Amadeo for his report .
Mr President , I want to welcome the Commission proposal this evening and to recognise the work done by Mr Amadeo in producing a very well thought-out report .
He has been very courteous to the other groups tonight and we can all say that we appreciate the time he has taken and the strenuous efforts he has made to find a compromise in certain particularly difficult areas of this report .
I would like to emphasise that European legislation on clinical trials has to be in line with international guidelines as laid down in the International Conference on Harmonisation of Good Clinical Practice Guidelines .
This is something that should be included in the directive in order to ensure harmonisation .
The report is a very important one which aims to reduce the amount of bureaucracy surrounding the conduct and application procedure of clinical trials while , at the same time , ensuring that the health , safety and confidentiality of clinical trials subjects are of utmost priority .
The issue of timescales of the application procedure has proved a problematic factor in the discussions on this issue and it has been of some concern particularly among the pharmaceutical industries .
We have looked at this further in the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection and it is especially of concern in the case of multicentre trials where administrative procedures can lead to extensive delays and confusion even before the commencement of the trial .
Some rationalisation has therefore been achieved in this report to ensure that multicentre trials , especially those covering a number of EU Member States , are using the same information and products of the same high quality .
In committee we agreed that the procedure for applying to conduct a clinical trial had to be looked into very closely .
At present companies or researchers may commence with a clinical trial without an obligation to notify .
Between the systems of authorisation and notification we favour the system of notification because with this system , when an application is submitted to the Ethics Committee , the regulatory authority will be notified , and the investigator may commence with the trial thereby cutting the bureaucracy to a minimum .
Moreover , the Ethics Committee would have the possibility of raising its concerns and the investigator would have to act on those concerns .
I also welcome the rapporteur 's views on the role of ethics committees and agree that the safety and dignity of patients must remain the utmost priority .
The introduction of ethics committees under EU law seeks to ensure the safety of subjects in such trials .
When red tape is reduced and the safety of trial subjects is ensured , particularly through the involvement of ethics committees , EU citizens can benefit from exciting new drugs and discoveries and innovative medicinal products that result from efficiently conducted clinical trials carried out in a more timely manner than hitherto .
Finally , I thank the rapporteur for the commitment he has shown in drafting a highly appropriate report , and I look forward to a positive response from the Commission .
Mr President , we feel that the Commission 's proposal is sound and one we can accept and support .
Nevertheless , quite a number of amendments were tabled in the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection , where all the political groups worked closely together .
I support my colleague Mr Needle 's statement , which proves that the work in committee was fruitful and that we come to the House with a widely accepted position .
Nevertheless , too many amendments were adopted in committee , as has tended to be the case of late . Some of these amendments are not entirely appropriate and it does not seem very likely that they could be incorporated into a coherent text .
That is why we need to repeat Amendment No 31 , which does not change what was adopted in committee but makes it easier to understand and enhances the legal certainty of the wording .
I also believe it is important to repeat here in the House and for the benefit of the sector and the patients themselves , that the work would be facilitated and the trials harmonised with a fairly efficient system . Its key features are the mere notification of the start of the clinical trial , a time limit of 30 days and a single ethics committee .
Speed and legal certainty will be gained . Finally , there will be adequate safeguards for the fundamental rights of individuals , which has been one of our main concerns since the beginning .
In addition , the proposal will result in a text that is in line with international regulations , which was another of the goals we set ourselves .
Mr President , I too would like to thank the rapporteur for the work which he has done in committee , and I welcome the broad support for this proposal .
The proposal codifies the Helsinki declaration while allowing the Member States to go further in terms of strengthening the protection of patients , which is also a focus of the committee 's amendments .
There are three main problems which may be a cause of division .
Firstly , there is the question of whether the Member States should authorise a clinical trial when the ethics committee has said yes , or if authorisation can be withheld in some cases .
Secondly , there is the question of whether authorisation is obtained automatically when an application has been made and no answer has been received , or if notification actually has to be given before proceeding with clinical trials , regardless of the fact that nothing has been heard from the official authorities .
And thirdly , there are the time limits which are to apply to the work of the ethics committee .
I would firstly like to say that the Liberal Group supports the main thrust of the amendments , but I personally have some reservations about the three points I have mentioned .
I think it is extremely important to preserve the Member States ' ability to reject an application , even if the ethics committee has said yes .
I do not in fact see this as a major problem in practice , because the ethics committee will not normally be operating in a political vacuum .
As regards the question of whether it is possible to proceed automatically , or if notification has to be given or a positive authorisation obtained , I would emphasise that I think this is also important in terms of patient protection .
I do not agree with the amendments concerning time limits .
Experience with the present ethics committees shows that ethical considerations and decisions take time , and so we should not set too short a time limit for the ethics committee to do its work .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the rules on conducting clinical trials are to apply from now on to socalled ' multi-centre ' trials , that is , trials that apply the same protocol in 50 or 60 different investigational sites , thereby ensuring that between 2 000 and 3 000 patients are used at a total cost of between ECU 300 million and ECU 500 m for one single trial .
That goes to show that when the human , social and economic resources of these trials , which are aimed at developing new medicinal products , are better targeted , they are therefore more effective and better tolerated by patients .
Besides having to notify the relevant local authorities of the trial , or using a centralised procedure through the European Agency for the Evaluation of Medicinal Products , a certain number of rules must be respected , and they were the subject of amendments in committee .
These amendments , which are supported by the UPE Group , have various objectives .
Firstly , they aim to guarantee full and objective information for the patients likely to take part in the trial .
Secondly , they are aimed at ensuring that the participants give their consent voluntarily by means of a written document that must be dated and signed , and , as a result , the necessary arrangements must be made for the mentally handicapped .
Thirdly , they aim to obtain the opinions of multidisciplinary and independent ethics committees , that is , committees consisting of doctors and paramedical staff that are not directly involved in the clinical trial .
Fourthly , they hope to oblige the Member States to take the necessary measures to respect good manufacturing practices with a view to guaranteeing the quality and safety of medicinal products .
And fifthly , they aim to make third countries exporting to the European Union provide proof that quality control and batch approval have been carried out , so that the products can actually be traced if something happens .
Notification must , of course , be given of any undesirable and serious occurrence in a Member State where the trial is taking place .
Finally , the researchers must be qualified doctors , who are responsible for the trial and , therefore , capable of assessing whether it is running smoothly and the effects on the patients voluntarily taking part in the study .
We are in favour of the proposal for a directive as amended , which aims to establish a framework designed to promote efficient clinical research to the benefit of patients .
Mr President , Mr Amadeo 's report is extremely interesting , and is indeed improved in certain respects by some of the amendments .
I think , however , that there should have been more criticism of the loopholes and omissions in the Commission 's proposal , and that we should be more daring about more specific proposals and more advanced measures for carrying out checks , both preventive and repressive , and imposing sanctions as and when criminal intentions are exposed that stem from profiteering by the all-powerful multinational pharmaceutical groups .
This is because those groups , involved as they are with other interests too - even political interests , as we all know - use and exploit a whole range of people without any accountability at all , for example people suffering from incurable diseases , people committed to psychiatric clinics or similar institutions because of psychiatric disorders , or people whose freedoms are restricted - I am talking about prison inmates who become experimental animals without their consent so that new drugs can be clinically tested .
Such people must of course be protected , but we must not forget that declarations alone do not suffice for their protection . For this , there must be specific measures , which are unfortunately missing from the Commission 's proposal .
Unfortunately , despite the amendments , the Amadeo report does not criticise those omissions and does nothing to make them good .
It amazes me that payments and compensation are provided for ; payments for those who undergo trials and compensation for those whose physical or mental health is damaged in trials of new drugs .
In other words , the human body and mind have become a commodity .
Here we see the prevalence of the law , the taboo of free competition , the right of industrial ownership , the prevalence of lack of transparency in programmes , research and funding .
With the opportunity this report gives us , we must overcome these things so that clinical trials of new drugs for diseases will be beneficial for the health of mankind ...
( The President cut the speaker off )
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , we all agree on the need to protect patients - and many here have spoken of a high level of protection ; but I too feel that the level of patient protection should be defined in far more specific terms .
I too am concerned with defining this high level of protection .
It is not enough for us to say : someone else has to give consent for those who are incapable of giving their informed consent .
No !
That is why we have tabled an amendment which provides quite plainly that no research may be carried out on people who are incapable of giving their informed consent unless it is of direct use .
This is a crucial point , because what would happen in the reverse case ?
If we do not endorse this amendment , then that would surely automatically mean that anyone at all can consent on behalf of these people who are incapable of giving their informed consent , and that research can be carried out on them which is of no use at all .
Then we really will be treating people to whom we have promised a high level of protection just like guinea pigs .
In my view , we must not forget either that we are running a risk of opening the door to eugenics , unless we guarantee a direct level of protection .
The past has after all proved that we must not carry out research on the mentally handicapped who are incapable of giving their consent , unless it is of direct use .
So I would very urgently ask you to support this amendment by the Green Group , so that we can ensure precisely that .
Let me also place special emphasis on this aspect against the background of the heated discussions we have already seen here in the European Parliament , and especially also among many social groups , concerning the bioethics convention .
The Federal Republic has not signed this bioethics convention , for precisely the reasons I have just given .
That is why our prime concern should be that we do not approve a directive which does not specifically guarantee protection for people who are incapable of giving their informed consent .
I would therefore ask the House to endorse our amendment , which makes it clear that research may only be conducted if it is of direct use , and that any other research is quite out of the question .
Mr President , everyone knows that since 1990 the rules governing clinical trials in the European Union , and internationally , have been codified in directives on good clinical practice . The globalisation of the pharmaceuticals industry has necessarily led to the harmonisation of international rules set at the International Conference on Harmonisation .
Nonetheless , the Member States can still take different legislative or administrative measures , and that can lead to significant delays in starting clinical trials . This , in turn , is bound to lead to delays in the application of the benefits of those trials to the treatment of patients .
That is why , without prejudice to the principle of subsidiarity , we need to take decisive steps towards rationalising and harmonising clinical trials .
Nonetheless , while scientific research has to be supported and encouraged , we must also ensure that those who take part in the trials are guaranteed protection , so that their human rights and dignity are respected .
That is why it is important to have ethics committees and for them to be transparent and independent .
If there were one national ethics committee , coordinating the regional and local committees , then each Member State could have a single set of rules while safeguarding the independence of local committees and allowing them to agree to or ban trials .
There would also have to be an ethics committee , whose opinions would be binding , at every centre where clinical trials take place .
Those opinions would be issued by doctors not involved in the trials , along with nurses and other health professionals , as well as non-medical staff , to guarantee patients ' safety and the wellbeing of those taking part .
Researchers , whether medical or not - and if not then medical supervision should be provided - ought invariably to obtain the informed consent of everyone taking part in trials - or of their guardians - and honour their confidentiality .
We could then promote research , safeguarding the interests of patients and of the pharmaceuticals industry alike .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I too am grateful to the rapporteur .
Two thirds of all diseases can still not be treated or treated adequately .
Some of them are quite dreadful diseases , and often fatal .
Hence the need for medical research , and especially research into medical products .
The directive we are discussing can help improve clinical research in Europe .
In particular , the standardisation of procedures offers a chance to avoid duplication .
However , we must guarantee comprehensive protection of the trial subjects under all circumstances .
Special attention must be given to protecting people who are incapable of giving their informed consent , such as children and the mentally handicapped .
The Commission proposal does not take adequate account of this .
Instead , it refers mainly to the Council of Europe Convention for the protection of human rights and biomedicine .
But that convention is a subject of dispute , and some Member States have not yet decided whether or not to ratify it .
The European Commission - and I would ask Commissioner Liikanen to pass this on - should stop writing this convention into EU legislative documents , rather on the assumption that ' we need not concern ourselves with the ethical questions ; the Council of Europe has already done so ' .
We need very strict provisions to protect individuals who are incapable of giving their informed consent .
Under no circumstances may children or the mentally handicapped be misused as guinea pigs .
However , I do not accept Mr Ephremidis 's statement as it stands , since I believe that the overwhelming majority of responsible persons in industry and in the clinics do not carry out research in an abusive manner , but abide by the rules on the protection of trial subjects .
But we must also make that clear under this directive .
I do not endorse the amendment by the Green Group to the effect that people who are incapable of giving their informed consent should be totally excluded from the research , because I believe we would then be bringing research to a standstill , for children 's diseases in particular .
Some children 's diseases do not occur among adults , which is why it is not possible to conduct the relevant studies in full on adults .
That is why we need strict rules , but not a total ban .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I too should like to begin by thanking Mr Amadeo for his excellent work and outstanding readiness to cooperate with all members of the committee , as well as for taking up so many amendments and being so open to suggestions .
This proposal for a directive is of particular importance because it sets out to regulate such a sensitive sector , seeking to harmonise standards for the conduct of clinical trials of medicinal products on human subjects .
The good clinical practice guide has existed since 1990 , but as we all know is not binding ; that is why national provisions must be harmonised .
It is advisable to lay down a single procedure in a field where the rules currently vary from one Member State to another .
We have opted for notification rather than authorisation , and the reasons why have been explained .
But what is even more vital is to protect the health of subjects who volunteer for trials .
To this end , an amendment submitted by me and adopted unanimously by my colleagues in the Environment Committee provides for an explicit definition of informed consent : before taking part in a clinical trial , the subject of that trial must receive full and easily understandable information about the trial , and must sign a written statement indicating consent .
Ethics committees play a particularly important role in protecting subjects who volunteer for trials : it will be they who evaluate the relevance of the trial , the protocol , the suitability of the investigators and the available facilities .
Ethics committees will assess the adequacy and completeness of the written information .
In the case of injury , the sponsors and the ethics committee should be informed immediately .
In this way , we shall ensure that trials are completely safe .
The Member States will furthermore be cooperating with one another in the interests of research by the European pharmaceutical industry and , ultimately , the health of their citizens , who will receive early treatment with the new products .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , like Mr Liese , I too wish to emphasise once again that despite the undoubted success in curing illnesses by the use of medicines , there are still at present some 20 000 diseases that we cannot treat with much hope of success .
That is why new , effective and safe medicines will still be essential in the future .
Clinical trials , in other words studies of the potential effects of a medicine on human beings , are extremely important to medical research and development .
Various speakers have referred to the need for international networking .
We consider it urgently necessary not just to take joint action on a Europe-wide basis , but to have international agreements .
That is why Mr Valverde and I have tabled three amendments , to emphasise that point again .
This is all the more important because - as has already been said - all these safety requirements also concern the protection of human beings , and in particular the protection of people who are incapable or less capable of giving their informed consent .
Our group aims to ensure that human beings are comprehensively protected in the conduct of clinical trials , that all patients have access to therapeutic progress , but also that we have and maintain reliable and innovative framework conditions for research and for the development and production of innovative medicines .
Mr Amadeo has done some valuable work towards achieving these aims , and we can basically support his report .
Mr President , the characteristics we demand from pharmaceutical products are quality , safety and efficacy .
The most important information regarding those characteristics comes from clinical trials in man .
I believe it is quite clear to us all that such trials must be carried out in accordance with firm and inviolate rules which go as far as possible towards protecting the physical and mental integrity of those who take part in them , and at the same time provide air-tight guarantees of the inviolability of their private life .
Most of the amendments the European Parliament will be voting on go some way towards strengthening the Commission 's text in relation to the safeguarding , if I can use this expression , of the human experimental animals used in clinical trials , with detailed provisions ranging from full information for participants about the clinical trial and their written consent , to restoration and compensation in the event of damage or death .
I would like to believe that the Commission will accept all these amendments .
We must not forget that we owe a lot to the volunteer subjects who undergo clinical trials , because it is thanks to them that the final assessment can be made , particularly of a drug 's safety and efficacy , with records of any side effects it may have .
This has benefited mankind in the past , and it is still a benefit and will remain so in the future , thanks to valuable drugs that protect human health and provide means of restoring it when it fails .
Finally , Mr President , it is self-evident that the provisions of this directive must be implemented in a uniform manner in all the Member States if we really want to ensure proper clinical trials and fair competition in the production and marketing of drugs .
Here , I would like to thank the rapporteur Mr Amadeo , who worked so well with the Committee on the Environment .
Mr President , Parliament has recommended some thirty amendments to the proposal for a directive .
The Commission accepts half of them , as they either complement the Commission 's original proposal satisfactorily or they simplify it .
The Commission unreservedly accepts seven amendments .
In addition , we can accept two amendments if we alter the wording slightly .
The Commission accepts Amendments Nos 1 and 6 , paragraphs 1 , 2 and 4 of Amendment No 10 , and Amendments Nos 13 , 14 , 15 , 18 , 19 , 21 , 22 , 23 , 24 and 27 .
The Commission will take the following into consideration in its amended proposal .
The Commission intends to include in its proposal Amendments Nos 1 and 6 and paragraphs 1 , 2 and 4 of Amendment No 10 .
The amendments serve to improve the degree of protection afforded to participants in clinical trials in particular by imposing the condition of informed consent and the protection of the sponsor in Amendment No 19 .
The Commission agrees with Parliament 's competent committees that we need to confirm the status of the ethics committee as the recipient of certain types of information especially with regard to medical safety during a clinical trial , as well as the tasks connected with undertaking the clinical trial itself . The trial could last as long as five to ten years .
This concerns Amendments Nos 21 , 22 and 27 .
The most major amendment put forward by Parliament 's competent committees concerns deleting the reference to alternative commencement procedures .
In the Commission 's original proposal the alternatives were either to notify the competent authorities , which is the normal legal procedure , or to obtain an official licence issued by the competent authority , which was suggested in consideration of special or exceptional circumstances .
Parliament 's competent committees only support the notification procedure , which is the purpose behind Amendments Nos 13 , 14 , 15 and 18 .
The Commission accepts this position and will amend its original proposal accordingly .
In addition , the purpose behind Amendments Nos 23 and 24 is to clarify or specify more precisely the principles of good manufacturing practices applicable to investigational medical products to be used in clinical trials .
The Commission cannot accept amendments that do not improve on the original as it stands , especially when it comes to the readability of a complicated text .
This applies to Amendments Nos 3 , 8 , 9 , paragraphs 1 and 2 of Amendment No 12 , and Amendments Nos 16 , 17 , 20 , 25 and 26 .
Neither can the Commission accept amendments which dramatically alter the original text , or stray too far way from its spirit or legal basis .
This is the case with Amendments Nos 4 , 7 , paragraph 3 of Amendment No 10 , and Amendments Nos 11 and 20 , and , similarly , Amendments Nos 28 and 36 , which reiterate amendments the Commission cannot accept .
I would further like to emphasise that the Commission is very satisfied with the constructive view taken by the rapporteur and is confident that there will be effective cooperation with the European Parliament so that the statute can be adopted reasonably quickly .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
( The sitting was closed at 8.30 p.m. )
Approval of the Minutes
The Minutes of yesterday 's sitting have been distributed .
Are there any comments ?
Mr President , the Dutch taxation authorities tax not only Parliament 's contribution to voluntary pensions but also the actual pensions payable .
I am grateful to Mrs Fontaine for her spontaneous protest at this , and to Mr Rothley for putting down an amendment aimed at ending this anomalous state of affairs in the Netherlands .
Unfortunately a number of our Dutch people have indicated through their representative that they are happy with the system .
That is what I wanted recorded in the Minutes yesterday , and I am glad to see that it has been done .
Mr President , I would just like to say that I was here yesterday but for some inexplicable reason my name does not appear on the list .
I would be glad if that could be put right .
We shall check that and include your name .
Mr President , the same thing happened to me yesterday .
My name is not on the attendance register either . I must have been so focused on the Rothley report and the work of the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights that I forgot to sign .
Please could my name be added .
That will be checked and corrected .
( The Minutes were approved )
Mr President , we have been looking forward to getting the diaries for 1999 and am pleased we were able to collect them yesterday .
One of the important dates for 1999 is that of the elections to this House .
As you know , there has been a wide-ranging debate in Parliament about the days on which these elections should be held .
So I am very disappointed to see it stated incorrectly in this diary that just three countries of the European Union will be voting not on Sunday the thirteenth but earlier , and that my own country , the Netherlands , is not listed with these .
It is quite wrong that the elections are to be held on Sunday .
One of the good traditions we have in the Netherlands is that these elections are held during the week , and it is a mistake that the Netherlands is not down as voting on 10 June .
I should like to ask how you propose to correct this misunderstanding and prevent the turnout from being even lower .
I believe you should put this question to the Dutch authorities .
As you are well aware , the date of the elections is not determined by entries in Parliament 's agenda but by the authorities in each Member State . The elections must take place within a set time period that may only be altered following a Council decision and Parliament has no power in this respect .
The particular date set for elections in the Netherlands must have been decided by the authorities in that country , on the grounds , presumably , of the principle of subsidiarity .
In no way is Parliament responsible for the dates of the elections nor may it change them .
That is not the point , Mr President .
The elections will indeed be held in the Netherlands on 10 June .
That is not the problem .
It is the diary which is wrong .
That needs to be corrected .
That is what Mr van Dam is asking .
A check will be carried out to establish if an error has been made on our part in the agenda .
Rest assured , however , that elections in the Netherlands will not be held in accordance with our agenda but in accordance with the arrangements made by the Dutch authorities .
Decision on urgent procedure
President .
I call Mr von Wogau to give the opinion of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy , which is the committee responsible .
Mr President , this is an issue which we have had to deal with before .
This problem referred to by the Commission has existed since January of this year .
But we did not receive the documents until September .
I cannot therefore understand why the Commission has now twice in succession lodged a request for urgent procedure when it had plenty of time before .
Mr Langen is currently preparing a report which we will vote on at the November meeting and present to the House in December .
I therefore propose that we reject the request for urgent procedure .
I put the request for urgent procedure to the vote .
( Parliament rejected the request for urgent procedure )
Court of Auditors annual report
The next item is the presentation of the annual report of the Court of Auditors .
I should like to welcome the President of the Court , Mr Friedmann , who once again has been kind enough to come and present this report to the House .
Mr Friedmann , you have the floor .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , on behalf of the Members of the European Court of Auditors , may I thank you for allowing me to present the results of our work over the past year at this early hour of the morning .
We will surely agree that money is not everything , but the way in which money is used is an indication of whether a policy is successful or not .
You will probably have noticed that this year 's annual report is much slimmer than in previous years .
This is not because we have done any less work , quite the contrary .
In the past year , we have presented 25 special reports .
Our aim is in fact also to make your own work easier by spreading these annual reports over the year , so that you too can spread your work accordingly .
I readily admit that there is still room for improvement , but there is good will for this on our part .
On the revenue side in the past year , the Community has continued to lose billions from both customs duties and value added tax .
In the case of customs duties , this is partly due to the fact there is still insufficient cooperation between national customs authorities .
The possibilities of modern information technology are not being adequately exploited .
Every Member State has its own risk analysis methods , which produce different results .
The Member States ' lack of interest in pursuing this more vigorously is all the more surprising when one considers that uncollected customs revenue has to be offset in the budget by higher contributions from the Member States .
I would therefore appeal to the Member States to attach greater importance to collecting customs duties correctly , in their own interest .
In the case of value added tax , as I said , huge amounts are being lost .
Model calculations have shown that in the years 1991 to 1993 - on a basis of nine Member States - the amount underpaid on average every year was ECU 70 billion .
It is true that this is happening in the Member States , but it has a direct impact on the European Union .
We still have the unsatisfactory situation that the country of destination principle applies in the single market , whereby the goods are outside the tax system from the place of origin until they reach their destination , which of course offers tempting opportunities for irregularities .
On the expenditure side , following the structure of the budget , we have once again concentrated our efforts on agricultural and structural policy .
On the agricultural policy , we have presented a number of special reports , for example on the BSE disease in cows , and on the closure of accounts .
In the annual report itself , we tackle the question of durum wheat , amongst other things .
Why ?
Because this is a cereal which is particularly heavily subsidised .
For durum wheat , not only is the normal aid per hectare paid , but an additional aid which is only justifiable in political terms .
Had the same criteria that apply to other cereals been applied to durum wheat , more than ECU 3 billion in subsidies could have been saved over a four-year period .
We dealt in a special report with the exports of New Zealand dairy products to the United Kingdom .
Certain quotas of New Zealand milk and cheese may , in fact , be exported from New Zealand to the United Kingdom on preferential terms , provided that it meets certain criteria , including in particular a specified fat content .
As we established , the import conditions were not always complied with , leading to a reduction of Community revenue by some ECU 410 million .
Much of this revenue can no longer be claimed , but around ECU 110 million is still recoverable , and we have called on the Commission to pursue the matter .
So much for that area of the agricultural policy .
As you know , the Court is strongly committed to environmental policy .
It was recently awarded the ' Europäisches Naturerbe ' prize for its work in this area .
In a special report , we point out that among the 40 000 sewage plants in operation in the EU , some of which have received EU assistance , there are some serious shortcomings .
A third of the plants in Belgium and as many as half of those in Italy are in need of repair .
Above all , we established that a good many sewage plants were not even put into service initially , because the operators did not have the money to cover the operating costs or lacked the technical know-how .
This is something that must be considered , since between now and the year 2005 , a further 40 000 plants are to be constructed .
We also took a critical look at the support for renewable energy sources under the JOULE-Thermie programme .
Amongst other things , we established that the Commission had used more than 50 % of the staff posts earmarked for the programme in other areas of expenditure .
At the same time , we discovered cases where Commission staff involved in management decisions were exposed to major conflicts of interest , in particular because these staff had previously worked elsewhere , something which must be looked at in connection with the placing of orders .
We all know that , time and again , the European Union is faced with new challenges .
This is often a difficult task for the Commission , when it is called upon to respond rapidly to heavy demands imposed upon it at short notice .
Humanitarian aid is one example of this , to which we devoted a special report which appeared in March last year .
In 1991 , it was decided that , for the period 1992 to 1997 , some ECU 4 billion would be made available for this purpose .
More than ECU 3 billion has already been spent .
The aid has indeed reached the people in need of it .
The problem lies in the Commission 's central unit for managing humanitarian aid , known as ECHO .
In our special report last year , we had already pointed out that the staff policy regarding outside personnel in particular in this department was not transparent .
We asked for further information in writing from the Commission .
This information was not satisfactory .
You are all only too well aware of the debate which then flared up under the catchword ' U-boats ' .
It is not only with ECHO that there are problems with external staff , however , but also with the PHARE , TACIS and MED programmes , where some of the operating appropriations may be used for programme support , i.e. for outside experts .
The figure - known as the ' Liikanen facility ' after my neighbour here , Commissioner Liikanen - is 2 % for PHARE , 3.5 % for TACIS and 3 % for MED .
Our initial inquiries have shown that these figures were exceeded by more than twice as much .
I would ask Parliament to give some critical attention to this matter , so that proper order is restored .
As you know , the PHARE and TACIS activities also include nuclear safety .
In the last week , we have adopted a special report on this which has now been published .
In this report , we have established some significant things .
It should first be pointed out that , since 1990 , the Community has provided some ECU 850 million for nuclear safety in Central and Eastern Europe .
To this aid provided by the European Union must be added the further aid which the international community has made available , in particular through the G7 and G24 .
And in addition there are the loans granted by the EBRD in London .
What complaints do we have ?
Of the ECU 850 million made available , only ECU 300 million has been spent so far .
This is an indication that this policy is not being pursued with the necessary determination and rigour .
We criticise the fact that the G7 and G24 activities are being inadequately coordinated by the Commission .
The Commission points out that it is not exclusively responsible for this , but it must nevertheless be clear that it has to coordinate these activities .
We are critical of the fact that the Commission has no definite policy on the decommissioning of older nuclear power plants and the disposal of radioactive waste .
I think this is a very important point .
Another criticism is that , of the money provided for technical assistance , about one third , in other words ECU 200 million , was spent directly , i.e. without any open tendering .
With the best will in the world , it was not possible at the end of last year to form a definite judgement on how the Commission 's efforts to improve nuclear safety in Central and Eastern Europe should be assessed .
I would appeal urgently to you , as political decision-makers - but also to the Commission and the Council - to devote appropriate attention to this extremely important task , which is ticking away like a time bomb .
We are now constantly being asked what progress we are making in uncovering fraud involving European funds .
On this point , I would like to take the precaution of defining our position for you once again .
We in the Court of Auditors are required to consider whether the principles of legality , regularity and sound financial management are being met .
This means that we are not a criminal investigation department , nor a police force .
However , we do pay particular attention to areas of risk which we select using specific criteria .
In other words , we see our task above all as preventing fraud , helping to ensure that it does not occur , and developing ideas which make fraud unattractive in the first place .
If we do encounter actual cases of fraud or irregularities in carrying out our normal auditing tasks , we naturally work together with the national criminal investigation authorities - as well as UCLAF - so that matters take their proper course .
In the field of tourism , for example , we are working with the criminal investigation departments of several countries , and in the case I have just mentioned , the ' New Zealand Dairy Report ' , we are cooperating with the British authorities , that goes without saying .
We also audit UCLAF , since UCLAF is also a department of the Commission .
A few weeks ago , we presented a report on it which met with an appropriate response from you , for which I should like to thank the House .
Amongst other things , we criticise the fact that the UCLAF databases are incomplete and therefore not fully usable .
It is not clear who actually has access to these databases , and that is of course a question of security .
Half the UCLAF employees are on short-term contracts , so that when people have settled in they leave again and important knowledge is lost .
Because the databases are not fully usable , it is sometimes not possible to recover sums which the Community should be able to recover .
It is also not clear what powers UCLAF has within the Commission itself , given that it has no powers in other institutions .
This needs to be clarified by the Commission .
We have taken careful note that a debate has started here in the House on the subject of OLAF .
Your aim here is to extend and develop the powers of UCLAF .
You have also looked at the question of whether a separate institution should be created .
We have followed all this very carefully , especially since you base some of your arguments on our own report .
We in the Court of Auditors believe - and here we agree with you - that the Community institutions can of course develop their administration and their organisation further .
That is in accordance with the Treaties and does not infringe the rights of the Member States , and to that extent we in the Court can imagine that the independence of UCLAF could well be increased if it were to be given a position of independence in the form of OLAF roughly similar to that of the Financial Controller at the Commission .
But that is your decision !
We are of course ready to work with any unit that is created by the legislative authority .
As you know , the Court of Auditors is repeatedly asked to provide opinions on proposed measures .
Any institution can ask us to produce a report , especially on measures which affect the budget .
The latest comprehensive opinion of this kind dealt with Agenda 2000 .
We were asked for such an opinion by the Council .
In this , of course , we also address the agricultural policy as it is envisaged for the future by the Commission .
As you know , the Commission is proposing to reduce the guarantee prices for beef by 30 % , for cereals by 20 % and for milk by 10 % .
My impression is that the Commission drew up these plans at a time when the full extent of the crises in Asia , Russia and Latin America had still not been recognised .
In the meantime , it has become clear that , because of the crises in these regions , purchasing power for European agricultural products has fallen .
To prevent surplus stocks being created and the associated export refunds and storage costs , it would be more sensible to cut the guarantee prices more sharply than the Commission has proposed , but as a counter-move to place greater emphasis on direct aid .
As you know , the Commission is proposing to reduce direct aid above ECU 100 000 by 20 % and above ECU 200 000 by 25 % .
We would ask whether , in view of the fact that 80 % of the direct aid is paid to 20 % of the agricultural holdings , it would not be more sensible to put a cap on direct aid over ECU 100 000 , for example , as we have indicated .
The Commission has assumed that no direct aid is to be paid to the new Member States which are to join the Union .
We in the Court of Auditors take the view that this appears unrealistic , and have therefore proposed that , as a precaution , direct aid for the future Member States should be included in the calculations .
This would mean that ECU 3.3 billion would have to be entered in the budget annually in connection with the future Member States .
With regard to structural aid , we are largely in agreement with the Commission .
We think it is right that Community structural assistance should be implemented in more concentrated form .
We think it right that a 10 % reserve should be created for the countries that perform particularly well .
We also think it is right , and this is a very important point , that appropriations should automatically lapse if they do not give rise to payments within a specified time .
We believe this to be very significant ; it means that the Commission 's approach on structural aid - and , I would add , perhaps also with a view to creating more jobs - to a large extent coincides with our judgement .
I would also like to confirm that the relationship between commitments and payments has become very good and sensible .
However , that is not the real problem with structural aid .
The problem is as follows : it was decided at the Edinburgh summit to spend some ECU 175 billion on structural aid under the various Funds .
Of this amount , however , only ECU 85 billion has been spent so far , in other words more than ECU 90 billion is still waiting to be disbursed .
To this can be added another ECU 5 billion from the previous programming period , and it is an illusion to think that this sum of ECU 95 billion might still be spent in the two remaining years of this programming period .
These payments will have to be made in the years that follow .
Let me briefly mention to you the widening and deepening of our cooperation with national audit institutions .
This is more than just a formal process , because it ensures that the arguments of the Member States which are audited are included with more emphasis in our reports .
A few days ago , the heads of the institutions of all 15 EU Member States visited us to coordinate this work , and at the beginning of the year a conference took place in Warsaw with the heads of the East European audit institutions , under the chairmanship of the Polish audit institution and the European Court of Auditors .
As a result , I can tell you that the structures for cooperation between the East European audit institutions are now similar to those we have within the EU .
This is important because they will be our future colleagues in Central and Eastern Europe , and because these East European audit institutions will increasingly have the right to audit European Union resources on the spot .
In conclusion , may I offer our thanks for the excellent cooperation we have had with Parliament .
On behalf of the Court , I would like to thank , in particular , the Committee on Budgetary Control under its active , wise and intelligent chairman Mrs Diemut Theato , together with the rapporteur responsible for us , Mr Brinkhorst .
Finally , I would like to thank all of you who have listened to me here at this early hour of the morning .
( Applause ) Let me add one further point .
This year too , we are also presenting a statement of assurance for the general budget and the European Development Funds .
Contrary to the practice of previous years , we have not quantified the irregularities which we established ; we are thus presenting a qualified statement of assurance rather than a quantified one .
We want to avoid quoting percentages that might lead to misinterpretation .
In general , I can say that this year 's statement of assurance for the general budget essentially draws the same conclusions as it has done in previous years .
This means that , apart from the continuing problems with the recording of fixed assets , debts and liquid assets , the Court believes that the accounts for the 1997 financial year reliably reflect the Community 's revenue and expenditure for the year and the financial situation at the end of the year .
The transactions underlying the revenue are , taken as a whole , legal and regular .
In the case of customs duties and agricultural levies , however , no assurance can be given as to whether all taxable imports have actually been declared and have generated the corresponding revenue .
In the Court 's opinion , the transactions underlying the commitments are also , taken as a whole , legal and regular , although some commitments were effected either without budgetary authorisation or without a legal base .
As regards the transactions underlying the payments , however , the Court is again , as in previous years , unable to given any positive assurance , as they are affected by too many irregularities .
The statement of assurance for the Sixth and Seventh European Development Funds for the year 1997 , on the other hand , is , on the whole , essentially positive , and that also includes the transactions underlying the payments .
Thank you very much for that additional comment , Mr Friedmann .
Mrs Wemheuer has the floor .
Mr President , President Friedmann , you know that staffing policy was one of the five points which caused the European Parliament to postpone the discharge for 1996 .
I mention this because staffing policy is referred to in almost all of your reports .
One extreme example is the case of ECHO , which involved falsification of contracts .
I say that it is an extreme case , but issues such as mini-budgets , exceeding the limit of the Liikanen facility , which you have just mentioned , and combinations of interests arise again and again , and the same applies to transferring too much authority to external personnel , with all the consequences that follow both in financial and political terms .
In the report on nuclear safety you wrote that such measures even undermine the credibility and authority of the Commission .
It is therefore a very broad area .
However , I believe it is not merely a question of staffing policy , but that it also has financial repercussions .
I therefore have two questions .
Firstly , to allow us to assess the situation , could you summarise for us from all the special reports what your opinion is of the Commission 's staffing policy ?
Secondly , can we expect a report on this specific issue , or can we call upon you to provide this ?
Mr President , President Friedmann , firstly I would like to reciprocate to you and to the Court of Auditors the thanks that you extended to the Committee on Budgetary Control and to Parliament as a whole for the work we have achieved together .
We have worked together very closely , increasingly so over the years , in fact , and I believe this is very useful in investigating good financial and budgetary management and in intervening where necessary , where something is not working properly .
This is not done in order to cause or to publicise scandals but to develop preventive measures , as you emphasised strongly .
Wherever there are subsidies , there is unfortunately also the risk of fraud , if indeed it is not inherent .
I come now to the report presented by the Court of Auditors for 1997 .
This sets in motion the discharge procedure which we will now begin .
It is remarkable in two respects ; the first is that we have not yet concluded the discharge procedure for 1996 and are already beginning another one .
We must be careful not to confuse the two , but of course it cannot be denied that there are certain points that are common to both .
The second point that is worthy of note is that you have presented a significantly higher number of individual reports or special reports this year for 1997 , and also retrospectively for 1996 .
You highlighted the fact that the annual report had simply become too long , which meant that all the information came at once and at a time when everything had to be processed , so of course something always slipped through the net .
We must now adjust our method of working in accordance with this , as we could almost take up a whole year of debates before the House dealing with these Court of Auditors reports .
However , as this is simply not possible we have decided to summarise them to some extent .
But I strongly support what Mrs Wemheuer has just said on this matter .
In her comments she raised the issue of how we are to approach staffing policy .
This question is addressed to the Commission but also to the budgetary authority .
How are we to allocate staff and approve posts in future ?
You also mentioned this in your report .
I am also particularly grateful to you for having very clearly highlighted the issue of own resources .
In view of the loss of revenue , partly from customs duties , as we established in our committee of inquiry into fraud in the transit system , we must ask how much is lost due to a lack of coordination in our work .
We are still examining this whole question , and I would ask you to continue to give it your attention .
I have a further question concerning the annual report .
We would like this report to be published earlier , as you know .
Will you be able to work towards presenting it in October in future ?
I would like to say a final word to Mr Liikanen .
I listened very carefully yesterday to what you said on the subject of the MED programmes .
Unfortunately , I have to say that I did not find it terribly enlightening or very promising as far as the 1996 discharge is concerned .
We will have a great deal more to discuss on this issue .
Mr President , as always , it is a great pleasure to listen to President Friedmann 's presentation of the accounts - this time for 1997 .
Over the coming months we will have an opportunity of discussing in greater depth all the detailed points and , quite clearly , it is important to note that a number of improvements have taken place .
In the few minutes available , I wish to concentrate on a very central point which should be emphasized more in the future .
President Friedmann rightly states that enormous responsibility lies with the Member States both for resources and for expenditure .
One hundred per cent of resources come from the Member States .
He stated just now that 40 years on the Community Member States ' customs authorities still do not cooperate .
He states also that on the issue of VAT , 70 billion - nearly the total amount of the budget of the Community - is not collected by the Member States .
That means that 80 % of expenditure is also spent by the Member States .
The various cases he mentions - durum wheat , New Zealand butter , environment policy - all relate to lack of action in that area .
I am very happy to hear him say that cooperation with the national courts of auditors has improved .
But I would like to make more specific points .
Could the Court of Auditors enter into specific agreements with the national courts of auditors so that they perform tasks on behalf of the European Community budget , too ?
I know that there are all kinds of constitutional problems - sensitivity , national pride , and what have you - but if the figures he indicates even approximate reality , it is intolerable that the Community is still a lame duck as far as the Member States are concerned .
The general public 's perception is that the Community is squandering money , that the European Union does not do its duty , whether it is on nuclear safety , the environment or agriculture .
But , in fact , a large amount of responsibility lies with the Member States .
I call on the President here and Commissioner Liikanen to make it clearer to the outside world that only if Member States are ready to overcome old-fashioned ideas about national sovereignty can we really have significant improvement in terms of the environment , nuclear safety and fraud .
This is the central point .
I would like the President to elaborate on this specific point because it will be relevant for the whole of next year when we discuss this specific declaration of assurance .
Mr President , I was very interested in the section of the Court 's report relating to own resources , because this debate is at the heart of the political problems that are going to be mentioned and that are already being mentioned within the European Council on the future financing of the Union .
The findings are incredible : the Court of Auditors shows that , since the last audit , the amount of revenue lost has doubled to ECU 70 billion .
That is an overall assessment .
However , we would be extremely interested to know , Mr President of the Court , if the Court can tell us whether or not this sum of ECU 70 billion is spread evenly and fairly between the various Member States .
In other words , are certain Member States more at fault than others in terms of the collection of the own resources of the European Union ?
If this is the case - as I happen to believe it is - I imagine that this fact would certainly be politically very difficult to demonstrate .
Nevertheless , it would be very useful for Members when assessing the discussions that are going to take place within the Council , particularly if certain countries put forward the concept of net balance .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , my thanks for the presentation of the Court of Auditors report .
I was particularly interested in the chapter on foreign policy .
As you know , in deciding to postpone the discharge for 1996 we paid particular attention to the PHARE , TACIS and MEDA programmes .
I have now read the new Court of Auditors report for 1997 , bearing in mind our criticism from 1996 , 1995 and also 1994 , because I wanted to know whether there is any improvement in how our money is managed in the area of foreign policy .
The new report for 1997 has confirmed my opinion that the Commission obviously still finds it difficult - and I am saying this from a completely neutral point of view - to take action on the problems it discovers in the large PHARE , TACIS and MEDA programmes , action that would enable us to say that things really will be better next year .
I would therefore like to ask the Commission : why should Parliament believe that the assurances that next year will bring an improvement really will come true ?
Mr President , Mr Friedmann should not be surprised if the House is hardly full to bursting , and also if there are spaces in the press gallery : it is because , once again , we have read much more of this report in the newspapers over the past few days than we have heard here from the horse 's mouth today .
The first remark I would make , therefore , is that the Court of Auditors - from where leaked information often gives a partial picture of its reports - should pay more attention to this aspect , which is important if it is true that reports should be produced to the public here in this forum .
Mr Friedmann , you quite rightly referred several times to the question of staffing and to ECHO , and you have good cause to do so .
Parliament has discussed and approved your report on ECHO , and indeed we approved a document of yours at the beginning of this year .
If we are correctly informed , although you state in your report that the Commission does not grant sufficient resources , it is the world 's leading donor . I believe that your report refers to external staff as one tangible problem .
Well , all I would say - and I hope you will agree , because your neighbour can certainly pass you the latest figures - is that we are not talking here about ECHO submarines ; what we , and perhaps the Court too , should be considering is an entire fleet of U-boats .
Mr President , Mr President of the Court of Auditors , the annual report for the 1997 financial year mentions the existence of an audit concerning a sample of 100 information and communication projects implemented by the Commission .
A special report , Report No 23 , is in the pipeline .
We are looking forward to receiving it , but the Court does , however , make several comments regarding the budgetary heading B3-300 .
On one page , and one page only , it makes a number of criticisms about the lack of specific objectives and the lack of an appropriate system to monitor and assess the impact of the objectives involved .
It notes that certain projects that have benefited from financial support from the Community budget have no demonstrable link with information policy activities .
Indeed , for many years , our group has constantly condemned the lack of transparency , consistency and democracy in what the European Union calls its ' information policy ' .
That is why I would like to ask the following question : what type of precise recommendation does the Court intend to make to the Commission so that it puts an end to the ideological drifts that are characteristic of headings B3-300 and B3-306 ?
And more precisely , what exactly does the Court mean when it refers to ' equal treatment of final beneficiaries ' and ' a policy and financial planning framework in order to define the overall objectives of information policy ' ?
These are the very terms used in the report that suggest that changes are needed to put an end to these problems .
Mr President , the European Court of Auditors points out that in terms of external actions , the European Union has become one of the largest donors in the world with a total of ECU 6 billion , or almost FRF 40 billion .
But your report , Mr Friedman , highlights serious shortcomings , particularly in public procurement procedures , the quality of contractors and , finally , the follow-up procedures for the actions .
This being the case , do you not think that there is a serious risk , particularly in certain countries such as those of the former Soviet Union , that Community aid , rather than helping the people , only in fact serves to increase corruption and the power of the mafias ?
Would it not therefore be wise to reduce this type of aid , which can do more harm than good , and wait for proper control procedures that guarantee that Community aid is used effectively and honestly ?
Mr President , I welcome Mr Friedmann and thank him and the Court of Auditors for their report .
Would he agree with me if I suggested to him that the rather alarmist headlines of £ 3 billion fraud are not borne out by the annual report and the accompanying special reports ?
I am sure he will understand if I concentrate the rest of my remarks on the revenue side of the budget .
The first thing I would say to him - and I hope he accepts it in the spirit in which it is said - is that it is not really the Court of Auditors ' responsibility to challenge the Fontainebleau Agreement on the United Kingdom budgetary rebate .
Any change to the own-resources decision will require unanimity in the Council between the parties involved and the Court of Auditors will not be one of those parties .
Concerning the own-resources side of the budget , would he agree with me that it is an extremely serious picture that is painted ?
In traditional own-resources we see evidence of the difficulty of collection and the propensity to fraud .
But when we look at the very valuable analysis that has been done on VAT collection in the Member States , we see this alarming figure of a gap between the theoretical VAT yield and the actual collection running at ECU 70 000m a year .
That not only has an effect on Member States but also on the GNP and VAT based receipts .
Finally , it is reasonable to say - and I hope Mr Friedmann agrees with me - that there should be no substantial increase in own resources until all income is collected and until we can be reassured that all revenue is not only legal but is properly , efficiently and effectively spent .
Mr President , I should like to thank Mr Friedmann and the other members of the Court of Auditors present in the gallery for being here today .
I believe that the procedure for granting discharge for 1996 , which has not yet been granted by Parliament , is excellent proof of the importance of the Court of Auditors ' reports in this area .
In any case , this discharge will result in important methods and tools becoming available to Parliament in terms of the financial control of other institutions , notably the Commission . In particular , these will involve the ability to request documents and other relevant information .
Mr President of the Court of Auditors , I should like to comment on the section on Structural Funds and put some questions to you in that connection .
The Court has consistently criticised the large number of administrative irregularities in structural expenditure .
You point out that there is very little coordination between the Member States and the Court you so ably preside .
You hope to receive from the Member States in 1998 the first reports on the implementation of the regulation unifying the Member States ' provisions for financial control in operations cofinanced by the Structural Funds .
Have you received these reports yet ?
And if so , what is your assessment of them ?
You have also presented very detailed conclusions as to the number and nature of substantive errors in the Structural Funds .
However , this seems to contradict your statements on the lack of coordination on the part of Member States .
I would repeat the argument I have put forward in previous years : in my view , it is impossible to produce a reliable estimate if you do not have a well-established coordination procedure involving the national control institutions .
I would therefore like to ask : has progress been made ?
Is this coordination currently taking place ?
Finally , Mr President of the Court of Auditors , I should like to point out that the majority of Structural Funds are actually allocated during this last part of the programming period .
This does not seem to me to be clear from your remarks , and could perhaps lead to confusion amongst some of the more naive Members of the House .
Mr President of the Court of Auditors , the Edinburgh Council decided upon a multi-annual programming of expenditure until the financial perspective expires at the end of 1999 .
According to the Court 's audit , ECU 70 billion have not yet been spent .
Why is there this delay ?
Is it mismanagement by the Commission ?
Or is it that the Member States are implementing , through Structural Fund expenditure , the policy known , in French , as the policy of the juste retour ?
Which Member States could be picked out as the bad pupils ?
In my view , the Edinburgh Agreement should be honoured since maintaining the structural actions allowed by those Funds is the key to balance in southern Europe .
To end with , I have one more question : can those ECU 70 billion still be used or not ?
Mr President , we should be happy that only ECU 300 million were spent of the total ECU 850 million of PHARE and TACIS funds made available for nuclear safety , because 80 % of the money was scandalously spent on safety studies of dubious value , simply on paperwork .
On top of that , it stayed in Western hands without any proper methodology , evaluation or consultation , and without the eastern European countries being informed of the results of the studies .
What this amounts to is simply money down the drain , and we have not even achieved the slightest improvement in safety as a result .
That is the true scandal , and here I would like to hear from the Commission how it intends to put a stop to such situations in future .
Secondly , I would like to give an example of how money is wasted .
For the purpose of a rather dubious investigation a study costing ECU 170 000 was undertaken to preserve the Siberian tiger .
The study was carried out in Italy , filed away and forgotten about , and it was concluded that the tiger would simply die out .
So that was the end of that .
Something else could have been done with this money .
This is how the Commission wastes money on studies which do not lead to any action bring taken .
I would therefore like to know what will be done in the near future with the ECU 550 million that we have left for nuclear safety , and whether we will continue to have studies of dubious value without any action being taken as a result .
Mr President , it is surely amazing that the president of the Court of Auditors has to report on the loss of millions by the Commission .
The Commission , while allowing this to happen , adopts an entirely different attitude to the pig producers of Northern Ireland .
The devastated pig producers there have had to have a financially-assisted scheme to remove unwanted animals from their farms .
Now the Commission says that the farmers must repay this money which prevented cruelty to animals .
The Commission allows millions to be lost but has no consideration for those in the most desperate circumstances .
I would put on record today the call of those of us in this House who are from Northern Ireland to stop increasing the desperation of our pig producers .
Already some of have become so desperate that they have been driven to suicide .
Mr President , when I received the Court of Auditors ' annual report yesterday , I read it with great interest .
As a Dane , I was naturally interested in what it had to say about Denmark .
I have read the report countless times overnight , but I cannot find anything about Denmark in it .
Of course , I am glad that we are doing things properly in our country .
It is always good to be able to take that as a starting-point .
I noted that there have been a number of special reports , and I would like to say that one of them which really made an impression on me is the one which has featured in the press for the last fortnight and deals with safety in nuclear power plants .
I would like to ask Mr Friedmann , and also Mr Liikanen and the Commission , not just to focus on nuclear power plants in the eastern countries .
We should perhaps also be looking at the situation in Murmansk , where there are several hundred submarines which have been scrapped but still have active reactors , and where a number of reactors have been dumped in the Barents Sea .
I really do think that we need to have a special report on this area , and I think that instead of going on talking about these things and employing expensive consultants and a good deal more besides , we should employ people ourselves and send them out there to start the necessary process .
That naturally requires there to be cooperation with the Member States .
I know that is difficult , but we must do something about this .
The greatest time bomb that we have is the nuclear power plants and the submarines which are lying around .
All the other small-scale fraud which is happening round about should also be addressed , but it must not be our top priority .
Mr President , I want to congratulate Mr Friedmann and the Court on their best-seller report again this year .
When he presented it last night to the Budgetary Control Committee the room was full - people were perched on windows and tables and even sitting on the floor .
Of course the media were there looking for the ' f ' word but fraud is scrupulously not mentioned in the report .
I was disappointed particularly by the phrase that ' substantive errors affecting transaction underlying payments ' was in the same range as in previous years .
I take some encouragement from the postscript to President Friedmann 's speech this morning where he said that there was some improvement .
That is what we are looking for - improvement .
In paragraph 1.18 there is a quotation from the transit report where we called for the Community customs services to work together as if they were one .
The gaps between them provide this figure of about 70 billion lost to the Member States in a year , 35 to 40 times the amount which is actually defrauded from the EC budget .
I wish finance ministers would take note of this .
I am interested in Chapter 6 on administration .
Thank you for the various reports we have had from the agencies .
You mentioned specifically Turin and the fact that ECU 380m from PHARE and TACIS spent by that agency is not included in their accounts .
One hopes that it is hidden somewhere in the Commission accounts .
As for the schools , I would point out that the fact that four of the schools have more external pupils than Community pupils poses a problem .
I wonder if we should transfer some of the cash to overcrowded schools in other places .
Madam President , President Friedmann , ladies and gentlemen , on the subject of UCLAF , you consider the creation of an additional institution to combat fraud to be problematic , as you said last week at our interparliamentary conference and again yesterday .
However , we have heard that this is precisely what is currently being prepared by the Commission .
A proposal for a regulation on the basis of Article 235 of the EC Treaty on creating an external assessment agency , as it is called , is evidently in the process of being drafted by the Commission .
The Commission is giving the false impression that in doing so it is complying with Parliament 's request to create an OLAF , an office for fraud prevention .
I would like to make it clear that this is not the case , Commissioner Liikanen .
What Parliament called for with a large majority at the beginning of October was not an additional institution .
Instead , we want the current UCLAF to be replaced by an office of fraud prevention with full operational independence , but not one that is a satellite organisation somewhere outside the institutions of the EU .
An external solution is not valid as long as we do not have a European public prosecution authority .
No , OLAF should remain within the Commission and all other institutions of the Union should be involved in it .
I would now like to ask you , President Friedmann , whether it could be of interest to the Court of Auditors to be involved in an office of this kind and to contribute its experience .
Has the Court of Auditors formed an opinion on this yet ?
Madam President , I would like to discuss the planning and implementation of actions in the field of external aid .
The scale of Community activities in this area has in recent years increased continuously in both political and financial terms .
Moreover , neither the extent nor the importance of these activities will decrease in the coming years .
Following the ratification of the Amsterdam Treaty , in fact , the opposite is to be expected .
The content of the Court of Auditors ' annual report is therefore all the more worrying as it has found considerable shortcomings in all phases of preparation , implementation and assessment of the actions by the Commission .
The cost / benefit outcome currently falls far short of its potential , and it is not clear whether restructuring measures within the Commission , for example the creation of a common service for all external aid and ECHO , can solve all these management problems .
Unfortunately , as we have already seen , while the creation of a separate common service results in improvement of management capacities , it also distances political and economic services from the implementation of policies .
The question I would like to ask the Court of Auditors is the following : is the Court of Auditors of the opinion that the creation of the common service RELEX will result in significant improvements or is it necessary , particularly in view of the future tasks of the Union in this area , to think of completely new solutions ?
Madam President , thank you very much for the many very interesting questions .
Mrs Wemheuer - and this also fits in with what Mrs Krehl has just said - you expressed criticism about staffing policy .
On the one hand , it is astonishing that the administrative costs of the European Union represent in total approximately 5 % of the budget , including personnel expenditure .
But this does not say much as European Union policy must be implemented by the administrations of the Member States .
As you know , Mrs Wemheuer , we referred some time ago to fact that the mini-budgets used at the time were to be heavily criticised .
Parliament kindly took control and resolved the matter by granting the Commission a generous number of posts for permanent staff .
In the meantime , however , it has emerged that , despite this , more of the operational budget is once again being spent on a decentralised staffing policy and in particular on employing external consultants and experts .
This was why I criticised these Liikanen facilities whose limit is being exceeded .
In this respect I share your concern about the Commission 's staffing policy .
I will discuss with the members of the Court whether and to what extent we could examine this in a special report and how it would fit into our schedule .
Mrs Theato , thank you for your comments .
I appreciate that you wish to receive the annual report earlier .
The actual problem is the time needed for the contradictory procedure , though the period agreed does not even take account of the summer recess .
We must enter into intensive talks with the Commission , as we discussed yesterday in the Committee on Budgetary Control , in order to clarify to what extent this period can be reduced and the Financial Regulation amended accordingly .
Mr Brinkhorst , it is clear why you place importance on cooperation with the national courts of auditors .
We have developed a particular procedure whereby we write a sectoral letter when our auditors come back from the Member States ; this means that the relevant auditing sector writes to the Member State and to the relevant national court of auditors in order to inform them of the results .
The Member State can then reply to us , usually via the national court of auditors , and if we do not reply to this within two months it means that we are in agreement with the Member State 's reply .
Therefore , if each party meets its deadline the arguments of the country being audited are taken into account in our annual report and in the special reports .
Mr Pasty , like several of your colleagues , you referred to the ECU 70 billion that have been lost in VAT revenue .
This figure of 70 billion refers to the model calculations based on nine Member States and is the annual average over four years .
We calculated it by adding up the VAT actually paid and comparing this figure with the sum of the Member States ' total gross national product .
This gives an indication of the sum not paid .
We can also account for this in detail , but of course the Member States are the first to be affected by this loss , and obviously the Community is indirectly affected by it to a certain extent .
To give you an idea of the magnitude of this I could say that the sum lost by the Member States in the form of VAT revenue is in the order of the budget of the European Union .
Mrs Müller , on the issue of foreign policy and the question of whether the situation is improving , I have to say quite honestly that we cannot give the all-clear .
We always provide timely information on everything , but we cannot say that currently everything is exactly as it should be .
Mr Dell 'Alba , I understand your anger regarding the newspaper reports .
However , I must make two points here .
Firstly , many newspaper reports simply rehash the special reports already published officially by us .
Sometimes the impression is given that the annual report has been leaked , but I am not aware of any incident of this kind .
However , I understand your concern , and we in the European Court of Auditors generally agree that Parliament has the right to be the first to be informed .
Mr Fabre-Aubrespy , you addressed the issue of information policy .
We have referred to a few points in that area .
The content of the information policy is outside our jurisdiction .
We do not see it as our job to censor the information the Commission feels it has to provide , but we insist that the delegations , or whoever may be concerned , must be capable of meeting their responsibilities .
Mr Le Gallou , the question is whether we should reduce humanitarian aid if , as we say , so much money does not actually reach the people concerned .
This is a political issue but in my personal opinion I would ask you to bear in mind that it is probably the very poorest who have to suffer as a result of others not being honest .
That should be taken into account in this decision .
Lord Tomlinson , you stated that British press reports of fraud in the order of three billion pounds are not borne out by the content of our annual report .
We deliberately mention irregularities , as you know , and I should make it clear - here we are in agreement - that the report of the European Court of Auditors is not a fraud report ; rather , we check for legality , regularity and sound financial management , and the content of the report reflects this .
I understand your reference to the Fontainebleau Agreement as a UK Member of Parliament .
We addressed this issue in our special report on the Community 's own resources .
We do not regard it as our job to tell the political powers how possible changes should be made to the contributions paid by the Member States .
However , we did note that it had been arranged in Fontainebleau that should adjustments be decided on for political reasons , then expenditure policy too must be changed .
Mr Garriga Polledo , you mentioned the Structural Funds and asked whether we received reports from the Member States and how coordination with the Member States works .
In fact , we exchange views continuously with the Member States , particularly in the area of structural aid .
The issue of why this delay has arisen in the programming period was touched on later ; one of your colleagues also mentioned it .
I must say that at the beginning of the programming period a certain amount of time is always needed for work to get properly underway .
We are seeing this at the moment with the new Member States , with the result that at the end of the programming period a backlog tends to build up .
However , the problem of co-financing in the Member States was doubtless partly responsible for this , as when we request co-financing the Member States are often obliged to incur additional debts .
We must understand that this was not easy in the run-up to monetary union .
So it is a combination of several factors that account for the delay .
In my opinion , the money will have to be paid via the budget outside the programming period .
Mr Rosado Fernandes , you mentioned Edinburgh and asked why there has been a delay over the ECU 90 billion . I hope I answered this question together with that of Mr Garriga Polledo .
Mrs Bloch von Blottnitz , you addressed the issue of nuclear safety .
The way in which companies have awarded subcontracts is indeed a problem .
Some contractors have taken the price of Western experts as the basis for the terms specified in the contracts , but in fact employed east European experts to do the work .
The fees of Western experts are about fifteen times higher than those of their east European counterparts .
But you are right , and I think this is the opinion of the entire House : a nuclear safety strategy is urgently needed and should be given priority .
Mr Blak , you mentioned that there is a big problem with submarines in Murmansk .
As you know , this is a military issue that is not within the direct jurisdiction of the European Court of Auditors .
We can only audit in connection with the EU budget - we have already discussed this in the Court of Auditors , and I will bring it up once again - but I must first remind you that these submarines in Murmansk are a military matter , with which we are not directly involved .
I understand your concern , and we will discuss this again .
You also mentioned that in Denmark everything is in order .
Mr Blak , I am pleased that you believe you can draw this conclusion , but the fact that we do not criticise something does not mean that everything is in order .
That is obvious .
Mr Kellett-Bowman , you are right to say that the Community loses considerable customs revenue in transit traffic .
You are also right to say that the European Schools have more external pupils than children of EU staff , and in view of the high deficit this is a point that needs to be clarified .
We have also referred to this in the relevant special report .
Mr Bösch , your question concerning whether we would be prepared to accept OLAF being affiliated to the European Court of Auditors in some way was a very difficult one .
It must be clear that the nature of the tasks involved is quite different .
I repeat , and on this we are in agreement , that the European Court of Auditors is not a criminal investigation department or a police force .
There is a good reason for this , as much of our auditing leads to consultation work .
I also appreciate your idea that if an independent unit of this kind is to be responsible for all the institutions without becoming a new institution itself , you need an existing institution to which you can affiliate OLAF .
I can only say in this discussion that the nature of the task is not the same ; it is quite different .
You will have to make the political decision , and the Court of Auditors will have to accept what is decided by the legislator .
In conclusion , Mrs Krehl , I believe I have already answered your question on creating a separate common service , on staffing policy and administration .
Finally , I would like to thank you all very much for your keen interest .
( Applause )
Thank you , Mr Liikanen .
The debate is closed .
Employment in the Union
The next item is the report ( A4-0417 / 98 ) by Mr Wim van Velzen , on behalf of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs , on the Commission communication : Proposal for guidelines for Member States ' employment policies 1999 ( COM ( 98 ) 0574 - C4-0587 / 98 ) .
Madam President , looking at what has happened a year on from when the first guidelines were drawn up , I think we can rightly speak of a quiet revolution .
Initial opposition to an active labour market policy and the near-total belief in EMU and the jobs it would create have actually disappeared .
There is not one Member State which has failed to take on board the guidelines agreed in Luxembourg .
That is an extremely good thing .
But things could be even better .
If we look at the evaluation carried out by the Commission , and it is a first-class evaluation , you will see that the Member States ' approach to the guidelines has been one of picking and choosing and that often the choice they have made has been unbalanced , placing too much emphasis on employment and entrepreneurship .
At the same time , however , it might be said that those guidelines which were the most precisely , most exactly formulated have also produced the best results , and that is an argument for continuing with the strategy .
But I do have a problem with the proposals put forward by the European Commission .
I do not think they keep the process in a sharp enough focus .
By sharp focus , I mean ensuring that quantified objectives are as far as possible based on benchmarking .
That is the best way of keeping the Member States ' minds on the job .
I have no sympathy at all for those Member States which say ' we already have so much to do ; let us cut down a bit , let us not have any new objectives ' .
The work we are adding is all work which they have to do in the normal course of events .
We are just trying to target it at European level towards common goals which we have previously defined .
The current process , developed in Luxembourg , focuses strongly on people already out of work - quite properly , as things stood at the time .
I think it is now time to look also at how , whilst helping the unemployed , we can stop more and more unemployed people from joining them .
How can we get more attention paid to prevention ?
This , in my view , will have enormous implications for education .
Hence my request for an additional objective for those who are now employed but who need further training to make sure they stay abreast of new developments .
Another problem which I myself feel is not taken into account enough in the objectives is participation in the work process .
There are large groups for whom it remains difficult to break into the labour market , even in my own country of the Netherlands , which is reckoned to be successful .
In the Netherlands you find older people over 55 , you find migrants and still women too who have trouble finding work .
It is no different in other countries of the Union .
That is just employment policy , not unimportant - far from it - but it is just one side of the coin .
The other side is this : what are we doing on the economic front ?
What are we doing about economic coordination ?
What are we doing to deepen the process begun with EMU ?
What use are we making of these opportunities ?
I think the moment for making a start has long since passed .
But given the fact that we are now debating this report , I think we must urge the Council to produce , as quickly as possible , a framework in which economic coordination can really take shape .
Other speakers will cover this in more depth .
At this point , I would mention an aspect touched on earlier by the Commission , namely the fact that there is a large measure of under-investment in Europe .
Where are the Commission 's plans , its proposals for tackling that problem ?
Where are the opportunities for broadening the financial initiatives taken at Member State level ?
In my country - as I said just now - we seem to have been successful .
A decision has been taken there to cut back the programme for giving school children more computer-oriented education , due to shortage of funds , and now there are one or two pioneering schools which will get computers whilst all the rest will have to wait years before they get them .
A laughable investment failure !
So in an area where we ought to be investing in the future , one of the European countries with the best record is unable to come up with the cash .
I think that should prompt the Council to reflect about what we can do to give Member States more room for manoeuvre .
I am not coming down in favour of one proposal rather than the other .
It is a package of proposals , and I think we have to choose very carefully here .
Lastly , I am very surprised by the PPE Group 's amendments I have seen , admittedly very late , because we have very little time .
They have retabled all the amendments they had originally tabled in the Social Affairs Committee .
May I remind you that the PPE coordinator volunteered the information during the part-session that I had done an excellent job by incorporating their proposals into my report , that there was still just one difference of opinion remaining which concerned investment policy , but that otherwise he was very happy .
Now all the amendments are being put down again unseen , even those which are already in my report .
I find that incomprehensible .
I hope I can reach a more satisfactory resolution of this with the PPE Group , because I think it is putting our future cooperation in jeopardy .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , in two minutes it is hard to summarise the opinion I drafted for the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy , and which was unanimously approved .
The basic idea was that the creation of jobs , a higher rate of employment for Europe , will only become a solid , stable and lasting reality if it is based on a truly competitive economy and on what we term a globalised or internationalised economy . Unfortunately , the European Union is not yet in a position to cope with the level of competition demanded by an open economy .
We therefore wish to emphasise the importance of a series of issues raised over recent years .
These include the need to eliminate barriers and systems of protection that still exist in key areas of our economy and the need to increase our level of knowledge . We must also improve our level of education , particularly in the areas of vocational and technical training .
In addition , an effort should be made to remove the current obstacles to the creation of new jobs , particularly those involving taxation .
The possibility of modifying VAT , value added tax , must be considered , with a view to reducing it in the so-called labour-intensive sectors , the sectors with the largest workforce . I should also mention the need to provide new and improved guidance in terms of allowing better access to finance , especially for small and medium-sized enterprises , so as to promote a better business environment .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , Mr van Velzen 's excellent report , which the PSE Group supports , is rightly based on lasting , sustainable strategies to combat mass unemployment , but also on innovative adjustment of the employment guidelines .
Of particular importance are the structural elements for the promotion of structural reform of the labour market , the need to bring about a better balance among the four pillars of the employment guidelines and the emphasis on gender mainstreaming .
At the same time , however , the totally inadequate employment recovery must be regarded as a challenge for the Union and the Member States to achieve a better and more balanced policy mix and to improve coordination of economic , financial and employment policies .
As we are now only a few weeks away from the beginning of monetary union it is high time to integrate guidelines for economic policy and for employment so that the accent can deliberately be put on effectiveness in creating employment as a condition for policy coordination , in good time for the national budget debates .
The European Parliament must at long last be involved in an interinstitutional agreement on this issue .
The parties to the collective agreement are also called upon , in view of monetary union , to begin to harmonise productivity-based wage agreements in order to avoid the risk of wage dumping that would adversely affect the Community .
Once again , calls are being made for a review of the basic elements of economic policy and for proper coordination of economic policy .
The European Union cannot afford to sit back , despite the Commission 's favourable autumn forecast .
Even the lack of currency fluctuation that has been caused by the prospect of the euro should not induce us to sit back .
Today we are already seeing the effects of the crisis in South-East Asia on European jobs .
The chemical , engineering and electronics sectors are already hit by reduced orders and falling prices .
This is affecting European jobs .
Supply-side measures alone are not sufficient .
Demand must also be stimulated by increasing the purchasing power of consumers and fostering greater trust in the future of the European Union .
In this respect , the van Velzen report is right to emphasise changing the system by means of implementing tax reforms and reducing taxation on labour .
But we also need a reform of wage structures that takes productivity into account , as well as stimulation of investment as an important means of stabilising the European economy .
As current investment levels are much too low - public investment is currently barely 2 % of GDP - growth and employment cannot be achieved .
Structural change in the labour market must be supported by a new prospect of growth .
Alliances for work could successfully accompany this process .
We still lack Europe-wide modernisation offensives with investment plans in the areas of communications , transport , the environment , energy conservation , research , development , innovation and training .
Here we must speedily draw up an indicative list that allows a combination of public and private investment .
In the spirit of the Maastricht Treaty the EU Ministers for Finance are called upon to separate this kind of investment from the general government deficit , as long as the EU is still caught between mass unemployment and the Stability Pact .
Madam President , by this stage I think all the main debates concerning the employment situation in Europe have now come through the worst .
We already have European guidelines - the Treaty of Amsterdam includes a chapter specifically on employment - and we also have a European strategy that has inspired national employment action plans .
I feel Mr van Velzen 's report bears all the hallmarks of a rushed and interim document , but I must stress that I do not in any way wish to blame him for that .
The Commission 's report reached us late , as it almost always does , and it too was wanting , as the Commission itself is not able to conduct rigorous and serious investigations at present .
What is true , however , is that some Member States of the European Union are applying principles that are producing excellent results where job creation is concerned .
This has been the case in my country , Spain . The results , ladies and gentlemen , speak for themselves : unemployment has been reduced by 4 % , over 800 000 jobs have been created and a meaningful social dialogue is in place that is leading to a radical reform of the labour market and greater stability of employment .
Government and unions have recently reached agreement on important issues such as part-time work and the introduction of a new concept : ' supplementary time ' . This will allow greater flexibility in the management of working time and will replace overtime .
I believe it would be very interesting to evaluate this new formula .
In addition , I would like to refer briefly to two key issues in any employment policy .
The first is the relationship that ought to exist between training and employment .
A first job depends very much on that essential link between the institutions offering education and training and the requirements of the labour market .
There are too many instances of failure at school , inadequate training and graduate unemployment in Europe .
Even worse , there is considerable underemployment which means human resources are not being exploited to the full .
The second issue I would like to raise seems important to me , but is not mentioned in the report . It concerns the strong resistance to geographical mobility within the Union and between regions of the Member States , both on the part of those seeking their first job and the unemployed .
This situation has as much to do with income policies as with language problems and the shortage of affordable housing for these people .
As a result of the lack of mobility and of migratory flows between regions , unemployment becomes structural and prices and costs are destabilised , with the consequent negative impact on the competitiveness of businesses .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , my thanks to Mr van Velzen for having incorporated paragraph 9 into his report .
This concerns the evaluation of the venture capital we provide through the Investment Bank .
We have been looking this morning at the report of the Court of Auditors , and it transpires that this provision of venture capital is not exactly satisfactory .
The criteria are too general , there is no cohesive policy and the use of interest margins is unclear .
But above all , and I would stress this , the Commission has no role other than that of information exchange .
I think that where we ourselves are at issue , in a report in which we are primarily asking the Member States to do certain things , we should have our own house in order .
So I seriously urge the Commission to produce an evaluation on this point very soon for the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs .
If it is not forthcoming , I shall ask questions in the committee myself .
Many speakers have already said as much , ladies and gentlemen , and the advent of Economic and Monetary Union requires measures to be taken in a number of policy areas .
This report indicates that the Member States are beginning to take them , through the reform of tax and social security systems and all manner of measures to stimulate the labour market .
There is one point I should like to make here : slowly but surely , power and influence are shifting from national to European level .
This goes unnoticed by the man in the street .
Of course we have to be in favour of most of the measures in the van Velzen report .
We cannot live with an employment rate of 60.5 % , for example .
But it is high time these measures were subjected to democratic debate in the Member States ; we must not think , as is sometimes suggested in this House , that all this is a matter for the Member States and that the European Parliament does not need to be involved and that there is no feedback either from the process , from Europe to the European citizen .
With the elections almost upon us , it is an absolute must , and I am thus asking the Commission whether a little more might not be done to keep us informed on this matter .
Madam President , I wish to congratulate Mr Wim van Velzen on his report .
Unfortunately , however , this fine report addresses appeals and wishes both to the Council of Ministers and to the Commission , and the question , Mr van Velzen , is whether the Council and the Commission have ears to hear what you are saying .
I would remind you that in Amsterdam no substantive decision was taken regarding unemployment .
In Luxembourg the ball was tossed into the court of the Member States .
I would also remind you that the Maastricht criteria on economic and monetary union deliberately do not include the criterion of unemployment .
I would remind you that both in the 1998 budget and in the budget for 1999 we will be voting on in a month 's time , expenditure to combat unemployment for social Europe , for people with special needs and for the third age is either static or even lower , and all this at a time when , as you say in your report , full-time jobs are continually becoming fewer and only part-time jobs are being created .
Consequently , incomes are down in a Europe in which costs are going up , and that is why the proportion of nouveaux pauvres has climbed above 15 % .
I am sorry to see that this is taking place with the approval of Parliament , which on 2 May 1998 put social Europe into the hands of bankers and EMU .
Madam President , the European left in all its diverse forms now has the chance to show that it is really serious when it comes to increasing employment .
Of the fifteen Member States , the left is in government in one form or another in thirteen .
My impression is that European voters are looking to the left for protection against the forces of money and uncontrolled market trends .
Is it at all possible for the left to respond to the wishes of the voters ?
The different formulas left-wing governments have come up with are very much at odds with one another .
While Britain continues to rely on the market to create jobs , in France and Italy there is a drive to shorten working hours and raise public spending to increase employment .
Furthermore , the conditions agreed previously by the EU countries on economic and monetary union are slowing down progress .
We now need to create a programme for economic revival and employment based on four vital elements .
The first of these is the lowering of interest rates , to prevent Europe from falling into the abyss .
Unfortunately , the European Central Bank , which is ruled by the economic dogma of the last couple of decades , does not seem ready to lower interest rates so that production and employment might increase .
Secondly , taxation has to be changed to encourage people to work .
The current tax system favours ownership , investments and lazy money too much , and penalises work .
Thirdly , we have to increase investment , especially in the area of transport and communications .
It is also time we stopped regarding public services as a harmful extravagance and admitted they are immensely important in creating jobs and the infrastructure we vitally need .
Fourthly , we must embark on action to shorten working time generally .
The ways and means may vary from country to country and from region to region , but the objective must be a common one .
Mr President , we are all keen for the Member States to cooperate with one another , coordinating their strategies for creating sustainable employment .
It is important that the employment guidelines are actually implemented under national action programmes .
Member States may occasionally need a nudge to remind them to abide by the recommendations - although we have to accept that there are considerable differences in the way countries handle these matters . Discussion is of the essence , and it will take time before everything is adopted and in place .
Mr van Velzen is clearly an impatient man !
He wants action , but his zeal possibly gets the better of him at times . One of his proposals is for economic and financial policy coordination - a very far-reaching enterprise indeed .
Most of his suggestions are very good , nonetheless . I particularly like his ideas on reducing working hours in a flexible way .
And he rightly sets his proposal in the context of the fight against unemployment . My group has , however , tabled an amendment calling for a slightly more radical approach to cutting working hours in Europe , and I would recommend that colleagues vote for this .
Mr President , the level of unemployment in the Union has remained far too high despite the favourable economic trends of recent years , primarily amongst the categories of the poorly educated and the long-term unemployed , and these include a great many women .
Not only in Europe but worldwide , the pressure of world unemployment is increasing .
I would point above all to the millions of young people in the third world who are unemployed .
The effects of that are felt throughout Europe , and it is a factor in social dislocation and poverty .
Problems with asylum seekers are just one part of the result .
Stimulating employment must thus be recognised as a prime objective in the Member States , the Union and in international organisations as well .
In view of the slow-down in economic growth we are experiencing , it is doubtless all the more important .
The van Velzen report illustrates this especially clearly , and I am grateful to the rapporteur .
The achievements of the European Union in the field of employment are meagre , so the report tells us .
Differences between and within Member States remain enormous , despite the Structural Funds .
Evaluation of the national action plans shows up positive points , it is true , but many gaps and weaknesses too .
In my country , for example , there is the failure to reduce labour costs .
These shortcomings also apply to the four pillars .
Europe 's leaders have concluded too late , regrettably , that a better balance is needed between a Europe of monetary union and a policy of employment .
We echo Mr van Velzen in wanting quantified objectives , training and participation .
We also believe above all that the choice of a European investment programme is a good choice .
We shall vote for the resolution but there is too much in it , Mr President , and we think that ultimately we may not be able to see the wood for the trees .
Unless Europe makes jobs a priority , there will no future for its children and thus no future for Europe itself .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the van Velzen report paints a clear picture of the economic situation in Europe over the past year : on the one hand , cautious optimism due to the welcome prospect of the European single currency and to slight but appreciable economic growth ; on the other , a climate of distrust and instability due to all the international financial crises - in Asia , Eastern Europe and Latin America - the repercussions of which have had an adverse effect on the European market .
And then there is unemployment , still the most urgent social problem facing our continent , above all for young people and women .
Broadly speaking , therefore , we can endorse the report 's approach to relaunching effective employment policies in the Member States .
I would stress in particular the importance of vocational training , which must be improved and adapted to the requirements of the labour market .
There is a major contradiction inherent in vocational training : it is true that the funds available are inadequate , but it is also true that a good deal of money is badly invested in poor-quality courses with a minimal impact on employment .
The Member States should be called on , in more general terms , to overhaul their educational systems thoroughly .
Italy 's Audit Office recently bemoaned the fact that a substantial percentage of graduates have difficulty in finding jobs owing to the mediocrity of the education system , in particular the universities , where the practical and applied aspects of the theoretical instruction are all too often overlooked .
My second point relates to women .
They are the greatest victims of discrimination in the world of work , partly because of their family responsibilities and , where necessary , their role as carers for the elderly and the disabled .
This House has already drawn the Commission 's attention on numerous occasions to the fact that , unless proper social assistance is available for working women , especially single mothers , the right to work is nothing but a figment of the imagination .
Finally , I should like to turn to another proposal made in the report , namely a more flexible distribution of working time .
Where economic conditions permit , it is indeed desirable to reduce weekly working time and above all to introduce part-time work in order to create new jobs .
But let us not forget , in accordance with the fundamental principles of subsidiarity and participation , that any reduction in working time must be agreed between the social partners , in other words not by handing down legislation which would merely be a source of pointless and harmful inflexibility .
Mr President , the van Velzen report is excellent and very balanced .
The rapporteur wanted to reach a consensus catering for various different European social situations in the current economic situation .
Concerns over investment , support for small firms , assistance for companies that employ large numbers of people , working conditions , the gradual reduction in maximum working hours and improving the management thereof , wages , social protection , training leading to genuine qualifications and appropriate education systems all give a social meaning to the terms of adaptability and employability , which , without that guidance , would be cynical objectives , concerned only with economics , as I would like the Commission to remember .
Unemployment is not inevitable but I would not wish on other countries in the European Union the solution applied in large areas of Portugal , where all three generations have to work in order to scrape together the minimum wage paid in Spain , half the minimum wage in Belgium , and a quarter the minimum wage in Germany , albeit with almost full employment .
It is a world where , when people lose their jobs , especially women , they lose 50 % to 100 % of their income and in order to survive , they rely on strong family support , weak national solidarity and your solidarity , thanks to the European Union 's cohesion .
I support this report because it takes a significant step towards fleshing out the concept of employability .
But we do not wish on countries experiencing high levels of unemployment a solution that only weakens citizenship and undermines the European social model .
Mr President , the situation four years ago was as follows : at the summit in Essen we agreed a broad strategy to combat unemployment more effectively at European level by strictly observing the principle of subsidiarity .
The situation one year ago was that we agreed guidelines at the Luxembourg Employment Summit to guarantee a high level of employment .
The situation today is that we are publicly assessing what has and has not been achieved in the National Action Plans .
There are gaps in particular in terms of training ; not enough training is provided , not enough older workers are involved in training , training courses are not sufficiently adapted to new technologies and education systems often fail to provide practical experience , team work and knowledge of other countries .
Employability , the first pillar of the NAPs , is therefore difficult to achieve .
Much too little importance is placed on the fourth pillar : equal opportunities .
Commissioner , where child care is not provided , in the form of creches , nursery schools and day care centres , it is mainly women who are denied access to a career .
But there are also encouraging developments : more and more Member States , for example Germany , are managing to adapt to changed employment structures .
Conditions for entrepreneurship are being improved and passive employment policies are finally being replaced by active policies .
We must now institutionalise dialogue between the Ecofin Council , the ECB , those responsible for social policy , the social partners , the Council , the Commission and the European Parliament in order to better coordinate economic and monetary policy , including the indispensable Stability Pact , with employment policy .
The forthcoming summit in Vienna should set the right course instead of arousing false hopes such as the supposedly comprehensive investment programme worth billions that the Member States will not in any case finance .
With a realistic approach there is a good chance that even those affected by unemployment and exclusion will feel that Europe is overcoming obstacles and inaction , is capable of coordination and can provide important impetus and new ideas .
Mr President , current rates of development are not absorbing the high level of unemployment .
In 1997 economic development in the European Union was 2.7 % and it is expected to be about 2.8 % in 1998 , while salaries increased by just 1 % in real terms , despite which the unemployment indexes have not improved .
Full-time jobs are becoming fewer and only part-time jobs are increasing .
The spectre of poverty and social exclusion is already affecting or directly threatening millions of the Union 's citizens .
To be honest , how much optimism do these facts justify ?
In our opinion , employment policy has been shown to be unreliable and a factor which exacerbates the crisis .
That is the conclusion which the Union 's citizens reach .
But while that is the situation , the Commission 's statement gives priority to the competitiveness of trade and industry , to the stability pact , to monetary stability , to the promotion of part-time employment and informal forms of work , and to employability - a concept which transfers the burden of responsibility for finding work from the state and its policy onto working people .
Mr President , working people disapprove of this policy .
They see no future in it , and their only recourse is to intensify their struggle to overthrow it .
We will stand by them in that .
Mr President , since we are talking about a social Europe , I would firstly like to congratulate Mr van Velzen and - just this once - the Commission for the action taken on the consultation of employees .
After Vilvoorde and , more recently , Levi 's , there is an urgent need to give employees greater rights when it comes to informing and consulting them about companies ' investment strategies and any decision to relocate .
This culture of information - I would even go so far as to say joint management - is a step in the right direction .
However , I must say , more generally , that the Commission 's social action programme lacks ambition and grand design .
Obviously , reference is rightly made to reducing VAT for labour-intensive services , lowering costs for SMEs , flexibility , training , etc .
But I would like to know what is being done about the commitments made at the Luxembourg Employment Summit in November 1997 .
It is politically vital for us to have a major project that is able to channel our efforts .
To be honest , what we need is a new welfare state which promotes employment and lifelong learning for every citizen of the European Union .
In other words , we must ensure that every woman and man from Lisbon to Berlin , from London to Rome , has the same hope if they lose their jobs .
I myself dream of banishing the word unemployment from our vocabulary and this is more than just rhetorical .
What this means in practical terms is that from now on during each redundancy or period of inactivity , a compulsory period of paid training should automatically begin , one that more than just fills a gap .
We must translate the wishes of the Luxembourg Employment Summit in November 1997 , where the 15 Member States decided that it was a priority to ensure that no young person was out of work or without training for more than six months , and no adult for more than a year .
We must bring this idea to life by going even further and proposing that throughout their lives people should alternate between working and training by moving from one to the other without any unwanted breaks , that is , without any periods of unemployment .
This would be a really major project that would allow Europe to get back in touch with its past , when it used to initiate social progress .
It could be financed through the FRF 2 300 billion devoted every year in Europe to combating unemployment and through the European Structural Funds , which would better serve this objective if less fragmented .
Mr President , the latest statistics show a fall in unemployment .
On closer study , however , we see that unemployment has fallen to a lesser degree than the economy has grown in the same period .
The fact that 23 million European citizens are living at subsistence level also gives cause for thought , as does the fact that the present report warns of low-pay and low-quality jobs and demands that monetary stability be maintained .
The Luxembourg Summit 's guidelines for a successful employment policy are ambitious .
No one will seriously oppose alternatives to taxation on labour or measures to improve the climate for investment or education and training .
But these formulas are not new , after all .
Precisely these measures were discussed at the Essen Summit in the context of the White Paper on employment .
However , it is sobering that the NAPs for employment are so unspecific about these measures .
Many National Action Plans do not fix any concrete aims or financial resources , or else they are inadequate .
What is needed are appropriate indicators , specification of budgetary funds and laying down of priorities and the deadlines for achieving them .
And how are we to evaluate honestly the progress and results of employment policy ?
I have to say that I hear the message but I do not believe it if the Member States fail to realise the objectives .
Mr President , I should like to agree with those honourable Members who have said that the process begun in Luxembourg is a good thing but that Vienna will of course have to move things forward emphatically .
I should like to focus on one aspect , Commissioner , which is extremely important to me .
It is time Member States restored the link between more work and more equal opportunities for women .
In the van Velzen report we firmly advocate a halving of the gender gap .
This requires a particular commitment on the part of Member States for all the guidelines , and it also represents a commitment to positive action .
Let me give you a few examples : it looks at the fact that more women are unemployed and for longer , and it is good , Commissioner , that the Member States have opted for action to prevent long-term unemployment .
But that means too that women must get at least their fair share of any benefit from such measures .
It means too that Member States must not be allowed , as they now do , to ignore long-term unemployment , where women are over-represented .
No , the two things have to go together and complement each other .
Secondly , we also want a clear commitment to more training opportunities for people currently in work .
I think it is disgraceful that women working part-time are quite simply excluded from the opportunities offered under most of the training programmes laid on by employers .
Thirdly , it presupposes extra attention in wage bargaining for the unacceptable differential of 20 to 30 % which still persists between male and female earnings .
The result of this would have to be that any increases agreed in wage negotiations were now applied primarily to women 's earnings , which are undervalued .
It also presupposes that Member States will not remain obsessed with part-time work , but will talk about more family-friendly forms of work sharing and shorter working hours such as a four-day week , for example .
We should like to see the Commission coming up with a further proposal to tighten the existing directive on working time .
Lastly , Mr President , the preparation of concrete objectives has already proved its worth .
We must intensify this process for all guidelines , and my group would like to make an important request for the Commission to address with urgency the question of benchmarks for the efficacy of social protection .
We must ensure that more work also means better quality work and thus an adequate level of social protection .
Mr President , I should like to express more than the conventional expressions of gratitude to the rapporteur , and also to put forward four ideas that would , in my view , enrich the report .
Firstly , I regret the lack of any reference to the coordination of economic policies with monetary policy , that is to say , of the Economy and Finance Council with the European Central Bank .
Recent publications , particularly Krugmann 's work , are beginning to call into question whether it is logical and coherent to continue giving priority to price stability now that we have reached all-time low levels where job creation is concerned .
Although I agree with Carlos Gasòliba that economic stability is a prerequisite for job creation , I also believe that greater coordination is needed and that the European Central Bank should focus more on this objective .
Secondly , I think it is unfortunate that when comparing - benchmarking - job creation in Europe and in the United States , the experience gained by this Parliament was not drawn upon .
Apart from some ideas reiterated in this House by a number of speakers - flexibility and the liberalisation of certain markets , particularly the service market and the labour market - , the report emphasised that one of the main reasons why the United States takes the lead where job creation is concerned is that it is far more committed to research and development . Also , private initiative plays a much greater part in that joint effort and there is an option of encouraging R & D through tax incentives rather than direct aid , thus linking projects to making a profit .
Thirdly , with regard to the tax burden , there is reference to VAT on labour-intensive services .
It seems to me that the time has come to ask ourselves whether it makes sense to maintain a value added tax such as the one devised in 1967 when there was a shortage of labour in Europe , and jobs remained unfilled . It might well be appropriate to consider whether it is still reasonable to allow immediate deduction of the tax on investment goods thus encouraging the replacement of workers by capital goods .
My concluding remark is that I agree with the references to trans-European networks , but it is time to move on and say how we intend to finance them : from surplus reserves , issuing loans or in some other way .
Mr President , as documented in Mr van Velzen 's report , it seems to have been established that there is no direct connection between economic prosperity and job creation .
Jobs have been created , but not enough of them . Social conditions in Europe have also failed to improve : 15 % of workers live below the poverty line .
The much-heralded monetary union , the ' euro-umbrella ' meant to protect Europe from the economic and financial ups and downs of the outside world does not seem likely to prevent some of their effects reaching our continent .
We therefore feel that certain aspects of Mr van Velzen 's report deserve to be highlighted .
Firstly , there is a reference to the obsession with the concept of stability , the strict stability plan that has to be complied with .
We believe that such an obsession should be done away with . What is of crucial importance now is the creation of employment if we also want the economy to do well .
This stability plan is more concerned with monetary stability than with the stability of employment .
In conclusion , Mr President , I should like to stress the importance of two of the four pillars of the employment strategy : adaptability and equal opportunities .
With regard to adaptability , the social partners must be involved when dealing with the working day and the reduction of overtime , amongst other issues .
As for equal opportunities , we have repeatedly pointed out that women lag far behind men where access to work and salaries are concerned . This fourth pillar has turned out to be very weak in all the Member States ' strategies .
We must therefore encourage the creation of services to facilitate access to work for women and also their return to work following a career break .
Mr President , allow me to begin by congratulating the rapporteur , Mr van Velzen , who has managed to home in on the fundamental issues concerning this key aspect of the economy - employment .
He has done so at a time of uncertainty : there can be no doubt that the situation is now radically different from that described in the conclusions reached by the national governments in November 1997 , both within the Community - which has since embarked on stage three of economic and monetary union and created the stability pact , with everything which that implies - and in the rest of the world , where there is no denying the serious changes that have taken place in the recent past .
A recession is undoubtedly under way , affecting at least 40 % of the world 's population , as the rapporteur himself has stated ; so far , the storms have spared Europe and North America , but there are no guarantees as to the future .
All in all , the growth rate in Europe is not keeping pace with the need for employment growth , and there is ground to be made up .
We are convinced that the problem of unemployment cannot be solved through acts and decrees on employment : jobs cannot be created by decree ; they are created by promoting economic growth .
So efforts are required all round in order that such growth is stimulated by means of appropriate policies , above all fiscal ones , and through adequate support for economic development .
Investment must therefore be as productive as possible , concentrated in areas where it can be used to best effect .
Investment of a purely social nature would be ineffectual .
I hope that this will be the approach adopted at the forthcoming Vienna summit , which Europe as a whole will be observing with keen interest .
Mr van Velzen has indeed produced an excellent report , Mr President .
It contains sound proposals , is in touch with reality , unpretentious and contains several innovative ideas .
If I had to highlight one aspect of it , I would highlight the section devoted to the preventive approach .
I hope and trust that this report will receive all possible support from Parliament .
The European Union 's millions of unemployed do not render this debate pointless - quite the contrary .
In any case , thanks to this and other debates , employment is developing , albeit slowly , into a common policy that must be linked to economic policy , as coordination is essential .
Unemployment leads to forms of exclusion , precariousness hampers personal development , and the lack of personal expectations places available labour in a feudal position in relation to whoever can provide a job .
The authorities have the duty of ensuring that the principles of equality and solidarity are maintained where opportunities and income are concerned . However , they must also promote active policies and foster the basic conditions to relieve unemployment , the greatest concern of our societies .
As stated in the report , the authorities must adopt economic policies that will strengthen or promote growth resulting from investment , generate consumer confidence and maintain domestic consumer demand .
A much more determined effort by the authorities is called for to develop active policies on the labour market , and they should be prepared to take risks in dealing with the present situation .
We shall continue to defend proposals providing both flexibility and security against the preservation of the concept of deregulation , which tends to be used as the key argument .
Mr President , my compliments naturally go to the rapporteur , Mr van Velzen .
His report tells us that , according to the data available , unemployment has actually fallen this year ; however , we should not raise our hopes unduly , because the situation in Europe is only marginally positive .
What is more , if we analyse the real situation in each individual Member State , we find wide divergences between the 15 countries .
In Italy , for example , unemployment is still running at around 12 % .
What remedies have we come up with ?
A reduction in labour costs , naturally , and of course increased entrepreneurship , above all among SMEs .
The importance of vocational training and qualifications has already been mentioned , so I shall not dwell on that point .
I would merely stress one idea which is contained in the report and which I consider extremely important , namely that of reducing VAT on labour-intensive services .
This proposal was put forward by the Council on 21 October 1997 , and it could usefully be put back on the agenda .
By the same token , an initiative could be taken by the European Investment Bank - which has expressed its readiness to do this - to finance projects at rates below the market rate , provided of course that such projects really are effective in generating employment .
Furthermore , why not propose a review of the Central Bank 's key role ?
This new body , which came into being so as to keep down inflation within the 15 Member States , could and should have another important aim , namely to keep unemployment under control .
Such a role is played in the United States by the Federal Reserve ; its European counterpart should also undertake the vital task of keeping down unemployment .
I believe that it is worth underlining the social relevance of the institutions which are being established .
Mr President , the Commission 's report is on employment in Europe in 1998 .
It is on the question of employment and not on the problem and the statistics of unemployment .
Mr van Velzen , in particular , in the explanatory statement accompanying the motion for a resolution , has got close to and dealt well with this finer point of detail . In other words , we must make sure that we refer to the quality of employment , without calling into question the seriousness of the unemployment figures and the alarm that this causes .
Some of the rapporteur 's comments on the climate of economic recovery seem outdated because they no longer reflect the real situation .
That is not his fault but the result of how the situation has developed .
I would like to make one more comment , given the little time I have , about something that is not really that negative in itself , that is , the fact that the Commission has used the terminology of pillars in its report on employment .
We would highlight the ambiguity , in particular , of the first pillar , that of employability , a concept that seems to hold the unemployed responsible for the very existence of unemployment because they are poorly qualified .
This seems to take away the blame for unemployment from a social system that not only creates unemployment but also exploits it .
Mr President , I too must thank the rapporteur very warmly for all his hard work and for the report he has put together for us in so short a time .
It is not really possible to work in these conditions .
Perhaps that explains his attack on our amendments .
We were of course not happy with some parts of the report .
We also abstained in the committee meeting .
Consequently we felt obliged to retable the amendments on the points in question .
That does not mean of course that all the compromises reached are lost .
But we were in the extremely awkward position of having to make amendments on the basis of a report which did not yet exist .
It just means we shall have to find another solution in future , though I appreciate that the rapporteur himself cannot do anything about it .
As regards the subject itself : happily unemployment is slightly down for the first time , but that does not mean of course that this will continue to be the case in future .
There are a few dark clouds on the horizon .
So we must continue with the strategy we have started .
I should say really that this strategy has been far more successful than anyone could have expected beforehand .
There was a good deal of cynicism about this strategy , but it appears to work .
It really seems to be leading to change in the Member States .
Perhaps not enough change , but at least some .
A number of things are now threatening , some of which are actually in Mr van Velzen 's report .
Paragraph 7 and the broad investment programme is something which we cannot accept , because it would take us back to the whole discussion on the overall strategy .
We previously rejected this kind of broad investment programme , firstly because there is no money and , secondly , because it does not work at European level .
It is hard for us to agree to it now , even if we do have eleven prime ministers in the European Union with a socialist background .
It does not automatically mean that we are going to cough up .
The second point I wanted to raise is the question of taxes .
I think it quite proper that the rapporteur should ask for that to be addressed .
It is a great shame that the debate on this , specifically variations in the rate of VAT , went totally awry in the Council and that governments which were supposedly in favour and are doing nothing else about it , and the one or two governments which were against , appear to be getting their own way .
I think it is a great pity .
I hope the European Parliament will manage to get the matter raised again .
These are the main points .
We may be able to back this provided we do not radically change it all of a sudden , and provided enough of our amendments are adopted .
Mr President , it may well be that globally in the European Union there is a downturn in unemployment , though I do not know if it can be said that someone whose temperature has fallen from 41º to 40.5º can be said to be getting better .
What I would like to quote as experience from my own country is that the phenomenon of unemployment is increasing , especially among young people and women , and this alongside and in parallel with Greece 's desperate effort to meet the criteria for inclusion in economic and monetary union .
From that standpoint I think we are getting to the heart of how to address the problem of unemployment today .
A few years ago we had the White Paper on Growth , Competitiveness and Employment .
I do not know what its results were , perhaps there were some , but nothing came of all our discussions here and from the mobilisation in the European Parliament and in general .
Today , however , I think that if we want to see some results from the positive ideas expressed by Mr van Velzen and from the efforts of Commissioner Flynn and the Commission to develop an overall unemployment strategy based on certain pillars , the course established by Maastricht will have to be changed .
A change in the sense that social criteria and unemployment are included in progress towards EMU , investments are not counted among public deficits , and the European Central Bank at least follows the path pursued by the Federal Reserve in the United States .
Mr President , first of all I think the strategy launched in Luxembourg is producing good results and will provide an impetus for structural changes in the European labour market .
It is our expectation that the guidelines will be adjusted and tightened in Vienna so that the Member States have to give more specific commitments with quantified sums of expenditure .
We expect the European Commission to improve its proposals accordingly .
Secondly , there is no denying that the number of jobs rose by 750 000 in 1997 thanks to economic growth , economic growth which is now threatened by financial crises elsewhere in the world .
Hence the need to underpin economic growth by a broad European programme of investment .
There has been enough talking about the TENs .
It is time now for clear decisions to be taken .
Thirdly , I agree with those honourable Members who advocated a stronger presence in the jobs market for women , the over-fifties and the handicapped .
Last of all , Mr President , it is a matter of great urgency to bring labour costs down .
Mr President , though Europe 's economy has in recent years been developing at relatively satisfactory rates - for example , in 1997 growth amounted to 2.7 % - we are not seeing a corresponding fall in unemployment .
Unemployment has fallen , but by a small , an exceptionally small amount and in some countries it is at the same level or even increasing slightly , as in my own country .
This means that growth on its own does not create as many jobs as we need .
We also need structural measures in the labour market , and it is to this that we should turn our attention .
Given that the problem of unemployment is a pan-European phenomenon , there must certainly be coordination between the policies of Member States to address the issue globally and effectively .
The solution to the unemployment problem and the promotion of employment must become a truly European concern .
It is important , however , that any such coordination should proceed along appropriate lines , because otherwise we could all be coordinated , all have the same policy , and end up by increasing unemployment .
So here I should like to say - though this will provoke an allergic reaction in some colleagues - that we should look at what is happening in America and Japan .
We do not have to ape the American or Japanese models , but let us look to see why they have lower unemployment and try to learn some lessons , just as we can learn something from some countries in the European Union where unemployment is already exceptionally low .
I believe , then , that in this context there should be greater flexibility in the labour market , measures such as modernisation of the taxation and legal systems for employment , tax and other incentives for company investment , especially in the case of SMEs , completion of the internal market and easier movement of working people , flexible working hours , reduction of non-salary costs , the promotion of active employment policies and not just emphasis on the unemployment fund , and finally , utilisation of resources and potentials for education and higher education via the European Social Fund , which I feel could be much more effective than it currently is .
I thank you , Mr van Velzen , for your report .
It is a stimulating document , containing a thorough examination of the key problems of the European Union labour market , and it certainly it has a number of very good and interesting proposals for future action .
A year ago I presented to Parliament the first set of employment guidelines .
I am very pleased to inform you that we have achieved very considerable progress and success since then .
All the Member States have lived up to the political commitments they made at Luxembourg last year .
The Commission , in its draft joint report for 1998 , has duly reflected this progress by making national employment policies more structured and transparent , for instance by reporting on concrete funding for the NEPs and on monitoring and evaluation structures .
This progress is clearly in line with the proposals in Mr van Velzen 's report .
In particular I am pleased to see that the messages of prevention and activation as guiding principles for employment policy have penetrated the thinking of the national authorities and the social partners .
Such principles have begun to be translated into concrete action , which the Member States have already started on this year .
I recognise and welcome this progress .
You all know that early intervention to prevent youth and long-term unemployment and the move from a curative to a preventative approach lie at the very heart of the strategy .
This is the key point Mr van Velzen has been making - that we have to have a preventative approach .
Concrete action has also been taken , for instance in reducing the number of young people leaving training and educational systems without adequate qualifications .
This point is made very forcefully by Mr van Velzen and by Mr Thomas Mann and I agree wholeheartedly .
You will notice , Mr van Velzen , that in our recommendation for the 1999 guidelines , life-long learning is a key issue for consideration at Vienna .
What we are saying in the new guidelines is that we want to increase the number getting access to the labour market , in particular older workers .
Not enough attention has been paid to that point and the report supports us on that .
I should just draw your attention to a remark in the employment rates report , that high employment rates depend on educational attainment .
That must be a key feature in the development of these policies by the Member States .
We are talking about improving the environment for enterprise , encouraging and assisting business start-ups , coordination between the relevant authorities in the Member States , making the social partners more aware of their potential contribution , developing the adaptability pillar , introducing tax reforms to reduce the tax burden on labour , promoting greater awareness of the avoidance of gender segregation and facilitating access to the labour market for all .
Here I would refer Mrs Van Lancker 's comments on women in the labour market .
In fact the employment rates report deals with this very point .
I would just like to draw to your attention , Mrs Van Lancker , that equality is now a key element in our strategy .
You will notice that we are not just talking about mainstreaming , we are talking about a horizontal issue and not just relying on the fourth pillar in support of your point .
Your comments and those of the House have been taken fully into consideration .
The draft joint report identifies these encouraging developments , but that is just the beginning and there is a long way to go .
We need to involve the social partners more fully at all levels and to foster and develop a strong partnership approach at local level , promoting employment entrepreneurship and local economic development , especially in the services sector .
I agree entirely with what Mrs Ojala said about the services sector .
You will notice that in the employment rates report , where we draw the comparison between what happens in the United States and what happens in the European Union , the key issue is that we have not developed the services sector as they have done in the United States .
In the European Union 39.2 % are employed in the services sector , in the United States it is 54 % .
That is a big difference .
We need to work out new options for lowering taxation on labour compatible with the overall macroeconomic strategy for stable growth and raising employment in the EMU , to devise and implement more concrete action to develop equal opportunities in our labour markets for women , disabled people and immigrants .
Your report , Mr van Velzen , puts forward a wide range of suggestions for further developing the strategy .
I think that is going to happen .
The momentum is there .
I am pleased to tell you that many of your proposals and ideas have already been taken on board in our proposal for 1999 .
You will see that reflected in the outcome of the Vienna Summit .
In its proposal for employment guidelines for 1999 the Commission has sought to consolidate the political momentum that has been gained this year .
You yourself said , Mr van Velzen , that there is a quiet revolution .
I would like to think that it was not so quiet .
But the momentum is there , the Member States have taken on the commitment and I believe that it is going to be very much strengthened after Vienna .
In the interests of consistency and continuity , there are very few adjustments of substance in the 1999 proposal .
It preserves the four pillar structure and the three Europe-wide operational targets .
Nevertheless it incorporates the orientations of the European Council at Cardiff and it draws from the assessment of the 1998 joint employment report and the employment rates report for 1998 .
Some substantive additions and , in some cases , new guidelines aim at putting particular emphasis in 1999 on active measures : developing life-long learning , making the labour market more open to all , fully exploiting the jobs potential of the services sector and better reconciling work and family life .
The Commission has also identified a number of horizontal issues .
They include gender mainstreaming , the information society , undeclared work , the role of the structural funds , especially the social fund , local development and the need for improving common indicators and quantitative targets .
Moving in this direction requires realism and ambition .
Common targets require comparable statistics at European level and concrete action to improve the current state of such statistics will be proposed by the Commission in a specific report to the Vienna Summit .
This year 's revision of the guidelines is , however , a good opportunity to further develop this dimension of the strategy .
The Commission has proposed a new target to be set individually by the Member States for increasing the number of workers benefiting from life-long learning .
Furthermore , the Member States are invited to set concrete targets for other guidelines according to their national priorities and possibilities .
Mrs Boogerd-Quaak and Mrs Todini referred to the Community financing initiatives for the EIB and the EIF .
I should just like to say that the EIB Edinburgh facility of the ECU 5b in loans to general infrastructure projects is ongoing .
The Copenhagen SME facility is in place and the facility has been fully taken up .
The growth and environment pilot project is in place for loans of perhaps ECU 1.6b.
The EIF is authorised to commit up to 20 % of its own funds .
The EIB 's Amsterdam special action programme of ECU 1b to finance special action is also under way .
We would be happy to discuss these at any time in the future .
The 1999 joint employment report will for the first time attempt an evaluation of the impact of the NEPs .
It will be a test for all of us .
It is going to give the people of our Member States a tangible demonstration that we have moved from ideas to action and concrete results .
So the quiet revolution , Mr Van Velzen , is taking on quite a political momentum .
The strategy is there , we have targets , a timescale and a convergence policy .
We need better implementation , but I think we will be successful .
To start with , Commissioner , what a lucky fellow I am that everything I propose is already being planned by the Commission .
But that is not the point I wish to make .
You have heard a lot of speakers complaining here at the way in which we were obliged to prepare and amend this report .
The reason for that is the ridiculously short time which the European Parliament was given .
I would welcome the Commissioner 's reaction to the suggestion which I make on this in paragraph 30 of my report .
How does he think we can solve the problem in future ?
Mr President , we are stuck in a very tight time frame to deal with all of this .
Obviously , it is going to have to be considered further when the Treaty is ratified .
I cannot really say at this time how we are going to fit all of this in .
When you consider the reports coming next year in June - preparation for the Joint Annual Report , the Joint Employment Report - and meeting all the deadlines including the consultation report under the Treaty with Parliament later on , I cannot see yet how we are going to fit it in .
Some new arrangement is going to have to be entered into between the institutions to enable us to meet the time-scale so that we can be ready for the December summit each year .
We will have to consider how it is going to be done .
The debate is closed .
The vote will be taken tomorrow at 11.30 p.m.
Social action programme 1998-2000
The next item is the report ( A4-0381 / 98 ) by Mr Hughes , on behalf of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs , on the Communication from the Commission : Social action programme 1998-2000 ( COM ( 98 ) 0259 - C4-0343 / 9 )
The debate is suspended and will be resumed at 3 p.m.
VOTES
Mr President , I would like to briefly draw your attention and that of the House to the fact that the date change proposed by Amendment No 7 applies not only to Article 1 ( 3 ) but also to Article 1 ( 2 ) .
It is the same date in both cases .
This is only logical .
( The President declared the common position approved as amended )
Mr President , I merely wish to make three remarks concerning the votes on the amendments .
With regard to Amendments Nos 29 and 30 , these have been resubmitted because the expression ' sperimentazione non interventistica ' in the Italian version is incomprehensible , and the addition of ' observational studies ' enables research to be conducted in centres which carry out research for purposes other than the registration of medicinal products .
Secondly , Amendment No 14 makes the wording of Article 7 ( 2 ) incompatible with Article 7 ( 3 ) .
Amendment No 31 corrects this inconsistency without altering the spirit of Amendment No 14 ; I would therefore suggest voting on No 31 before No 14 .
Finally , should Amendment No 35 be adopted , it will cause No 17 to fall .
However , I believe that it should be considered before Amendment No 16 , in that it would also cause the last paragraph of No 16 to fall , where it says ' the sponsor shall notify the competent authorities at the time of taking those measures ' .
Mr President , my request is for the different language versions of Amendments Nos 1 and 10 to be brought into line .
In committee we used the German text for the vote , and there I asked that the English version be aligned with it .
Now , however , the original German version of the amendments has also been changed for presentation to the House .
It is very important that we clarify that what we are voting on is what was adopted in committee in the original German version .
The German term in question is ' gesetzlicher Vertreter ' .
It must be very clear that for individuals who are incapable of giving their informed consent , approval is given by their legal representative .
If this is not clear in the English translation , the English version can be brought into line by saying ' legally responsible person ' , but nothing other than ' der gesetzliche Vertreter ' can be written in the German version , as this was used for the vote in committee .
Mr President , as we are currently dealing with general remarks and so as not to interrupt the vote later , I should like to point out , with respect to Amendment No 7 , that there is a discrepancy between some of the translations .
When the term ' Doctor ' is used in a general sense , colloquially , it ought to be understood to mean a medical doctor .
There are of course also Doctors of Architecture , Chemistry , Engineering and so on .
Mr President , as we decided in principle in Amendment No 28 , which we adopted by a large majority , that research may only be carried out on persons incapable of giving informed consent if it is guaranteed that this is for his or her direct benefit , I request that we ask the Commission before the final vote what its opinion is on this amendment .
I believe it will also be decisive for later votes , not only for the Commission and the Council but also for Parliament .
Mr President , I merely wished to say thank you and to appeal to the Commission to show sensitivity .
The overwhelming majority of this House has made certain requests , and I believe that such pressure must be taken into account .
( Parliament adopted the legislative resolution )
Mr President , I should like to clarify two points in connection with Amendments Nos 1 and 2 .
Both of these relate to the reinsertion of text that was part of my document prior to the vote in committee .
There is a significant difference between the two amendments , however .
Amendment No 1 involves reinserting material that I myself deleted following a compromise reached with Mrs Wemheuer , the Socialist spokesperson .
I would therefore ask the House to support this compromise , and recommend that they vote against the amendment .
Amendment No 2 also involves the reinsertion of text into the report .
In this case , however , the text concerned was deleted following the adoption of an amendment to delete it .
So in this instance , the rapporteur 's position is to recommend a free vote .
Mr President , I would like to make a general comment to point out to you , since I am aware of how fond you are of procedural motions , that two groups have requested split votes on this text : the first has asked for 13 split votes , and the second has asked for 23 split votes .
I would like to make it clear that the request does not come from our group .
So you see that all the groups can make use of the rights they are granted by the Rules of Procedure .
As regards what our rapporteur , Mr Fabra Vallés , has just said , I would point out that Amendment No 1 is an addition to the compromise text .
It does not therefore contradict the compromise text that has been adopted in committee .
Moreover , as regards Amendment No 2 , it seems to me that , in the German version of the text , the verb ' prévient ' is not translated correctly . It appears that the German version uses the term ' stellt ' , from the verb ' stellen ' , when it should be ' warnt ' , from the verb ' warnen ' .
I think that we should correct this version in line with the French text .
Thank you , Mr Fabre-Aubrespy .
I would like to say that it was never my intention to suggest that your group is the only one to request split votes .
Other groups ask for them as well .
It sometimes happens that a slip of the tongue can give a false impression .
Mr President , I have two minor comments .
Firstly , you say that the Conference of Presidents has decided that this report cannot refer to Article 206 , which means that the reference must be deleted from the motion for a resolution . Otherwise what would happen is that , although we are not voting by absolute majority as required under Article 206 , the reference would still be made .
Since Article 188c of the Treaty deals with precisely these matters , it should be included in the report .
Secondly , I wish to highlight a linguistic problem in recital T. The French expression ' ladite enquête administrative ' has been translated into Italian as ' la cosiddetta indagine amministrativa ' , whereby ' ladite ' has become ' soi-disant ' .
I would ask that the Italian version be corrected .
Mr Dell 'Alba , I have noted your comment .
We will continue with the votes , and to avoid upsetting Mr Fabre-Aubrespy I will mention that this time , most of the separate votes were requested by the Socialist Group .
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
Mr President , if I could just ask you , on a point of order , whether it is within the rules or against the rules for Members to conduct lengthy telephone conversations on their mobile phones .
Mr McMillan-Scott is doing so and I would like to draw that to your attention .
Mr Evans , you are quite right .
Other colleagues of mine and I too have repeatedly requested from this platform that when voting is in progress , telephone conversations should not be taking place on mobile phones .
I do not know how urgent that telephone call was for Mr McMillan-Scott , but in cases of urgent need Members can leave the Chamber so that they are not on the phone while voting is in progress .
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
This report proposes that Europol should have direct access to the customs information system .
A federal police force , lacking any democratic accountability , has no attractions for me and I certainly cannot endorse granting it powers of this kind .
For more detailed arguments , please refer to my explanation of vote on report A-0396 / 98 .
We thank Mr Schmid for producing such a thorough and pertinent report .
Regulating Internet use is a sensitive matter , and it is necessary to proceed with extreme caution . The Internet facilitates global contact between individuals .
Ideally , the flow of information should be unhindered and free from regulation . This report calls for a necessary degree of self-regulation , primarily in order to pre-empt exploitation of the Internet for criminal purposes , such as the dissemination of child pornography .
The rapporteur 's proposals complement the Commission 's initial text . We particularly welcome the calls for European quality labelling and the approximation of substantive provisions in criminal law .
Common definitions should prevent child pornography rings , for example , from exploiting differences in legislation in pursuit of their vile and degrading activities .
The Danish Social Democrats have today voted in favour of an EU action plan to promote self-regulation , develop filtering and classification systems and encourage information activities and support measures .
We are very much in favour of providing financial support for moves to restrict violence and pornography on the Internet .
However , we have voted against a common European quality label awarded by the Commission .
It is not the Commission 's role to decide on the morality of material .
We have also voted against harmonisation of civil and criminal law in the Member States .
Legal practice in the Member States reflects the different national cultures and traditions in terms of what should be censored and how it should be punished .
It is important to distinguish between what is illegal and what is offensive or damaging to morals .
We need to have European cooperation to combat illegal material such as child pornography .
In this area , we should extend the competence of Europol as soon as possible , so that we can combat international networks which produce , sell and distribute pornography of this kind .
My reaction to the common position of the Council was one of ambivalence .
On the one hand , I am glad that efforts are being made to counter ' pollution ' of the Internet as effectively as possible .
Cooperation between the Member States is altogether essential here .
On the other hand , I remain very critical of the artificial , not to say spurious distinction generally made between ' illegal ' and ' harmful ' material .
Child pornography is illegal , whilst adult pornography is merely harmful to children .
But the appalling and abhorrent extent of sexual abuse against women and children ought to make us take a more realistic view of things .
I voted for the amendment to develop a European ' quality-site label ' .
If we first have self-regulation on the part of service providers and personal responsibility on the part of Internet users , everything should be done to facilitate this .
I did not support the proposed amendment to have legal questions ruled on at Community level .
After all , the law varies from Member State to Member State in respect of the limits placed on freedom of expression . I think it would be a waste of energy trying to persuade the Council to change its mind on this .
The development of the Internet has rapidly presented us with a difficult problem : how can we prevent this new means of communication from being used for unlawful purposes such as prostitution , paedophilia and the dissemination of theories or doctrines that do not respect human dignity , without establishing a system of censorship ?
The only realistic method was to take action with the Internet providers .
The Community action plan is based around this idea , particularly through codes of conduct developed by self-regulatory bodies .
In this respect , the European Parliament had proposed , at first reading , the creation of a European quality label for suppliers of Internet services complying with these rules .
The Commission did not adopt this idea and that is unfortunate .
We therefore welcomed the fact that this amendment was tabled again .
Finally , since the legal questions raised by the content or use of the Internet are difficult , the Council has reserved the possibility of issuing an invitation to tender in order to assess these difficulties .
Parliament wishes to go further and to make this initiative compulsory so that these studies can begin immediately .
The Council 's position seems to be more sensible , and we should only undertake these studies if there truly is a need to do so .
In conclusion , I would like to say that the same applies to the Internet as to all means of communication : it is the reflection of a civilisation , of a general state of mind .
It is in some ways the mirror of our society , its tensions , its contradictions , its hedonism and its amorality , but also its creativity and the need to break the personal solitude and misery that the materialism and individualism of our time so often bring with them .
If the images we receive over the Internet are not always pleasant , we should ask ourselves why .
Mr President , I abstained from the vote on the Amadeo report although I consider the report itself to be a very good one .
I did this to protest against the fact that in particular the Group of the Party of European Socialists rejected Amendment No 36 .
The amendment is worded in such a way as to allow a type of disciplinary committee of the professional representation or a committee of the national professional representation to be convened in the event of a breach by the doctor conducting the trial .
I believe that , where a problem arises , it is the right of doctors , who do so much for all of us , to have a professional representative that can be informed , make a case for and stand by the doctors .
I regret this attitude of hostility towards doctors that is shown by the Group of the Party of European Socialists and I wished to protest against this by abstaining from the vote .
' In Europe there is a diversity of cultural traditions .
Equally , there is diversity in religious beliefs . ' That is what the European Commission says in its proposal for a directive on the introduction of good clinical practice .
This pronouncement was an important starting-point for me in deciding where I stood on the clinical trials directive .
Decisions on whether or not clinical trials are ethical are the province of the Member States , precisely because of this cultural and religious diversity .
This is an important issue , and decisions on whether or not to authorise clinical trials cannot be taken just like that .
Ethics committees can never carry as much authority as national governments .
Moreover , each Member State has developed its own system for allowing or not allowing trials . The industry is familiar with them .
They are afraid that a European directive will create a lack of clarity and thus an additional link in the chain of decision- making on clinical testing .
In this way we are making the European market less attractive .
These considerations prompted me , following the adoption of Amendments Nos 13 , 14 and 15 , to vote against the report .
We have today voted against the Amadeo report on the implementation of good clinical practice in the conduct of clinical trials on medicinal products for human use .
We believe that the Member States themselves should be able to decide how to organise their health systems , and that there should be no harmonisation of health policy at EU level .
We therefore cannot support the undermining of the Member States ' competence in this area through an EU directive , or the undermining of national systems which work perfectly well because of a desire to lay down standards by law at EU level .
We cannot vote in favour of a proposal which would mean increased bureaucracy and higher costs for existing national systems which already efficiently handle applications for the authorisation of trials of medicinal products for human use .
However , we have decided to vote in favour of those amendments which deal solely with the protection of trial subjects and their rights .
The report is far too vague about the procedures associated with applying to begin a clinical trial , and we do not think it is justifiable that the new ethics committees are exclusively able to authorise trials , without consulting the national authorities .
The time limits set out in the report for communicating authorisations are unreasonably short , and mean that it is not possible to carry out a thorough assessment of the applications as is required .
We therefore cannot support the proposal that clinical trials of medicinal products can be begun if authorisation has not been given by the expiry of the time limit .
It is unacceptable to us that clinical trials of medicinal products for human use can be started under any circumstances without being directly authorised by the Member States , but simply once the authorities have been notified .
The proposal will cause a reduction in the level of health protection in those cases where the Member States are obliged to give authorisation for trials on the basis of the time limits in the directive , even if the national authorities have still not completed a more thorough assessment of the application .
We shall always oppose EU rules in the health sector which produce a lower level of health protection in the Member States in this way .
As is quite rightly pointed out in the Commission 's proposal for a directive , ethical principles reflect the culture , traditions and expectations of our peoples , and we also think that the Commission should respect these .
We will not play a part in enabling the EU to harmonise national ethical judgements .
We are grateful to the rapporteur for producing a good and thorough text .
Given the transfrontier dimension of fraud and counterfeiting , there is a clear need for the countries of the Union to cooperate in combating such crime - especially when it comes to protecting the euro against counterfeiters .
The report offers some imaginative suggestions as to how the Commission 's proposal might be rendered more precise .
As regards the role of Europol , we can support the relevant amendments for the specific purpose they are designed to serve : namely to combat fraud and the counterfeiting of means of payment .
Given the emergence of electronic commerce that is developing on the Internet , the report by our colleague Gerhard Schmid has come at just the right time to warn us of the risks of fraud that we can already see growing .
I believe that the text should enable us to limit the amount of fraud , even if it cannot put a stop to all attempted fraud on its own .
Moreover , it is vital for the Member States to coordinate their judicial policies , for this type of crime will undoubtedly tend to develop on the global network .
As it has done already .
In this respect , we must speed up the talks we are holding with our partners in the framework of the WTO .
It is not unreasonable to think that countries that are very conciliatory towards certain networks involved in serious crime might kindly welcome these new types of criminals .
To fight them effectively , the international community must not only mobilise itself but must also have the means available to ensure that a minimum standard is applied in every country .
It is indeed necessary to coordinate all those involved in these new means of payment , but we must also encourage the use of encryption in payment transactions .
Equally , the use of credit cards at home can be made secure though the use of an individual terminal .
The first trials in this respect seem encouraging .
But there is a great deal yet to be done and time is moving on .
We are not in favour of economic and monetary union and would rather it never came about . EMU signals a major political step in the direction of a ' Greater Europe ' .
Eleven out of the 15 Member States are more or less sure to go ahead , however , and we accept that the consequences will have to be dealt with as best as possible .
This report deals with protecting the euro against counterfeiting , and we appreciate the need to introduce an effective system for pre-empting the forging of bank notes .
Close cooperation between the national police authorities will be essential - and with Interpol , since the euro will also be circulating outside the eleven participating countries .
We therefore see the logic of supporting this report , despite our fundamental disapproval of EMU as a political project .
We are unable to support this report .
We are opposed to harmonisation in the legal sector and see this report as the beginning of cooperation in the area of criminal law .
Amongst other things , we are concerned at the proposal for a common European definition of what constitute criminal offences .
The current differences in definitions are a reflection of differences in culture and legal traditions , and they should be maintained .
We are also deeply concerned at the part of the proposal which relates to the Member States exchanging information on people who have been convicted of breaking the law in this area .
The Commission document on which the report is based contains many sensible elements which respect the Member States ' sovereignty in this area of criminal law .
Unfortunately , this does not alter the fact that other parts of it may provide a basis for EU cooperation on criminal law being developed in the longer term , and we are opposed to this form of cooperation .
Mr President , on behalf of the German delegation in the Group of the European People 's Party , but also on behalf of the Austrian and some other delegations - for example , the Luxembourgish delegation - I would like to say that some of us voted against the Cederschiöld report and some abstained from the vote because it is our opinion that this report was rendered unacceptable by the adoption of the socialists ' amendment on the introduction of voting rights for foreigners .
The text contravenes our own constitution and the Treaties because we are exceeding our authority here , and it contravenes the constitutions of a number of Member States , such as Germany , that expressly prohibit it ; it is a pity that this does such a disservice to the serious concerns expressed by Mrs Cederschiöld in her excellent report .
We therefore felt obliged to vote against this report although we fully agree with the report 's concerns .
But we must reject the text of the amendment , which certainly does not belong in the report , as totally unacceptable .
It is our opinion that it is basically unlawful because it is inconsistent with the legal system of the European Union and of a number of Member States .
The need for joint action to combat and prevent organised crime cannot be overstated , and we welcome the Council 's initiative in this field .
The report from the committee responsible brings some useful improvements to the original text .
The purpose of our explanation of vote is to express some reticence with regard to the rapporteur 's paragraph 6 .
We find the wording somewhat infelicitous , since it would be inappropriate to seek to infringe the media 's inalienable right to make independent judgements as to editorial content .
The report by Mrs Cederschiöld on crime prevention is full of good intentions , and we can but say that it is unfortunate that the European Union is not paying more heed to them .
It says , for example , that we need ' a strengthening of a sense of community ' through the promotion of ' families , kindergartens , schools , churches and leisure associations ' . We also need to encourage ' the absorption of laws and values in the family socialisation process ' and , finally , we need to maintain a feeling of belonging to a neighbourhood so as to form a ' sense of local area ' , which will encourage citizens to feel responsible for what happens in their common area .
All these intentions are excellent , and we can only regret the fact that the European Union is doing the contrary by trying to destabilise all communities , from the nation , through standardisation and integration , to the family , by fighting against discrimination on grounds of ' sexual orientation ' .
Similarly , we do not see how it could be possible to promote a sense of belonging to a local neighbourhood at a time when the European Union is advocating mobility on an international scale as the greatest of virtues and when it is establishing , moreover , all the policies that will mean that this is absolutely necessary in the future .
However , we cannot support the section of the Cederschiöld report relating to immigrants , which has been made even worse by an amendment .
It says that the European Parliament wishes to guarantee them ' the introduction of voting rights at communal level after a certain period of legal residence ' , according to the same conditions as apply for citizens of the European Union .
We can see here a glimpse of the old idea promoted by certain federalist camps that nationals of third countries should have at least some of the rights of European citizens .
We believe that those who wish to vote in a country , at whatever level , must apply for nationality of that country .
They must share the destiny of a country - that is , hold its nationality - if they want to be involved in its decisions .
The Danish Social Democrats have voted in favour of this report on the prevention of organised crime .
We have voted in favour of calling on the Member States to develop national programmes in the areas of job creation , health , education and social policy , and of improving the European cooperation which already exists in this sector .
However , we believe that this report is somewhat superfluous .
It is not particularly ambitious , and it is time that we proceeded instead with a practical and binding form of cooperation which really is capable of preventing organised crime .
In principle I support all measures to combat organised crime , both repressive and preventive measures .
The current scale of organised crime makes all conceivable initiatives necessary .
Nevertheless , in my opinion the report goes beyond the stated aim , which is to draft guidelines and measures for the prevention of organised crime .
In several points in paragraph 7 , for example , measures to prevent organised crime are confused with measures to prevent small-scale crime .
Apart from the fact that in my opinion it is not the task of the European Union to make such detailed statements on these issues , I also reject some points because of their content ( the introduction of voting rights at local level for foreigners , giving priority to crime prevention projects in the context of the reform of the Structural Funds , attaching increased importance to alternative forms of reaction ) .
Despite this , I voted in favour of the report in the final vote because in my view the positive aspects outweigh the negative , and I would simply like to make it clear that this approval does not apply to all points .
We cannot support the Cederschiöld report , even thoughwe fully sympathise with its view that combating crime does not just involve tackling the crime which currently exists , but also social prevention , for example .
In this context , we can only deplore the adverse social effects of the EMU policy on large sections of the EU 's population , while the convergence demands made on national budgets by EMU will indeed make it difficult for the Member States to carry through many of the sound proposals contained in the Cederschiöld report .
We are voting in favour of all the report 's good advice to the Member States , but we are strongly opposed to all those elements which point to EU harmonisation of this sector , whether now or in the future .
This is a good report overall .
Mrs Cederschiöld manages to come to grips with many of the problems connected with organised crime , but two important elements are missing .
My first caveat is that no real account is given of the huge social problems underlying criminal behaviour .
What we need is an analysis of the way in which greater divisions in society and mass unemployment are generating organised crime .
The second shortcoming is a consequence of the first .
Flawed premises lead to faulty conclusions , as we find on occasion in this report .
Special reference is made to the importance of ' civil society ' and the role of the individual in reducing organised crime .
I have no faith in such an approach .
Welfare and equality are the prerequisites for cutting crime .
There are many good suggestions and interesting ideas in this report .
The rapporteur fails nonetheless to mention the prime causes of both organised and non-organised crime : poverty , destitution , large income discrepancies and , of course , unemployment .
In paragraph 7 , she expresses the view that we can combat organised crime by encouraging ' voluntary service for social policy objectives and the communication of values through private socialisation ' - by setting up kindergartens and schools , for example .
Such things are always possible , but it would be far preferable to build up a strong public sector , financed by taxation and capable of offering the fundamental facilities of society to everyone .
That concludes Voting Time .
( The sitting was suspended at 1.10 p.m. and resumed at 3 p.m. )

Social action programme 1998-2000 ( continuation )
The next item is the continuation of the debate on the report by Mr Hughes on the communication from the Commission on the social action programme 1998-2000 .
Mr President , a model for political action in Europe is the market economy , or at least the social market economy .
An element of the work of unification is cohesion , both economic and social .
And the single market , which as a result of the euro will become the home market , will only be complete when this social dimension is in place .
The Commission 's Social Action Programme therefore has an important status even in principle , and not only for unemployed , excluded , disabled and disadvantaged persons .
It creates the general conditions for new fields of responsibility in social policy , particularly in employment .
For this reason it is particularly regrettable that it is only a medium-term strategy until 2000 .
The opportunity to make a longer-term arrangement until 2006 was missed , but this is what we need in view of EU enlargement and the rapidly changing age structure .
Equal opportunities is one of the four pillars of the NAPs .
The Commission mentions it only randomly , however , instead of devoting a chapter to it .
Mainstreaming is not given sufficient attention either .
It deserves more than lip-service and is too significant to be restricted to employment and social protection .
Gender mainstreaming is relevant to health and safety at work , demography , new work organisation and other areas .
We thank Stephen Hughes , the rapporteur for the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs , for his excellent report .
He has also accepted some of the demands of the Committee on Women 's Rights , such as the directive on equal treatment between women and men in social security schemes , the social protection statute for assisting spouses and the evaluation reports on the health and safety of pregnant women and on equal pay for work of equal value .
We were able to integrate other issues into the report on Leonardo and the report on the European Structural Funds .
We call upon the Commission to take the initiative in the following areas : child care in the Member States , improved access for women to education , and the provision of new information on the situation of women in the applicant countries , both on the labour market and in society .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , on behalf of my group I would firstly like to thank Stephen Hughes for his report , which is a good and balanced one , as we have come to expect from him .
The Commission communication , however , contains an assortment of good ideas that have been put into practice but only very modest plans for the future .
The large discrepancy between Annex I and Annex II is perhaps symptomatic of this .
The debate about the new Social Action Programme is taking place in the context of the Amsterdam Treaty ; this means that the new instruments - the employment chapter , the Protocol on Social Policy , Article 13 on anti-discrimination and the instrument of social dialogue - should in future ensure a new quality for Europe 's social policy .
However , when I consider the Commission plans I am very sceptical .
They contain too many non-binding measures instead of new proposals to expand European legislation .
The consequences of European monetary union , of the euro and of enlargement to the east , on which our committee has often asked for information , are not mentioned .
Coordination of the guidelines and economic policy is imprecise and non-binding .
Two of the three main areas are also absolutely inadequate .
We consider the participation of workers to be relevant to the subject of the world of work in relation to modernisation , but at the moment it seems that the debate on information and consultation of workers has disappeared in the Bermuda Triangle of the Council .
The second area is that of exclusion .
Citizens have lost a great deal of faith in us due to the irresponsible behaviour of the Council of Ministers in this area , and incidentally the poverty reports demanded by Parliament are not mentioned .
The third area is that of jobs and mobility , and here I must in fact praise the Commission .
Many points have already been discussed this morning in the context of the van Velzen report .
However , the courageous decision made by the Commission on the issue of free movement was the right one .
If you continue in this way , including in other legislation , you will be able to count on the support of our committee and my group .
Mr President , I too must thank Mr Hughes very sincerely for all the work he has put into this actually quite slim report .
I think we have a new process here .
He has said as much himself this morning , a new process in our cooperation with the Commission , namely that we look first at what an action programme of this kind might contain and then pass it over to the Commission , which then shapes it into an action programme of its own or at least adopts it as one element of its own programme .
I think it has worked well .
And I do not think there are too many problems .
We have one amendment concerning a relatively minor detail .
So there are no differences of opinion as far as the main substance of the report is concerned .
I agree really with Mrs Weiler that the Commission 's proposals are somewhat on the lean side , that there is not all that much to them .
This brings us really to the only major difference we have with the European Commission , namely the time frame we have for this action programme .
The time frame , which is above all limited to what is covered by the current mandate of the Commission , is too short .
We cannot know exactly when the Amsterdam Treaty will come into force .
We know the Amsterdam Treaty creates many new opportunities precisely in the very sensitive and important area of social and employment policy .
That has not really been taken into account .
What makes no sense , and what I want to ask the Commissioner , is this : how can it be that the Commission has very far-reaching plans with regard to Agenda 2000 , so far-reaching that it is virtually impossible for the Council to agree them , but that in this relatively simple , straightforward area it refuses to go beyond its own mandate ?
I think these things are very hard to reconcile , because social policy will be important not only within the European Union of today , but also in our dealings with the new states which will be joining the European Union early in the next millennium .
And unless we have our house in order , unless we have clearly established what constitutes the acquis communautaire , we shall have a lot of problems .
Those problems could be greater than the problems in all the other areas which we cover in such breadth .
So this is a missed opportunity .
I would actually have been far happier if the Commission had gone along with what we suggested , namely working to a longer time scale .
Then we could take the Amsterdam Treaty fully on board , and if we did that we should advance a little further in the social field and show the public some results from our social and employment policy , not just what has been achieved already , but what is likely to be achieved soon .
Mr President , let me begin by stressing how important it is that jobs and employment policy are now to receive the treatment they deserve at EU level . European cooperation has too long been dominated by competition , the market , trade policy and so on .
There is , however , a problem .
Perhaps I will not have my whole group behind me in what I am about to say , but I am not convinced that EMU is the way forward on jobs .
An abiding anti-inflationary strategy - in the current climate of low inflation throughout most of Europe - could in fact cause more problems than it solves on the employment front .
I feel that we should be looking for alternative ways of improving the unemployment situation , focusing on an interplay between economic and employment policy .
The social dialogue , social policy cooperation and the action programme are important instruments for highlighting political issues and analysing problems . We need all this in order to understand the causes of exclusion , poverty , unemployment , discrimination and globalisation .
If we are to preserve socially viable societies , the big questions must be looked at from a long-term perspective .
My position possibly differs somewhat from the general committee view in this respect .
I would tend more towards supporting the Commission 's approach .
Many of us in my group feel that these are matters to be dealt with primarily by the individual Member States .
Decisions on the rights of individuals belong within the realm of domestic policy .
Furthermore , I believe that partnership , mutual support , positive incentives and setting a good example count for just as much as Europe-wide legislation .
Provided all these elements are handled properly , equally good results can be achieved .
Mr President , I would firstly like to congratulate the chairman of our committee on this important report and echo his support for the Commission communication on this new social action programme that presents significant new areas for intervention .
I would like to say that I agree with and I thank the rapporteur for proposing the inclusion of a bill of rights at the next revision of the Treaties , as requested by many associations as well as our fellow citizens .
I can tell you that the President of France at least is very much in favour of this as part of refocusing the Treaties and the necessary changes to the institutional set-up of the Union for enlargement .
I would also like to emphasise how important we feel it is to promote every aspect of the social dialogue and European civil dialogue .
This is the way to make those taking part in social dialogue more representative , particularly the SMEs which account for more than 66 % of all jobs in France today .
I would like to emphasise another aspect of participation .
I am referring here , Commissioner , to participation in the profits and results of companies , particularly in its most perfect form , that is , employee share ownership .
This is not mentioned in the social action programme despite the fact that its development seems to me to be an important element in modernising labour relations .
That is why I am calling on the Commission to encourage the development of this form of participation , which is both beneficial to the competitiveness of companies and fulfilling for employees .
Those are the few comments I wanted to make on behalf of the UPE Group on this important report .
Mr President , I too would like to thank our committee chairman for all the work he has put into this report .
He has my support in his criticism of the fact that the action plan will cover only three years and not run the full five to 2006 , as originally envisaged .
Forward planning and a long-term perspective are essential here .
I am also a little disappointed that the civil dialogue , which we well and truly need , was deemed to be dispensable .
The Commission appears content with the European social policy forums held every other year , although these are far from adequate .
It is a great pity that neither home working nor the general issue of equal opportunities are included in the action plan . An amendment from my group seeks to remedy this .
I do not share the rapporteur 's disappointment over the Commission 's proposal for greater resort to ' soft law ' .
This is an acceptable way forward , preferably in combination with commitment to the civil dialogue .
Mr President , when I read the Commission 's Social Action Programme 1998-2000 and the Hughes report on it , an expression which is often used in Denmark came to mind : this is the thin end of the wedge .
And why was that ?
Well , the fact is that when someone says ' A ' in the European Union , it is not long before the whole alphabet has been used .
This is also clearly illustrated by this report , as when the rapporteur states that there is a need for an action programme which is ' more explicitly a political document rather than simply a list of intended actions ' .
And when a concept like ' the European social model ' is used from time to time , then in my view we have taken far too many steps in the wrong direction .
Because what is the European social model ?
It does not exist in reality , although it certainly does in the imaginations of most of the Members of Parliament .
That does nothing to make it any more real , however .
There is a huge gulf between fantasy and reality in this system , and everyone should face that fact before the next step is taken .
Think of the people out there in the Member States who cannot identify with the fantasy world of the EU , and who in many ways have hardly any idea of what is going on down here .
There are great differences between north and south in the EU , and these are both cultural and economic .
For example , there is a major difference in terms of women 's participation in the labour market and as regards the provision of care for children and the elderly .
There is a different basis for social policy in the individual countries .
In some , it is largely geared to families and private schemes , whereas in others it is based on the public sector .
In Denmark and the rest of Scandinavia , the dominant principle is that of solidarity - and continues to be , I have to say .
But we are seeing in Denmark too how things are changing towards a more personal system , in which it is up to individuals to save and take out insurance for themselves .
This is a new and not particularly welcome trend , in my opinion .
It is also one which has not just taken place because the majority of the population want it , but also because Denmark is a member of the EU and is therefore trying to approximate Danish social policy to the concept referred to as the European social model .
This is a foolish and mistaken development , and one which is dangerous for democracy in our individual countries .
It is stated in the Commission 's proposal and in the report that the introduction of the European social model is important in relation to the internal market and EMU .
I refuse to accept a social principle which is based on the principles of the internal market , where it is reasons of competition which determine what kind of social policy is pursued .
That does not imply any particular kind of solidarity .
And in conclusion , I would say that it must continue to be the individual Member States that decide for themselves what kind of social policy they wish to pursue in their countries .
Mr President , I wish to join with the others in congratulating the rapporteur .
I also welcome Commissioner Flynn , who has been unstinting in his efforts to encourage a very close dialogue between the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs and the Commission in this area .
Turning to the Hughes report and to the future of the social action programme , I should like to make a few brief comments .
At a time of unprecedented political change in Europe , we should not only consolidate but also strengthen the social dimension and update it for the next century .
We face three tremendous challenges in the European Union at the moment : the advent of economic and monetary union , enlargement and the policy to combat large-scale unemployment .
When we add this to the demographic trends within the European Union , global economic change and technological innovation , we can see that we are facing considerable challenges .
I agree with Bartho Pronk and Barbara Weiler that it is regrettable the Commission has only really planned for an action programme up to the year 2000 , which is just over 18 months away .
We need something longer term , particularly as the Amsterdam Treaty - which has not yet been ratified in all the Member States - will have greater powers in the social area than any previous Treaty .
The social action programme should form the heart of Europe 's social policy agenda .
Like everyone else , I welcome the Commission 's emphasis on employment creation but this is not only a panacea for the European Union .
We need to strive to develop policies to help people who are unemployed , excluded or less fortunate .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Hughes report that we are debating today , welcoming the Commission 's new social action programme , makes such major changes that it virtually transforms the subject into a debate on the European social policy in its broadest sense .
Creating a genuine European welfare society , with an improved quality of life and strong social cohesion , calls for the drafting and subsequent implementation , in practical and objective terms , of a political document reflecting the new status of a European Union social and employment policy , something that has already been acknowledged .
Regrettably , instead of covering a longer period , 1998-2006 , the timetable has been limited to 1998-2000 , hampering the issues of employment and other social matters in Community policy .
The European Union 's new economic framework , resulting from the completion of the Single Market and the new monetary policy , which is about to come into effect , makes interaction between economic policy and social policy all the more important and accentuates the need to consolidate relations between EMU , the Single Market , the cohesion policy and effective social and employment policies .
The new social action programme , as a strong component of a European social policy , should be taken on board by all the European institutions , by the Member States and by the social partners , stressing the importance of more objective and decisive ways of bringing about civil dialogue in the future .
The report emphasises the need to strengthen the existing legislative framework , particularly in the areas of labour organisation , workers ' individual and collective rights and social measures aimed at regulating a free market economy .
However , we should not neglect legal arrangements for tackling serious problems lingering as a consequence of demographic trends , racism , poverty and social exclusion , for example .
This report has our support since , in our view , it should lead on to new and far-reaching discussions about the future of European social policy .
Mr President , my colleague , Mr Hughes , has produced an excellent report .
We in the Green Group would like to make one or two changes touching on the issue of equality between women and men .
I believe that it would be a good thing if the report were to emphasise that the issue of equality should be incorporated in all social policy , with particular emphasis on mainstreaming .
We would also like Parliament to remind everyone of the importance of childcare , without which equality between women and men will make no progress whatsoever .
We know that Mr Flynn has made enormous efforts here , and we would like Parliament to support him in this .
Finally , we should remember that we are in the middle of the enlargement process and we have to be concerned when we see how badly applicant countries perform in the area of equality between women and men .
We would like this to be emphasised in the enlargement negotiations .
Mr President , when you look at a report , it is important to realise that you have to read what it actually says .
My Danish colleague from the movement of permanent discontent evidently had some difficulty with that .
However , I would like to begin by congratulating Mr Hughes on what is a very fine report .
It focuses on the challenges that we are facing in labour market policy over the coming years .
The new social action programme is different from the previous action programmes in that it does not contain any specific proposals for directives on such things as the working environment and social protection .
I think it is a pity that the action programme does not include some more specific proposals on the working environment .
We do still need to improve matters there .
On the whole , the new programme is an excellent basis for the EU 's social and labour market policy in the next few years .
There are some shortcomings , for example the fact that the Commission does not mention home workers .
I am therefore pleased that we are calling on the Commission to take action in this area .
We should ensure that the seven million people in the Community who work at home are not treated in an inferior way to the rest of the labour market .
We should also be calling on the Commission to ensure that the existing directives also cover home workers .
The section dealing with employment could also have been a little more ambitious .
We should not just shift jobs around between the Member States .
That will not bring many people into work .
Some Member States have unfortunately used the trick of enticing businesses to their country with offers of tax exemptions and low corporation tax .
The Commission should therefore act to set a minimum rate for corporation tax .
Work is currently being done on drawing up a code of conduct for business taxation .
That is not enough .
We must have binding rules in this sector .
So there is a need for a more ambitious and binding form of cooperation on social and labour market policy for the future .
Mr President , the new social action programme for 1998-2000 proposed by the Commission is securely based on the guidelines for employment as agreed at the European Councils of Amsterdam and Luxembourg .
However , the proposals could certainly have been more daring .
For example , there should be more active participation by working people in the decision-making process in companies , and the rights of their representatives should be amplified .
But a special approach is also needed for small and medium-sized enterprises , which takes account of their special features and needs .
The Commission also ought to clarify the way in which it means to exploit the potential offered by the new legal base in the area of social protection .
In addition , preparatory work should begin straight away on action programmes against social discrimination and to promote social access , and I wish to stress in particular the care we must devote to people with special needs .
We must make sure that in directives concerning public contracts it will be compulsory to conform with current social legislation .
Finally , I cannot but agree with the rapporteur that the Commission should have chosen the period 1998-2006 and not the very brief span of 1998-2000 which it ultimately selected , since the former would have reinforced the basic role of employment and social affairs in the Union 's policy .
Mr President , Commissioner , let me begin by saying that I regard this present debate on the excellent report by Mr Hughes as a very important symbolic debate .
The rapporteur and Chairman of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs sets out in his explanatory statement the entire history of this contact and cooperation with the Commission , and the entire history of its development following the progress in Amsterdam and at the special conference in Luxembourg .
We in the European Union are today facing a new reality which finally accepts and recognises that employment and social policy are the first priority in Europe , and I think the social action programme which the Commission has proposed , Commissioner , is an important step forward .
It is indeed a policy document of great weight for the European Union .
I think this must be followed up , and I stress that the emphasis placed on dialogue with the civil society in various forums is extremely important , though more important still is social dialogue with the social partners , which is of course not just a fashion which has had its day .
Last Saturday a very important event took place in Athens at which Mr Delors was present , and he repeated that what Europe needs is precisely to highlight the value of social justice and solidarity .
I believe that for us too , this ought to form the basis which gives the European Union , our Europe , fresh impetus and brings our vision to fruition .
Mr President , I would like to comment further on the van Velzen report in the light of this morning 's debate . Employment continues to be first and foremost a task for the Member States .
Guidelines and coordination are useful and good , and I too hope that they will allow us to promote and develop employment .
But we must be careful not to do as we did this morning and talk as though we alone at EU level are capable of solving the problem of unemployment .
By doing so we are merely giving the relevant national politicians the opportunity to pass the buck to the EU or the European Central Bank if national labour market policy fails .
Incidentally , calling the Stability Pact into question has the effect of threatening employment rather than promoting it .
I call upon the Commission to give greater prominence to updating minimum social standards in the Social Action Programme 1998-2000 .
A fundamental aim of European social policy is to develop a European framework of social legislation that guarantees a common basis of binding and enforceable minimum social standards , which does not demand too much of weaker states and does not prevent more developed economies from maintaining or improving their social standards .
At least , this is what I have been told , Commissioner .
However , those countries which are weaker in economic terms have made progress since minimum standards were established , which is why I would repeat that the further development of minimum social standards must be seriously taken in hand .
Existing gaps , such as the inclusion of homeworking , teleworking and contract workers , and the reinforcement of information , consultation and participation procedures , must be dealt with by introducing new directives .
These gaps must be closed .
I would also like to comment on the social dialogue .
I support Mr Peter 's demand that the social dialogue must be placed on a broader basis of organisations , and despite your optimism , Commissioner , the results of the social dialogue have so far been disappointing .
In my opinion there is a great deal to be done , and if need be we must put the situation right by means of directives .
Mr President , I should like to thank Mr Hughes for his report and all those who stayed and contributed to the debate .
I look on the report as being very supportive of the Commission Social Action Programme .
As Mr Hughes says , the programme reflects very valuable prior input from himself and his colleagues .
This has been very favourably reported upon by many who contributed .
For the record I should like to say that , from the Commission 's perspective , the constructive way we have worked together to develop this programme was quite exemplary and has brought us a long way in the development of the relationship between the Commission and Parliament .
The Social Action Programme 1998-2000 adopted by the Commission on 29 April provides a strategic overview of how we see the key priorities for the future development of European social policy .
Indeed , European citizens want a very strong , dynamic and forward-looking social policy and this programme provides a framework within which all of that can be achieved .
The programme responds to the very significant potential of the new Amsterdam Treaty in the social field .
The programme places employment - as Mr Hughes quite rightly says - at the very centre of social policy , drawing out the complementarity between the new European employment strategy and the broader social policy agenda .
Employment is the principal means by which we can deal with many social problems and sustain the core values of the European social model .
Social protection systems - work regulation , health and safety provisions - are productive factors helping to improve economic performance as well as ensuring a fair sharing of the benefits of that performance .
We have already gone a long way in implementing the provisions of the Amsterdam Treaty in the field of employment .
Although much remains to be done to meet the expectations of our citizens , there are signs that our employment strategy is proving to be a success story .
Within a very short time Member States have engaged in a process to make their employment strategy systematic , consistent and quite transparent .
There is the opportunity for the Heads of State to move further at the Vienna Council and thereafter in their internal budget decisions .
While employment is central to our vision the programme goes beyond the labour market .
It sets out a balanced , ambitious and forward-looking vision of social policy as an essential element of the next challenging phase of European integration .
I am more than happy to make a commitment here to come back to report regularly on the implementation of the programme and to maintain the collaborative approach we have followed so far which has proved so useful in the development of the whole of European social policy .
The Commission is already preparing for the implementation of the other provisions of the Amsterdam Treaty as soon as it is ratified .
I will be looking for Parliament 's support to develop this new and exciting part of the agenda .
I should like to say a few words about the debate held in the Council on 27 October on the social action programme .
It was quite encouraging and I took note of several messages which came from the Council at that meeting .
Firstly , there was explicit support for our approach as set out and reconfirmation that employment is Europe 's top priority .
Enlargement was very strongly signalled as a key issue .
I believe that Member States would like social policy to have more emphasis in our enlargement discussions and I expect that will be the case .
I can report that the spirit of Amsterdam is very much alive .
I was particularly heartened by the encouragement to table proposals in the area of anti-discrimination under Article 13 .
There was a strong message from the Social Affairs Council as to the necessity of strengthening social dialogue .
I will not hide from you that social dialogue has a long way to go .
We have made some progress but it has been rather limited and I am going to have to work on that a little harder with the social partners .
I will now reply to some points which seem to be causing concern .
Some Members asked why , so far as the programme is concerned , the time span is not longer .
Let us be clear .
There will certainly be a need for a new social action programme post-2000 .
But by then we will be a lot clearer on many of the major issues we are talking about , for example developments in globalisation , in particular the social impact of economic and monetary union .
The potential that exists from the new Treaty will be clearer to us then .
We will have advanced a little in the negotiations on enlargement and we will be better able to focus on the key issues there .
There will be the impact of the employment strategy .
We will have progressed further in the whole evaluation of the national action plans and then we will be in a better position to get a longer term view for the next programme .
As honourable Members have said , social policy is changing and there will be a new focus particularly when the Treaty is ratified .
The strategy with regard to employment will be advanced as well .
Mrs Schörling put it very well when she said that we are taking the first steps in order to take further steps .
It is a good way of looking at the whole matter .
There is a lot to do and I would suggest that the House is going to be extremely busy between now and the end of this Commission and this Parliament in dealing both with the legislative programmes that are now coming on-stream and also the non-legislative actions .
Social policy is an ongoing process and our evaluation will help us to develop it better as time goes on .
Mr Hughes made it contingent on his support that certain matters would be replied to so I will make a few further remarks .
On the civil dialogue we did not get what we had hoped for from the Treaty .
However , we will be publishing the outcome from the Social Forum quite soon .
We have a budget line to do all this in 1999 so we are going to continue to develop it .
On preparatory actions for Articles 13 and 137 , you will be pleased to hear that work is well under way .
In fact , we issued a call for tenders to prepare for Article 137 in September so we are moving ahead nicely there .
On health and safety staffing , we now have the agency in Bilbao and I am trying to divide up the work in a more even-handed way so that we will continue to get the best results possible .
Remarks were made by Mr Hughes on social protection and the framework of investment .
Our plan contains three elements .
In a matter of weeks we will publish a review of the 1992 recommendation on minimum income support schemes within the social welfare systems and next year we will publish a new communication on the future of social protection .
We had two previous texts there in 1995 and 1997 but it is important that we do it again .
As we set out in the Action Programme we want to use Article 137 to develop a framework for national policies , including social protection systems to work against social exclusion .
The issue of sexual harassment was also raised .
I agree that the question of sexual harassment is a real problem .
I will soon be able to give you two studies concerning sexual harassment and its prevalence in organisations in all of the surveyed countries in the European Union .
It is my assessment that the majority of the Member States are , at the moment , not interested in legislation .
As you know , the social partners could not come to an agreement on the matter either , so I am in a bit of a dilemma there .
I would like to ask your indulgence to reflect further upon this .
Perhaps after the two studies have been published we can talk about it again .
Insofar as stress , as a health and safety matter to be examined is concerned , there is no problem .
It is already explicitly mentioned on page 9 of the mid-term report on Community programmes concerning safety , hygiene and health at work .
As far as home workers are concerned I should like to tell the House that the Commission will be adopting a communication on modernising the organisation of work .
We hope to do that on 25 November .
This is a framework document that will give the social partners and others an opportunity to comment on how we should now proceed with all of the organisation of work issues .
I can tell you , Mr Hughes , that home working will be included in that matter .
You also mentioned the question about a directive on equal treatment and social security in 1998 .
Our programme has a commitment to do that in 1999 and work is in progress which is well advanced now .
We have not discussed it yet at Commission-level , but it is quite well advanced .
Regarding the question of implementation of the pregnant workers directive , the report is presently being drafted on that particular issue .
It may be adopted by the end of the year .
I should like to say to Mrs Hautala that there will be a communication by the end of December , if possible , but certainly sometime before the middle of January , on the question of the external aspects of social policy .
That will include enlargement .
We have an awful lot of work to do between now and the end of next year .
Certainly , in my opinion , social policy has moved on quite dramatically .
We will be extremely busy with legislation , where a number of points are pending , and on non-legislative matters , together with the whole employment strategy .
I ask for your support for the plan .
Thank you , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 11.30 a.m.
Social dialogue
The next item is the report ( A4-0392 / 98 ) by Mr Peter , on behalf of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs , on the communication from the Commission : Adapting and promoting the social dialogue at Community level .
Mr President , allow me firstly to raise a technical point .
My attention has been drawn to the fact that in recital D of the Swedish version of this report there is a translation error which distorts the meaning .
I would ask you to have this checked .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the goal of coherence of economic and social development is enshrined in the Treaties .
The Commission 's clear remit to promote social dialogue , the European Social Charter , the Agreement on Social Policy which has now been incorporated into the Amsterdam Treaty , the employment chapter in this Treaty and not least the effects of imminent monetary union give the social dialogue greater significance than ever before .
It is consensus rather than conflict that remains at the heart of the social dialogue .
Where the social partners have completely different interests , a major factor in determining their ability to reach agreement will be whether they carry equal weight .
It is essential that the individual organisations prove that they are representative , but clear criteria must be set for establishing this and these must be continuously updated .
The organisations are autonomous , which means that they are free to decide with whom , in the given representative framework , they wish to sit at the table , negotiate , perhaps reach agreement .
They also decide , within the given framework , what they want to regulate .
Out of respect for the autonomy of the organisations the public authorities and political bodies must not directly interfere in the composition of the social partners .
The Committee on Employment and Social Affairs supports all the basic elements of the proposals drawn up by the Commission to increase the efficiency of structured European social dialogue , as presented in the Communication of 20 May 1998 on adapting and promoting the social dialogue at Community level .
The amendments approved by the committee do not stand in the way of this .
I have a few more points to make on this topic . The social dialogue is doubtless part of what we call the European social model .
In order to really do justice to this claim , it is crucial - and this is a point I would like to emphasise again - that the Commission should identify with it completely .
This means that there can be no arbitrary restriction of the traditional jurisdiction of the Social Affairs Commissioner , for example , or of certain of the other Commissioners !
Regardless of jurisdiction , the social dialogue must be conducted seriously at the relevant level for all social issues .
In future not only the employment guidelines but also the economic policy guidelines of the EU are to be discussed in the Standing Committee on Employment .
The results of the consultations are to be forwarded to the relevant Councils in time to be included in their consultations and decision-making .
This may seem obvious but from past experience it should not be taken for granted .
In the context of accession measures for the central and eastern European countries we must ensure that these countries have in place appropriate structures for the social dialogue by the time of accession .
I can only recommend to Parliament that it make its approval of accession conditional upon this .
Because legislation comes into effect in the EU by means of a Council decision resulting from the social dialogue process , the fact that the European Parliament is not involved creates the problem of a lack of democratic legitimation for such legislation .
Not least because of the rules which will in future become effective in all Member States and the duty of the Commission to present all social legislative initiatives to the social partners so that they can decide whether they wish to negotiate on the issue , Parliament must now insist on being placed on an equal footing with the Council in this procedure .
As the Commission has now stated that it is prepared to participate in interinstitutional negotiations , whether or not this actually happens will depend on the Council .
If Parliament continues to be excluded completely from this legislative procedure , while the Council has the last word , this will be a cardinal error that cannot be compensated for by extending the codecision procedure elsewhere .
Mr President , the European integration process , particularly after economic and monetary union , must bear the hallmark of greater commitment to sustainable growth and development and to social policy and employment ; indeed , this is the thrust of the reports presented this morning and this afternoon .
Europe 's social partners have a crucial role to play in this process , a role which is expressly recognised in the Treaty .
The Member States must take account of basic social rights in all their actions , and one of their aims is to promote social dialogue .
The new chapter of the Treaty devoted to employment , which was inserted at Amsterdam , also refers explicitly to consultation of the social partners .
What is more , under the Treaty the social partners may negotiate European-level framework agreements on relevant social policy issues falling within their competence .
Thus , because of the steadily increasing significance of the social dialogue , I should like to touch on three matters which crop up in the Commission 's communication and are also referred to in Mr Peter 's report .
Firstly , the problem of representation and the representativeness of the organisations concerned .
This is a problem that is beginning to arise in the Member States too , so in my opinion there is all the more cause to raise it at European level .
In this context , the study launched by the Commission - which we hope will soon be completed - will undoubtedly be most helpful in consolidating the European social dialogue , and will go a long way to avoiding the sort of disputes that have occurred in the past , some of which have even ended up in court .
The second matter is sectoral dialogue .
The development of social and sectoral dialogue can be crucial in terms of predicting and managing industrial change in the Community , paving the way for further progress and improving quantitative and qualitative results .
My final point relates to the role of the European Parliament .
Although I appreciate the Commission 's willingness to keep Parliament informed , under the legislative procedure laid down in the Protocol , I believe that an interinstitutional agreement should be concluded in the near future with a view to involving Parliament - the only institution directly elected by the citizens - in the legislative procedure provided for in the Agreement on Social Policy .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the social dialogue procedure is still a relatively new arrival in the European Union .
After two successful test runs involving the guidelines on parental leave and on part-time working , we now have a Commission communication that is considered to be a revision and a new direction .
The Commission has not provided anything new .
The rapporteur , Mr Peter , whom I should like to thank warmly for his collaboration , has put a great deal of effort into his report .
Nevertheless , it cannot be overlooked that the trade unions had the lead role in this extremely important text .
There need not be anything wrong with this if negotiations remain balanced and fair .
It is difficult to understand why the Commission should give increased support to only one side : that of employees ' representatives .
The ETUC certainly does not require any coaching or particular support in its work .
The financial support provided by the Commission for the ETUC should also be adequate .
I would now like to address a key issue .
The current round of social dialogue takes the form of tripartite negotiations , and many who cannot take part directly in the negotiations object to this .
The Commission has not been able to come up with any satisfactory proposals .
The Christian trade unions are still waiting in the wings , as are many representatives of small sectors and areas of employment .
Even if 80 % of UNICE 's members are from SMEs , UEAPME , as a direct and individual SME representative at EU level , has so far been forced to adopt a completely unacceptable position in the social dialogue .
Our group has protested against this again and again , and has asked that UEAPME be included .
UNICE and UEAPME are now concluding a contractual agreement that should allow SME representatives to participate directly in negotiations within the context of the social dialogue .
I deliberately say ' should ' , as we will have to wait and see how it works and whether the UEAPME representatives consider themselves to have been accepted .
This would solve one problem to a certain degree , even if it is only a stopgap , but other parties continue to be excluded from the negotiations .
We now urgently need the study of representativeness that the Commission announced in 1996 , and then we will have to take another long , hard look at the participants in the social dialogue .
At that point , at the very latest , the position of the European Parliament as the only democratically legitimate body of the European Union will have to re-examined , since our role in the social dialogue is also unsatisfactory .
We therefore continue to have two major problems facing us in the context of the social dialogue that are only too familiar to us .
Our group is determined to continue to work towards a solution to both these problems .
We owe it to the small organisations .
Mr President , what we are mainly dealing with here is how to structure the social dialogue as it operates between the two sides of industry .
The end result of such a process is a collective agreement of some kind - an instrument often better suited to resolving issues than legislation .
We have used this model of negotiation in Scandinavia for a long time now and would be happy to see it adopted at European level .
All the same , policy-makers should beware of seeing the passing of laws as an inevitable consequence of entering into a social dialogue and promoting collective agreements .
Legislation may follow , but that should not be the main purpose of the exercise .
The role of national authorities and the EU institutions is to further cooperation between autonomous and independent negotiating partners , as the rapporteur rightly says in paragraph 8 .
It will be up to the public bodies to act as mediators and facilitators , fostering contacts between the parties and stimulating discussion .
Many openings exist ; there is no need to reach for the legislative option every time .
I have three further points , Mr President . If the necessary connection between the employment guidelines and the economic policy guidelines is to be made , the Standing Committee on Employment would be well advised to discuss them in parallel .
Secondly , the social dialogue will need special consolidation in Central and Eastern Europe , since the parties have not had the same scope for cooperation as has existed in labour relations elsewhere .
Lastly , let us not forget that the local and regional authorities are major employers too . We will have to find a better way of incorporating them - as a matter of course - into the process of dialogue and cooperation .
In that way , they will constitute a strong employment presence at local level .
Mr President , I too would like to congratulate the rapporteur on his report and also to pay tribute to Commissioner Flynn for his involvement in this whole area .
With any model of social dialogue and social partnership , rights are devolved to the social partners to negotiate , consult and come up with framework agreements which should be implemented on a European basis .
Alongside the rights there are obligations .
A very important aspect , perhaps sometimes overlooked by this Parliament , is the obligation to come to the table with a real negotiating position and not just take a stance for the cameras .
In particular , it is necessary to broaden the partnership to include those sectors that are at present excluded , in particular the SME sector .
We should also look at questions like the disability sector , the education sector and the importance of life-long learning and education and training with regard to employment and other social exclusion problems which we discussed this morning , when we were speaking about the Van Velzen report and the Commission 's response .
Maybe we should now examine how we can bring more people into the social dialogue .
One way that we could do this , perhaps on a trial basis , is with a third type of organisation which also incorporates the Economic and Social Committee .
This would be more representative and could be used as a clearing house for some of the minor details and proposals .
I am concerned about the role of Parliament in this whole process .
Sometimes we in Parliament feel that we are presented with a fait accompli agreed by the social partners , and that this is political blackmail - we cannot oppose it because the social partners have agreed it .
Therefore some role must be found for Parliament in the interactions between the social partners .
However , bearing those points in mind , I would commend this report to the House and my group will be supporting the position of the rapporteur .
Mr President , under Article 118b of the Single European Act , the Commission is required to ' develop relations between management and labour at European level ' . Yet the local and regional authorities - who together constitute one of Europe 's largest employers - are being sidelined from this process .
Local and regional employers in the EU are extremely annoyed at not being seen as fully- fledged partners in the cross-sectoral social dialogue .
CEMR , the body representing hundreds of thousands of municipalities and regions around Europe , was set up back in 1951 . It is somewhat bizarre that an organisation representing the employers of over 14 million people full-time - and up to 30 million , if part-time workers are included - should be left out in this way .
The members of CEMR are very active in labour relations nationally and often enjoy negotiating powers .
They have behind them a long tradition of negotiating practice , after years of successful participation in social dialogue at national level .
It therefore makes sense in my view to envisage taking CEMR on board as a full and equal partner .
Mr President , let me begin by thanking the rapporteur for producing such a fine and eloquent text .
In future , the social dialogue will play an ever-increasing part in shaping EU policy . One of the main reasons for this is that the new treaty includes a specific reference to social and employment issues .
I wish to concentrate on three points .
Mrs Schörling was talking about the important question of fair representation .
Just how are we going to enhance representation ?
Is it a matter for politicians , or should the parties directly concerned be left to work things out for themselves ?
In line with Swedish tradition , my belief is that it is up to management and labour to ensure that they are properly represented .
The workers ' side - including public sector employees - has managed to get its act together .
The employers will now have to see to it that they follow suit .
Whilst I can appreciate the desire to reduce the membership of the Standing Committee on Employment , I do feel that something may be lost if that happens .
We must not lose sight of the need for outreach from the Standing Committee to the Member States .
A Brussels-only phenomenon is not what we want at all .
I would therefore urge people to take heed of paragraph 13 in Mr Peter 's report .
Thirdly , I should like to raise the matter of the Standing Committee 's remit .
Employment policy cannot be seen in isolation , as separate from economic policy .
It is essential for the Standing Committee on Employment to encompass macroeconomic issues and take part in drawing up economic policy guidelines .
Lastly , I agree with what has already been said on Parliament 's role in this process .
Mr President , a few days ago the presidents of UNICE and UEAPME declared that , respecting each other 's autonomy , they would be recognising one another as interlocutors in future European negotiations and would be stepping up their cooperation in that context .
UNICE acknowledges meanwhile that UEAPME is the body most representative of the specific interests of SMEs in Europe , and is thus giving it a place at the negotiating table .
If this agreement is finalised on 4 December by the decision-making bodies of the two organisations , a major step will have been taken towards achieving something which the PPE Group called for at the time of the Maastricht Treaty , namely full participation in European social dialogue by a partner speaking specifically for SMEs .
We are in favour of social dialogue , Mr President , but as a democratically elected body we cannot but approve of growing autonomy for the social partners , provided these are sufficiently representative - that word again .
This presupposes , amongst other things , that these partners together will cover enough of the ground to ensure that different interests are given sufficient consideration in negotiations .
This agreement represents a particularly significant step in that direction .
I would ask the Commission to honour the agreement in setting the long-awaited representativeness criteria .
We could put it this way , Mr President .
An engagement has been announced which will increase the representativeness and legitimacy of the social dialogue .
Anyone who now puts a spoke in the wheel and stops the wedding from going ahead or stops the couple from living together will bear an enormously heavy burden of responsibility .
SMEs are important creators of jobs .
They must have the chance - by virtue of having their own social partner at the European negotiating table - to take part in the negotiations and in that way to give expression and shape to their desire to be a responsible player .
Mr President , Ireland 's version of the social dialogue , which we call social partnership , is well established and has played a major part in the economic success which our country has achieved over recent years .
Our version of social partnership is in many ways ahead of the social dialogue .
The traditional social partners - the unions and the employers - are certainly central to the process , but they have been joined by others : farmers , women , people with disabilities , the unemployed and other marginalised groups .
I would like to see that broadened to include those representing the development area .
The benefits of the change from an adversarial to a consensual approach are very clear to everybody .
But there have been difficulties for many in Ireland , as the Ryanair dispute earlier this year clearly showed .
While we have managed to reach consensus on issues such as pay and taxation , the question of employee consultation within firms has not yet been adequately explored .
It is for this reason that I really welcome last week 's decision by the Commission .
Commissioner Flynn is to be congratulated for coming forward with a draft directive on worker consultation in firms with more than 50 employees .
I see the Commissioner is rightly satisfied .
This is another success and I hope to do the report .
I am convinced that the Ryanair dispute in Ireland would have been solved long ago if this directive had been in place .
Ireland fits somewhere between the continental European social model and the Anglo-Saxon model .
Worker consultation and information is a key part of the former but relatively unknown in the latter .
But it is strange that many companies in Ireland which do not negotiate with trade unions representing their own workers at local level do not seem to have great difficulty dealing with unions at the national or European levels .
I therefore call on all employers to be consistent in their approach to social dialogue and to take a positive view of the new directive .
Increased worker participation helps to achieve a happier , more highly motivated and more productive workforce .
Is this not what employers want ?
Mr President , I congratulate Mr Peter on his report , which is of a very high quality .
If agreements by the European social partners acquire legal force in the European Union in the area of work by making them generally binding through a Council decision , the SMEs will be among those most affected as they employ the majority of workers in Europe .
The report by the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs is right to call for increased involvement of the SMEs in shaping the European social dialogue , which is an issue of great concern to the Group of the European People 's Party , as is clear from our Amendment No 9 .
The social dialogue is necessary at both European and national levels .
It is also successful at company level .
This is illustrated by the success story of the European Works Council and the positive development of the discussion on the European Company .
Or so I am told , Commissioner .
In both cases the remedy has been negotiations by the social partners to establish ways in which the workers can participate .
A conference organised by the Austrian Presidency took place in Vienna last week on the European social model and the social dialogue .
Comparisons were made with other models , for example with the market economy pure and simple , as in the emergent industrial nations of South-East Asia .
But as they have neglected the social dimension many of the Asian tigers have in economic terms become tame , lame domestic cats .
The effective answer to globalisation is the European model , the social market economy based on social partnership and social dialogue .
The Group of the European People 's Party will therefore be voting in favour of the Peter report .
Mr President , I wish to begin by thanking Mr Peter for his report , which has been very helpful .
I would remind you that in 1996 the Commission initiated a major consultation exercise on the future of the social dialogue through the consultative communication .
At that time Parliament drew up a comprehensive resolution on the document and I was here in Strasbourg to discuss it with you in the summer of 1997 .
The Commission has worked very hard to take on board your comments in drafting this second communication .
The new Amsterdam Treaty provides the means for a renewed commitment of the social partners to modernise and strengthen the social dimension of Europe .
To do this the social dialogue must be helped .
It has to be helped to play its full role within the framework of supportive and efficient information , consultation and negotiation procedures .
As you said in the 1997 resolution , there are some key issues that we had to tackle and there are three of them .
Firstly , the need to reform the Standing Committee on Employment : considering the new focus on employment and the unwieldiness of the current structure , it has not worked well and has to be reformed .
Secondly , the importance of creating a more coherent and efficient framework within which the sectoral dialogue could develop and , finally , the question of representativeness .
The Commission 's communication on adapting and promoting the social dialogue at Community level was adopted on 20 May this year .
It addresses these three issues and sets out to strengthen the social dialogue at the European level and to make it more adaptable so that we can link the work of the social partners much more closely with the development and the implementation of all our European Union policies .
I begin with the question of representativeness , because it was raised by a number of Members - Mrs Ghilardotti , Mrs Glase , Mrs Schörling and Mrs Thyssen - and I am grateful for their concern .
It is clear that the institutions have to fully respect the autonomy of the social partners during their negotiations .
It is the social partners which , in this context , are responsible for ensuring sufficient representativeness .
However , as regards consultations , the institutions have to take their responsibilities to ensure the best possible representativeness .
It must be remembered that the Court of First Instance recently supported this approach in a landmark judgment .
We take the principle of the autonomy of the partners very seriously indeed .
In view of the European Parliament 's call on the Commission to reform the Standing Committee on Employment , as a matter of urgency , the Commission adopted a parallel to the communication : a proposal to the Council to reform the current structure .
What we want to do there is to give each presidency the choice of either calling a troika of Heads of State or Government or a council to meet with the social partners within the framework of the Standing Committee on Employment .
The social partner delegations to these meetings should be restricted in their number but always include the main social partner organisations .
In short , the Commission suggests to the Council creating a single , transparent and representative forum for high-level dialogue on employment .
So the ball is really in the Council 's court , to ensure that the real dialogue on employment is not restricted just to a core group of social partners .
With regard to the other consultation procedures , the communication introduced a liaison forum , involving quarterly consultations with all recognised European social partners on policy matters .
The first of these forums has already taken place and has proved to be a very useful exercise indeed .
Furthermore , at the sectoral level , new , flexible , sectoral committees will replace the many existing and cumbersome structures .
This decision caused some initial fears of a reduction in support for the sectoral dialogue .
Many of you have been in contact with me personally to query the practicalities of this new structure .
I will emphasise again here that this is not a reduction but rather a new start for the sectoral dialogue , where all the sectors wanting to make a meaningful joint contribution at European level can take part on equal terms .
There will no longer be a restriction of formalised support to activities where there is exclusive Community competence .
So the need to discuss industrial restructuring in employment matters is present today in all sectors of activity .
Just a few words about the Peter report .
Mr Peter and the Social Affairs Committee have once again managed to strike a fair balance between the different interests that are involved .
This is a very good report .
I would simply like to reiterate the importance of respecting the autonomy of the social partners .
I would therefore question whether it is politically or , indeed legally , feasible to involve any form of consultative committees in the negotiations between the partners or to involve any national organisations directly at European level .
As for the key point of the communication , I find the report is very supportive indeed and this is true of reform of the Standing Committee on Employment , the new sectoral dialogue committees , the representativeness question and the importance of developing a social dialogue with the applicant countries .
This should not come as a surprise because , as I have already stated , the position taken on these issues in the communication takes into account to a large extent the position of the European Parliament .
So the whole exercise serves , in my opinion , as an example of very good cooperation and understanding between our institutions .
Mr Crowley raised the question of the involvement of the European Parliament in the decision-making process leading to the adoption of legislation based on European agreements .
I wish to say to him that the Commission worked for the involvement of Parliament in this very respect during the IGC .
As emphasised in our draft report , this standpoint is clearly reiterated in our communication , and I know there are ongoing contacts between Parliament , the Council and the Commission in order to resolve this particular issue .
You know where I stand and where my support is on that point .
I wish to say to Mrs Thyssen that UNICE is in dialogue with UEAPME about the representativeness issue .
We understand that great progress is being made , and certainly I support that .
I would say to Mr Lindqvist , on the question of enlargement , that on all my visits to the applicant countries I have sought out the social partners to talk with them .
There are real problems there .
Through PHARE , we are trying to help the development of the dialogue there .
We look at the state of the social dialogue in all the screening exercises on each of the applicants . But it is a very keen point and we will return to it certainly .
Finally , I wish to say to Mrs Schörling that local government is part of CEEP , and I understand they are contemplating a sectoral dialogue .
If that is the case , I would greatly support it .
I thank Mr Peter .
It has been a very useful debate , and I look forward to the continuation and the enhancement of the social dialogue .
Mrs Malone , what happened last week on information and consultation was an enormous step forward .
We look forward to debating that issue in the House at a later date .
Thank you , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 11.30 a.m.
New Transatlantic Marketplace
The next item is the report ( A4-0387 / 98 ) by Mrs Mann , on behalf of the Committee on External Economic Relations , on the Commission communication on the ' New Transatlantic Marketplace ' ( COM ( 98 ) 0125 - C4-0271 / 98 ) .
Mr President , Commissioner Brittan , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to address a few fundamental points before I discuss the report .
Today 's debate will be dominated by the Americans ' threat to impose sanctions in the form of duties on products from Member States of the European Union , in particular from France and the UK , in order to undermine the present regulation on the banana market before 1 January 1999 and to stir up trouble among the Member States .
It is particularly ironic that the General Affairs Council made its decision on adopting the Action Plan for the Transatlantic Economic Partnership on 9 November 1998 , at almost the same time as the Americans decided to impose unilateral sanctions on the European Union .
This step by the Americans threatens the credibility of the whole WTO dispute settlement procedure .
The Americans are within their rights not to agree with the new banana market regulation .
They are within their rights to believe that this regulation is not consistent with WTO rules .
But they are not within their rights to decide this themselves .
However attractive such wild west behaviour may seem at national level , it provokes severe counter-reactions .
Increasing nervousness on the part of the Americans is nevertheless understandable and can be explained largely by their current trade deficit , which is relatively large .
So we should adopt a calmer stance in future .
We are doing well to consolidate and expand the political and economic basis between us .
The banana dispute will not be our last trade dispute ; the next ones , on hormones and steel , are already on the horizon .
We must accept these realities .
Since 1989 and 1990 our relations have been undergoing a sea-change .
The conditions which we formerly took for granted have changed and we have become global competitors .
Economic and trade policy determine more than ever the political actions of the two world powers .
However , we should not forget that we compete on a solid basis of friendship .
Nor should we forget that adapting and strengthening economic relations guarantees jobs on both sides of the Atlantic .
The huge merger of Daimler and Chrysler is only a foretaste of what we can expect in the near future .
The present report on the Action Plan ' Transatlantic Economic Partnership ' expressly supports the initiative of the Commission and the Council .
You will all remember that during the last summit between the European Union and the United States in London , the Council , particularly France , withheld its approval and presented a new plan that was less ambitious .
The result of the process was then the Transatlantic Economic Partnership rather than the Transatlantic Marketplace .
The Council feared that the Commission 's proposal to call for a framework agreement with a general negotiating mandate would result in an uncontrolled transfer of national decision-making powers and scope .
A framework agreement would have had the advantage for the European Parliament of allowing it to be formally consulted .
Now we are merely informed .
The Action Plan for the Transatlantic Economic Partnership proposes firstly the coordination of multilateral activities and secondly the coordination of a bilateral agenda for the following areas : first , removal of technical barriers ; second , intensification of the role of labour in services ; third , increased market access for EU and US companies in government procurement ; fourth , better protection for intellectual property ; fifth , strengthened dialogue and the creation of social cooperation structures in the areas of food , plant and animal health and biotechnology , and the creation of an environmental group .
I believe that this is a good report and we should support it .
However , the creation of an organisational framework should also be part of this report .
Many of the issues that are the subject of negotiations relate to what are regarded as new , sensitive areas , such as biotechnology .
This organisational framework should also define the forms of institutional cooperation between the institutions and procedures involved , and in many cases open the door to agreements , along the lines of mutual recognition , on certification and testing procedures .
To allow this to work in areas that are very sensitive for the consumer , it is essential that the process be absolutely transparent , and that the industries , experts , occupational groups and consumers concerned be kept fully informed and consulted .
We must build up an institutional process of trust so that we can ensure the broad approval of the public .
Certainly , I do not share the fear of some Members of the House and of the consumer associations that we are ignoring the general public .
We have become institutional experts , in a manner of speaking , so it is not amateurs that are taking action at European level , either in the Commission , the Council or Parliament .
We are perfectly capable of managing this process very well .
Mr President , the relationship between the European Union and the United States is a very important one .
We share many common values and interests and , while trade and investment links between us represent the world 's largest economic partnership , it would be wrong to restrict discussions to simply trade and economic matters .
I regret the fact that the more ambitious plans suggested by Sir Leon Brittan under the heading of the new transatlantic marketplace met with such strong opposition in the Council and were therefore not discussed with the US authorities .
Consequently , the obstructive stance of the Council resulted in the more restricted proposals contained in the transatlantic economic partnership .
When the European Parliament discussed the Souchet report in January of this year we expressed the desire for a more comprehensive level of cooperation .
Paragraph 3 of the Souchet resolution pointed to the need for greater dialogue in relation to justice and home affairs .
Paragraph 5 called for greater cooperation regarding the management of crisis situations and the use of peace-keeping forces .
The opinion that I have produced on behalf of the Foreign Affairs Committee attempts to restore the wishes of Parliament and , I hope , of Sir Leon Brittan himself , to ensure that security and defence relations become an important part of the EU-US dialogue .
An EU-US summit will be held shortly and it is important that we are able to examine the state of our respective relationships and resolve any problems , including those in the field of security and defence which are underlined by the current crisis in the Gulf .
I congratulate the rapporteur on her report and I thank her for including in it the specific proposal contained in the Foreign Affairs Committee opinion on this important issue .
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy . ( NL ) Mr President , the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy has given broad support to the transatlantic economic partnership and Mrs Mann 's excellent report on it .
Without in any way playing down the importance of multilateral talks , I think it is good that the two biggest players in the world market should be talking about eliminating barriers to free trade .
Together , the two trading blocs can provide the combined impetus for launching the debate which is needed if a multilateral agreement is ultimately to be concluded .
Of course , that must not mean that the EU and the USA together form a power bloc so that other countries are faced with a fait accompli within the WTO .
But the ideal of regional trading blocs is consistent with the ideals of the WTO .
Apart from long-standing issues which are obviously harder to resolve , there are two newer issues causing me some concern in the current trade relations between the EU and USA .
Firstly there is the metric-only directive .
In the meantime , Commissioner Bangemann has promised at the Internal Market Council that he will bring forward a proposal quickly , though he does not say how quickly , to defer the requirement that products should be labelled using the metric system only .
That proposal ought really to have been made months ago .
I have pressed the Commissioner for it on several occasions .
Europe is all about helping business and industry to play a more powerful role , not about hampering it .
The Economic Affairs Committee proposed in an amendment that conclusion of the transatlantic economic partnership should be conditional on the USA going over to the metric system .
We gave careful thought to this .
We were sorry that the REX Committee watered down our amendment to the point where it was neither fish nor fowl .
I hope that Mr Bangemann gets the message .
There has to be an end to the burden placed on European business and industry by American recalcitrance .
I think that Mr Bangemann and Sir Leon Brittan must put pressure on the USA .
My second concern is about anti-dumping measures in the EU and the USA .
Mrs Mann devotes just one paragraph to this in her report , and the European steel industry complains that it receives unreasonably harsh treatment .
Even the US Congress says in a major report that the ratio last year was 35 anti-dumping cases on the American side compared with just two on the European side .
Mr President , these relations are also extremely important as far as jobs are concerned .
On behalf of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs , I would make the point that 59 % of EU investment goes to the USA , and the figure in the other direction is 44 % , so to both parties that is very important in terms of jobs .
In an increasingly global world economy , however , there is more to it than trade relations alone .
We also have a responsibility to work together to tackle important issues of the kind which can lead to a new declaration by the International Labour Organisation on fundamental labour standards such as freedom of association , the right to collective bargaining , non-discrimination , the abolition of forced labour and of child labour .
Both parties can play a part here in the forthcoming WTO negotiations .
But there are more things of relevance to the social and employment dimension .
Let me quote a few of them .
Take European works councils , for example : numerous companies in Europe with parent companies in the USA come under the directive on European works councils , and there needs to be a proper exchange of information here between US and European firms and governments .
Another issue is that of pension funds .
Europe is a long way behind when it comes to the provision of investment loans .
Here too we need to work together , take notice of each other and talk to one another .
Lastly , Mr President , agriculture is a not insignificant obstacle in transatlantic negotiations .
In my view , things can get better here if not only the EU authorities but the US authorities too take greater account of social and employment issues in rural areas .
Optimum competition does not always have the best outcome for all parties in the world .
A balanced approach is needed here .
As my very last point , I should like to say that our education and training programmes ought also to include provision for exchanges with America ..
First of all I should like to congratulate Mrs Mann on her admirable report and also on the way in which she has put the banana contest in its proper perspective .
I will come to that at a later stage , but I entirely agree with her that we must not allow it to completely distort our consideration of relations between the European Union and the United States , which relate to wider issues .
Some of those have already been referred to by the previous speakers .
I am grateful to Mr Cushnahan for his kind remarks about the scaling down of the new transatlantic marketplace proposals .
They were more ambitious .
I do not apologise for that .
Nonetheless they have certainly informed the transatlantic economic partnership .
But important as the transatlantic economic partnership is , Mrs Peijs is quite right to say that the multilateral aspect of that should not allow us to give the impression of ganging up against the rest of the world .
We are cooperating to try and make faster progress in the multilateral talks , not seeking to impose a diktat , still less a fait accompli .
Mrs Boogerd-Quaak is right in saying that the discussions that we have with the United States have to include matters relating to social and employment questions , just as Mr Cushnahan is right in saying that there is a very important security and defence component in our relationship , even though that has to be pursued outside the transatlantic economic partnership .
Nonetheless , the transatlantic economic partnership is the most recent feature of the relationship , deriving from the new transatlantic marketplace and now , as Mrs Mann reminded us , endorsed by the Council last week in the form of an action plan .
Negotiating directives have been approved for the Commission to start bilateral negotiations on a series of agreements relating to technical barriers to trade in goods , services , public procurement and intellectual property .
It is a major initiative to consolidate and enhance transatlantic relations , including both multilateral and bilateral elements .
Bilaterally the core element is the tackling of trade issues such as regulatory barriers , which are the main current obstacle to transatlantic business while preserving a high level of protection for health , safety , consumers and the environment .
If we can achieve a degree of progress in dealing with these barriers , that promises great new economic opportunities for European firms and consumers .
If we can stimulate further multilateral liberalisation then I believe we will be able to make great headway in the new millennium and save a great deal of time .
The European Parliament has played a key role in this process , first with its call in January this year for a new impulse in transatlantic relations and afterwards through its involvement in the evolution of the transatlantic economic partnership .
I am very glad that we have been able to work together .
This will need to continue , not only in the face of the threat represented by the banana dispute but also in dealing with , for example , the unjust and inaccurate allegations that have recently been made about the European Union not doing its share in taking the strain of additional Asian exports .
So I welcome the very operational report of Mrs Mann and thank her for the support that she and Parliament have given to the development of the relationship .
I can give you some preliminary reactions to the report .
We fully share your desire to see positive results in the areas of MRAs , food safety , government procurement , intellectual property , compliance with international rules in the liberalisation process and many other areas .
I welcome the European Parliament 's desire to enhance its involvement in the work to be done on the transatlantic economic partnership .
Unfortunately all this has been overshadowed in recent days not only by the position of the United States on Asian exports but most of all by the recent controversy over bananas .
The position is really quite simple .
The WTO ruled against certain aspects of our regime and gave us until 1 January next year to comply with the ruling .
We have taken action to comply fully with it and a revised regime which we believe to be entirely consistent with WTO rules will take effect on 1 January .
The US is entitled to disagree with us about the compatibility of our new regime with the WTO rules .
It has the right to challenge this if it wishes , but only according to the procedures established by the WTO which are readily available to deal with precisely this sort of disagreement .
No WTO member has the right unilaterally to judge the compliance of another , nor to be judge and jury in its own cause .
In resorting to unilateral action the United States is setting itself above the law and resorting to the principle of ' might is right ' .
This threatens to damage the system which we both helped to create .
It will seriously undermine the confidence of WTO members in that system .
Therefore , we have publicly called on the United States to desist from unilateral action and seek to resolve our differences according to the lawful multilateral channels which are readily available and are the sole means that a law-abiding country should choose .
We are ready to cooperate with the United States to deal with our differences within the WTO rules and procedures but we will not do so under the threat of illegal unilateral action .
Unless the United States desists from that we will have no alternative but to go to the WTO and begin proceedings against the United States for its unlawful action .
I regret that this issue has overshadowed - at least in the headlines - the broader and more important work we have been doing .
It is , indeed , as Mrs Mann has rightly said , ironic that this should be the case .
I look to the European Parliament to be robust in the defence of European interests where they are under attack but also to take the broader view of what we need to do for the future .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , it seems that the issue of trade and economic relations between the European Union and the USA is one which usually inspires very heated debates and , I would say , intense passions .
That happens because so far we have been unable to form relations of mutual trust and open , sincere communication , despite the prolonged talks and negotiations , despite the planning of an ambitious programme and despite the honest efforts both by the Commission and by our rapporteur , our esteemed colleague Mrs Erika Mann , whom I congratulate on her report .
From what you have said , Commissioner , it is clear that we are still facing a very difficult interlocutor who is also burdened by activities which have shown that the United States , to promote its own exclusive interests , does not hesitate to violate international rules , and this to the cost of the poorest and weakest countries .
The truth of what I am saying is demonstrated by the fact that problems are still outstanding related to extraterritorial American legislation , while competition against the Union is constantly becoming keener .
So in view of the forthcoming transatlantic summit conference , the European Parliament must today send out some very clear messages , such as these :
First , the bipartite approach is acceptable to the extent that it does not impede multipartite negotiations at WTO level and does not create obstacles to access by third countries to markets in the Union and the USA .
Second , respect must be ensured for the rules of international law , and a definitive solution must be found for the dispute concerning extraterritorial laws .
Third , any commitments undertaken must be compatible with the acquis communautaire , especially with the CAP and the trade agreements we have concluded , particularly those with our traditional partners .
They must also be compatible with the commitments undertaken by the Union under the Lomé Convention and in the context of the enlargement procedure with central and eastern European countries .
Fourth , cooperation must include and emphasise social issues , such as securing the rights of working people and safeguarding collective bargaining , the abolition of child labour and forced labour , job creation , and the mutual recognition of qualifications .
Fifth , any agreement must be compatible with the high standards that prevail in Europe concerning health and safety , consumer protection , and the protection of the natural and human environment .
Sixth , cooperation must lead to the establishment of rules on the operation of credit institutions in all countries and control of the international movement of capital . I say this bearing in mind the present economic and money-market crisis .
Finally , the European Parliament must be kept constantly informed about the negotiations , most particularly about matters that relate to co-decision procedures .
As our rapporteur Mrs Mann said , there must be transparency and full information .
Mr President , the Group of the European People 's Party welcomes Mrs Mann 's report and congratulates her on her very useful arguments presented here over 43 pages , though they have been overshadowed by current events .
The USA 's relations with the European Union are a high priority for all of us , and in future , despite all the conflicts caused in our bilateral relations both by ourselves and particularly by the USA , we will continue to place great importance on the fact that we are dependent upon one another .
Bananas , hormones , steel , the US trade deficit , all these things make us nervous .
What increasingly concerns me about our relations with the USA is the fact that it is always the parliamentarians who put their governments under pressure and that administrations are often too cowardly to observe WTO rules because they always have to give in to domestic policy .
It is precisely this that should make us , as Members of the European Parliament , intensify our own contacts with Congress , and not rely on the Commission , which always seems to be told : we cannot do anything , it is the members of Congress who do that .
The Helms-Burton and d 'Amato Acts , which violate the principles of international law , were also the work of members of Congress .
Thankfully d 'Amato cannot be voted in again , so that leaves one less to be considered .
I say this because it must be clear that , as Sir Leon said , it must be the WTO requirements that determine our rules .
The WTO sets the standard for free competition , and in free competition we compete with each other .
Competition will become increasingly fierce , borders will become increasingly fluid , technology and in particular investment will become an area over which we Members of Parliament no longer have an overall view .
We do not always see the source of the conflicts in question .
This is all the more reason for us to support the Commission so that it does not debate for too long or look for compromises , but can often take a tough stance .
The USA often accuses us of being only paper tigers or lightweights because when it is being tough our reaction is not tough enough .
We must move more quickly in future with the new measures .
As Parliament we can perhaps take a tougher stance than the Commission does .
We are also accused of not really being affected by the growth of the Asian markets while the USA suffers as it has to take in all the cheap products .
We face the same the problems , although it has to be said that one or two aspects of our trade policy are also rather doubtful , and this has nothing to do with the USA .
We must monitor this and not simply say for the sake of national interests that one form of protectionism is good and the other bad .
None of the 15 Member States would bear scrutiny here !
In conclusion , I believe that an appreciation of mutual-interest politics is always advantageous if we advocate the interests that are important for our European economy strongly and consistently .
I would encourage us to intervene again in the current discussion about the USA 's violation of the principles of international law .
This report has given us a good opportunity to do so .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I warmly compliment Mrs Mann on her excellent report .
The transatlantic economic partnership which has now been agreed can put an end to the succession of trade disputes we have seen in recent years .
Remember the biotechnology bananas and all the rest of it .
The agreement may serve as an example to the rest of the world .
The European Union and the United States are the two biggest trading blocs in the world and each others ' main trading partners as well .
Bilateral agreement between two leading trading blocs will enable the Union and the USA to develop a transferable trading model consistent with the multilateral framework of trade , and in particular with the rules of the WTO .
My group deplores the fact that the Council has given a negotiating mandate to the Commission and already adopted an action plan without waiting to hear the European Parliament 's position .
I agree with Mrs Mann and Mr Kittelmann .
A new transatlantic economic partnership has major implications for private citizens and businesses in terms of jobs and prosperity .
Democratic scrutiny is absolutely vital here , because only that will guarantee the requisite public acceptance .
So my group also welcomes Mrs Mann 's suggestion that a joint parliamentary committee should be set up , because we have seen time after time that solutions to disputes reached at civil servant or government level are regularly torpedoed again by the US Congress .
Structural dialogue between parliamentary delegations and Members of Parliament may perhaps put an end to this .
I would thus urge the Commission and the Council once again to stop talking to the Americans on their own and to involve Parliament to a far greater extent ; they must not keep adopting plans without first waiting to hear what Parliament thinks .
Mr President , Commissioner , ever since the initiative of the transatlantic agenda , our relations with America have been visible .
But I see that they are not sufficiently tangible , and this action plan may improve things here .
Regrettably the action plan has come into being without the European Parliament being consulted in any way , and so I too support Mrs Mann 's suggestion for a joint parliamentary committee linking the US Congress and our Parliament as the final democratic counterbalance in the new relationship .
I must compliment Mrs Mann anyway on the form and content of her report .
The new partnership may prevent bilateral trade disputes from ending in threats of sanctions , as happened over the EU 's policy on bananas .
But there are one or two things which are not covered .
To my mind , too little attention is paid to the audiovisual imbalance .
The USA does well out of the European market in this respect , but makes no concessions at all itself .
We as the EU , with so many wonderful cultures , just cannot swallow that .
Certainly not !
Furthermore , I hope that future political and economic dialogue will address the question of anti-dumping measures .
Mrs Peijs has talked about that .
My group is very anxious too to preserve the acquis communautaire and especially the services of general interest which have a considerable influence on our social and economic cohesion .
These aspects must not be neglected .
Lastly , Mr President , the partnership will be good for jobs .
As Mrs Mann says , we shall have Daimler Benz and Chrysler on both sides of the Atlantic .
I hope , though , that this initiative will stimulate not just commerce pure and simple , but above all the values and cultures which exist in the relationship between the USA and Europe .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , a transatlantic relationship that is of mutual benefit and positive for everyone else in the world is a fundamental political issue .
Three conditions must be met : we must work to make trade more compatible with sustainable development and social welfare ; we must respect multilateral solidarity and commitments ; and we must guarantee real democratic control .

By rejecting the MAI and transatlantic free trade projects , several European countries have highlighted the importance of these requirements and signalled their disapproval of a certain way of conducting external relations .
We need a more autonomous and unified European Union and we would ask our American partners to show more loyalty towards the commitments they have made .
The United States is renewing commercial tensions and is not respecting the London commitment on extraterritorial laws .
We must remind them that the enormous deficit in the United States ' balance of payments is inseparable from the privilege they have of financing their growth through other countries .
The European Parliament is therefore faced with a contradiction : the renewal of aggressive commercial behaviour on the part of the Americans , and concern , on our part , for the development of dialogue .
It is under these conditions that we will undoubtedly be forced to take other political initiatives .
For the time being , we are taking note of the Transatlantic Economic Partnership and the Action Plan .
We welcome the fact that it is not simply a resumption of the NTM project , which project was particularly dangerous because of its aim of guaranteeing free trade in services and because it favoured bilateral settlements , at the risk of stifling multilateral progress .
We are also pleased that some of the provisions included in the Draft Action Plan have been removed by the Council , particularly a bilateral standstill agreement that would have suspended the development of Community rules .
We are pleased , too , that the Council is resuming its supervisory role by placing bilateral negotiations under its mandate .
We would finally like to stress the need to develop a new political doctrine for the Union in terms of both the content of the negotiations and democratic control .
We want to discuss the future WTO negotiations with the Americans , but has the impact of the Uruguay Round been felt ?
Do we know what we want to say on the new issues of society and regulation ?
Within the partnership , we must not prepare the basis of an agreement between two giants - the United States and Europe - before the next millennium .
Dialogue must only be exploratory and we have other friends to talk to .
As regards bilateral negotiations , we would like to look at them on a case-by-case basis .
We must defend employment and our industries , and this would mean strengthening their solidarity before the negotiations start .
Finally , I would like to emphasise the fact that our institutional procedures are showing a political and democratic deficit .
We call on the Council and the Commission to inform and consult the European Parliament both before and during the dialogue and negotiation process .
Consultation of the civil society , which today is inexistent , must be organised , and it is up to the European Parliament itself to play a key role here in guiding firms , unions , associations and public opinion .
Mr President , in order to prevent any misunderstandings right from the beginning , I must say that a good relationship with the USA is very important to us .
But not in the way you see it , Sir Leon .
Your first priority is the removal of so-called barriers to trade , and this includes political decision-making powers .
Your plans for the NTM were rejected by the Council in the spring , and now a slimmed-down version of the TEP is on the table , practically a disguised MAI .
But why should we applaud something that was rigged in advance ?
The negotiating mandate for the TEP was given long ago .
Yet we in the committee were only able to see it when the vote had already taken place .
That is absurd .
But some of its content is even more absurd .
It does not contain anything about setting up joint programmes for sustainable development in the world economy , nor does it say anything about commitment to a better quality of life , about using fewer natural resources , or about strengthening the multilateral system .
On the contrary , Charline Barschifsky stated on 28 July what the important issues are for the USA : the rights of US industry , the enforcement of US patent laws , crushing European protection laws in the field of biotechnology , the business interests of American banana producers , Helms-Burton , hormonized meat and genetically-modified food on European tables .
You , Sir Leon Brittan , wish to sacrifice all European and national standards on the altar of free trade , in accordance with your neoliberal philosophy .
Instead of constantly hatching new projects you should do your homework .
You gave in on the issue of Helms-Burton instead of enforcing WTO rules .
As a result , the Americans have taken legal proceedings against European firms in 5 911 cases .
Now the US does not care about the WTO and is threatening a full-scale attack on European products if the EU does not given in to US interests in the banana dispute .
We have been waiting for a reply from you since September on ECHELON , the unspeakable EU / US secret service dossier .
The Greens certainly do not want to see more and more national and European consumer protection laws , for which we have fought so hard , being violated by dubious trade agreements in the name of free trade .
We can only approve the report if our amendments are adopted .
Mr President , I would naturally like to congratulate Mrs Mann on her report , which I believe to be balanced on the whole .
This new partnership is obviously preferable to any notion of a single market between the European Union and the US , which was rightly rejected by the Council last April .
The Action Plan proposed today by the Commission to establish this dialogue provides a framework for the negotiations in the months ahead .
In my opinion , it is , for example , essential to establish a common strategy between the European Union and the United States with a view to laying down minimum social standards within both the WTO and the ILO .
It may be beneficial to have discussions on services or electronic commerce provided that this does not undermine countries ' cultural interests , and I am naturally thinking here of the audiovisual sector .
The creation of a global economic area in the field of electronic commerce is , to my mind , completely premature , particularly when we know that the US is the market leader in terms of the Internet .
This framework must therefore clearly establish the boundaries of the debate in terms of social , environmental and cultural issues .
It is true that similar action plans exist and serve as a basis for discussion between the Union and other countries , such as Canada , New Zealand and Japan .
But there is a fundamental difference between those countries and the United States : with them we do not negotiate with a gun at our heads .
In fact , the US is once again threatening to impose 100 % customs duties on us , jeopardising the very existence of some of our companies .
And surprise , surprise , the products concerned come from countries in the Union that produce bananas .
So after the famous Helms-Burton legislation , the United States is again beginning to use gunboat diplomacy , and we cannot accept that .
We do not underestimate the role of the American multinationals behind the Clinton administration .
I am thinking here of Chiquita in the case of bananas , but also of the American oil companies that are encouraging the bombing of Iraq .
That is why I believe that this notion of partnership must be suspended , and I call on the Commission to draw up a list of retaliatory measures aimed at certain American companies .
We must stop being naive !
If the Americans want to complain , then let them , but let them do it before the WTO . And let us hope this time that the body responsible for settling disputes gives a clear ruling on the banana issue .
In the meantime , my group believes that the report by Mrs Mann , good as it may be , should be referred back to committee .
Mr President , recent developments that have taken place have tended to temper somewhat the optimism surrounding the report by Mrs Mann on the future of transatlantic economic relations .
The rapporteur herself has just admitted this .
In this respect , the entirely unacceptable threats of trade retaliation illegally made by Congress towards a number of our countries , outside the WTO dispute settlement procedure on the banana issue , show that our partners have an uncontrollable propensity for unilateralism . And this is true even though everyone knows that the economic survival of entire regions of the European Union , particularly in the French overseas territories , depends on a solution to the banana conflict .
Moreover , on 21 October , Congress introduced a new provision that clearly has an extraterritorial effect , by adopting a corresponding amendment to Article 211 of the Finance Act , aimed at banning all transactions involving a well-known confiscated brand .
This provision , which aims to block the commercial development of the Pernod-Ricard company on the American market , is further proof that the United States , far from renouncing unilateralism , is , on the contrary , forging ahead with sanctions that have an extraterritorial effect .
This violation , which is taking place scarcely six months after the signing of the London agreement , makes us seriously question the credibility of the commitments that have been negotiated by the Commission with our American partners .
This is all the more worrying since , in addition , Congress does not seem willing to vote for the derogations provided for by the London agreement , which itself still does not completely settle the question of American laws with extraterritorial effect .
If we add to this use of unilateral instruments ( which cannot fail to affect the implementation of the TEP ) , the lack of progress in the negotiations on government procurement and intellectual property ( areas that are essential for Europe ) , the divergent positions on the future multilateral trade negotiations , and the stonewalling attitude that was maintained by the United States at the Buenos Aires Conference , it appears that the current situation is very worrying and requires a great deal of determination on our part .
This determination can be easily seen in the Council , which has ensured , in particular , that the audiovisual sector is excluded and the status quo for services clearly rejected within the framework of the TEP .
We hope that the Commission will also display such determination .
Perhaps the Council has some concerns in this respect , since it thought it necessary to formally state that the Commission could not give a definite decision on the Union 's position in the future multilateral trade negotiations , particularly in the audiovisual sector , without the Council 's approval .
It is unfortunate that in the recitals the rapporteur limits herself to deploring the institutional imbalance and does not mention these different and important concerns that may weigh heavily on the development of trade relations with the United States and on the implementation of the Transatlantic Economic Partnership if they are not tackled with enough determination by Europe .

Mr President , the debate about the United States and Europe is an old one .
Today , Commissioner , we are returning to it in a context that has three aspects : the United States ' trade deficit , which we have all discussed ; the negotiations in the World Trade Organisation , which are multilateral and that is why we cannot understand this bilateral move , unless we recall the unpleasant memories of Blair House and your colleague , Franz Andriessen , at the beginning of the 1990s ; and finally , of course , the American tradition of the big stick policy , with its attacks on Iraq , imperialism in the audiovisual sector , and selfishness in Rio .
This all means that we may well have doubts about the sincerity of the United States .
Everyone has mentioned - including Mr Sainjon and other speakers - the banana issue , the unilateral 100 % customs duties , the Helms-Burton legislation , Libya , Iran , Pernod-Ricard , etc .
This leads me to put two questions to you , Commissioner .
Firstly , I would like you to tell me about the strategy , the principle and the philosophy involved .
Are the world trade negotiations necessary for the wealth of nations ?
We signed the GATT in 1994 .
Has that led to increased wealth in Japan , Brazil , Korea or Thailand ?
Has unemployment fallen ?
Conversely , we rejected the MAI , the Multilateral Agreement on Investment .
Who suffered because of that ?
No-one did .
The truth is that world trade , despite the myth , only plays a residual role .
Let us look at the beef and veal market , for example .
It does not even represent 10 % of our production .
And if we had another policy besides Article 104c of the Maastricht Treaty , another policy besides austerity and rationing , we would have an internal demand that would do away with all this rubbish about having to find external markets .
Secondly , I would like to know how we can have an independent trade policy when we do not have an independent foreign policy , when we do not have an independent military policy and when we behave as we have done in Iraq , the country of the Code of Hammurabi , the country of Babylonia ?
I was with Mr Tariq Aziz three weeks ago and he asked the following question : ' I am offering Europe the best oilfields in southern Iraq .
Why will Europe not accept them ? ' Mr Sainjon gave you the answer : when we have a global market , we should not hold bilateral negotiations .
We are a parliament : we are not traders , we are not a chamber of commerce , we are representatives of the people .
Mr President , I take the floor to make clear my support for Mrs Mann 's report .
As debate is focusing mainly on the background to this report rather than on its content , I should like to say that it might initially appear that , in principle , we are offering an olive branch whilst our friends in the United States are digging up the battle axe .
I do not in fact believe that this is the case , because we could have applied many of the arguments we now use in connection with United States imperialism to each other in Europe in the past .
Nevertheless , I do believe we must send two clear messages to our friends and allies in the United States : firstly , that the association known as the Transatlantic Economic Partnership essentially implies a shared responsibility on the world stage , at global level , and therefore at multilateral not just at bilateral level ; and secondly , that we are not concerned solely with trade at this moment .
We are indeed concerned with trade , but also , and especially at the moment , we wish to emphasise the notion of shared responsibility for the world as a whole . In particular , we are concerned with the financial situation , bearing in mind that our discussion is taking place on the eve of the introduction of the euro .
I feel this is the first message we should send , and I for one have never been in favour of adopting a defensive position as a matter of course .
I am convinced that we Europeans put forward very good reasons and arguments when we state that a market and a relationship have to be civilised and bilateral , and that they cannot be controlled solely by one party , in the kind of atmosphere portrayed - if I may be permitted a reference to the cinema - in ' High Noon ' , where the Sheriff wields absolute power .
I believe that we are and must continue to be partners on equal terms .
My second concern is that we must make it quite clear to our friends in the United States that we do not share the unilateral vision of managed trade they uphold and that is particularly evident not only in Act 301 and ' Super 301 ' , but also in extraterritorial legislation such as the Helms-Burton Act and the D 'Amato Act . In addition , it underlies several other measures that contravene the regulations of the World Trade Organisation .
In my opinion , this report reflects our philosophy .
However , we obviously need to do more .
In the first instance , we need , for example , to coordinate the Commission , the Council and Parliament , given that they are not presently coordinated .
In addition to being absent , the Council takes decisions without consulting Parliament .
I think we need to prove that we can act as one , like the United States .
If we do , I am sure we will be listened to .
Mr President , I should firstly like to thank Mrs Mann for her report , which we support . I should also like to express my appreciation to the Commissioner for his efforts towards developing the best possible transatlantic relations .
Unfortunately , what seemed at first to be a good idea - the Transatlantic Agenda - turned into something of a damp squib after April , when the Council took a number of decisions we perhaps did not all support .
I agree entirely with Mr Enrique Barón who has just said that we ought to get on well , as well as we can .
Commissioner , you said that might is not necessarily right .
It remains to be seen who will have most might , once the euro is in place , the European Union 's institutions have developed and the 11 countries - soon to be more - are working together .
In any case , power must be vested in the bodies , and we need to learn to use them to resolve conflicts .
As the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy has stated , the existing obstacles must be removed , and here , we are certainly not in a very happy position .
The situation concerning Asian exports and the banana dispute are not exactly encouraging examples . Nevertheless , we have to ensure that , within the framework of the WTO , we can reach multilateral agreements that are compatible with the acquis communautaire , the CAP , the Lomé Convention , and the association and enlargement agreements .
Commissioner , Parliament will support you , in the hope that we can establish a relationship on equal terms with our friends in the United States , insofar as the provisions of the law allow . It is quite clear , though , that Parliament will have to be more involved .
As Parliament can express its support for your claims , you will be in a stronger negotiating position and so will we .
It is not acceptable that our companies should still be experiencing difficulties in the area of government procurement in the United States , and there is a long list of other problems I do not think it appropriate to elaborate on here and now .
We support the report , trust that deadlines for achieving the objectives are set and that we will find the way of enjoying the best possible relationship with our friends in the United States .
Mr President , I want to concentrate on one area only .
I have read few reports - even from the Commission - that have been stuffed so full of three and four-letter acronyms .
The one that is missing is GMOs .
If there is one area where US and European public opinion contrasts most it is here .
In the European Union consumers are particularly resistant to genetically modified food and the governments of Luxembourg and Austria are moving against current European policy .
On the other hand , in America crops which have been genetically modified are increasing and the proportion of maize now grown under GM conditions is quite large .
Then there is this brave attempt to remove trade barriers between these two major trading blocs .
My question to the Commissioner is : In such a market place as he proposes , how do we protect European citizens ' preferences in public health and environmental areas , as illustrated by the GMO issue ?
Mr President , the relations that link the United States and the European Union are very special .
We form the most important trade relationship in the world .
Therefore , the project for a new Transatlantic Economic Partnership carries great hopes for our respective economies and reasserts the objectives of Euro-American multilateral cooperation .
The global economy requires us to participate in this regular dialogue , but recent events lead me to fear that this enhanced partnership , which we have achieved after months of work and negotiations , might be at risk if one of the partners does not apply the principles on which it is founded .
The threats made by the United States of unilateral sanctions against European products , such as bananas and meat , are of some concern for the future , to say the least .
A solution will have to be found to this dispute within the framework of the WTO , that is , through the multilateral legal channel .
In any case , the application of unilateral sanctions against European products on the part of the United States would be unacceptable and would seriously damage the trust and cooperation that characterise our relationship .
I agree with the rapporteur and I would like to pay tribute here to her excellent work and to insist that as far as possible Parliament be involved in and informed of the development of transatlantic relations .
In addition , I fully agree with the proposal to create a US-Europe interparliamentary group .
Mr President , the French left-wing government overturned the MAI agreement in the OECD , which it considered a threat to national sovereignty in social issues and matters relating to working life and the environment .
My thanks to France .
In a new combination of letters of the alphabet , TEP , the Transatlantic Economic Partnership , poses the same problems as the MAI .
The TEP is a slimmed-down version of the MAI , Mr Kreissl-Dörfler said , and he is right .
We are hanging flesh on the same skeleton .
Free trade , which is the freedom of markets rather than people , is often an attack on the structures set up in a nation to protect its people and its environment .
They were created with good intentions .
Market forces have no social or ecological responsibility .
For example , the views of consumers in Europe on the one hand , and the USA on the other , on health foods are fundamentally different .
We do not want to eat hormone-treated meat .
We do not want to eat poison-resistant , genetically-modified soya , maize or potatoes , nor any other new American foods .
One problem in particular is the agreement on the reciprocal approval of products : approved one place , approved everywhere .
Mr President , I would like to make a few comments . I would firstly like to say that I am surprised that the United States is using retaliatory measures towards the European Union .
In the case of bananas , it is quite obvious .
I am amazed that we are surprised because , in fact , it is not the first time .
The United States has been playing this type of game for a very long time and , without getting involved here in kneejerk anti-American reactions , we should nevertheless remember the serious case of the Helms-Burton Act in which the European Union adopted an extremely timid attitude .
We even withdrew our complaint to the World Trade Organisation - in accordance with who knows what regulation and what principle - but this demonstrated two things : intransigence on the one hand , and weakness on the other .
It therefore seems to me to be time to put an end to this imbalance , particularly since - and I would like to mention this point - the United States has just showed itself up once again through its intransigence in Buenos Aires where it totally ruined a conference that was absolutely essential for the future of the planet .
My second comment relates to the involvement of the European Parliament in the process we are discussing today .
Are we going to continue to allow ourselves to be treated like this over the months ahead ?
As far as I am concerned , I do not think we should run after a moving target .
We firstly had the MAI , and I believe that we managed , along with others , to avert the danger .
There is the New Transatlantic Marketplace , which has been rejected by the Council , and we are now being offered the Transatlantic Economic Partnership .
When I look at what that project contains , I do not have the same positive outlook as some of my colleagues .
I think that it basically involves stepping up and extending bilateral cooperation with the United States , even if we add to it the multilateral dimension .
And it involves making general use of the principle of mutual recognition , particularly in areas such as biotechnology , food quality , the environment and social protection , which seems to me to be extremely dangerous .
If Parliament accepts the idea of not intervening from the outset in this type of debate , I think that it is making a fool of itself and bringing discredit upon itself in the face of public opinion .
Mr President , improved trade relations with the USA are a welcome development .
Given the increasing trend towards globalisation , it is useful to have a good relationship with trading partners whose interests are similar to ours .
The position of the individual Member States is fairly weak within a multilateral trading system , certainly since the advent of the World Trade Organisation .
So this is a job for the European Union , especially when it comes to looking for like-minded trading partners .
But I have a few cautionary comments to make on the new transatlantic marketplace .
Earlier this year , Parliament approved a resolution on the environmental , health and consumer protection aspects of world trade .
Those aspects are extremely important for the transatlantic marketplace .
The Commission 's communication does not take sufficient account of them .
I agree with the rapporteur , Mrs Mann , when she insists that there can be no tampering with European legislation in this area .
Another word of caution on the new transatlantic partnership concerns the place of the European Union in multilateral bodies and agreements .
The Union 's position in these must remain independent of the USA , especially in debate with and about the developing world .
I am not talking here of the so-called ' banana preferences ' referred to in Amendment No 4 .
I am concerned to ensure that this new transatlantic marketplace should not hamper the European Union in its worldwide pursuit of sustainable development and a fair distribution of prosperity .
Nor must the new transatlantic marketplace lead to a widening of the gap between north and south .
The same goes for other initiatives for cooperation by developed nations , for example the multilateral agreement on investment .
Lastly , I would like consideration to be given to the cultural issues on the transatlantic agenda .
There are important differences in approach here between the European Union and the USA .
The Member States of the European Union , for example , have a different system for protecting intellectual property .
On the question of whether or not a royalty should be paid for books made available on the Internet , we cannot allow the Americans to dictate to us .
Europe 's cultural identity must not be left to the mercy of the free market .
Mr President , the report by our colleague remains very quiet about the serious imbalance that characterises the economic and trade relations between the European Union and the United States .
However , the draftsmen of the opinions - whose opinions are annexed to the report - all mentioned this imbalance , in other words , the United States ' unilateral domination of Europe .
This domination is not a fabrication .
It was the subject of a theory a good few years ago by Professor François Perroux of the Collège de France in Paris .
The Committee on Foreign Affairs , Security and Defence Policy is , in fact , totally silent on this point , yet it is perhaps in the area of defence and arms that Europe is subject , in the most serious way possible , to American leadership , even going so far as accepting the gunboat diplomacy the United States currently applies towards European countries like Yugoslavia .
For its part , the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy pointed out , very appropriately , that the discussions with the United States on the transatlantic marketplace should have respected the acquis communautaire , particularly in the agriculture sector , the association agreements and the Lomé Convention , which is far from being the case .
The Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights pointed out that the problem raised by the unilateral Helms-Burton and d 'Amato-Kennedy Acts was still not settled .
The Committee on Employment and Social Affairs fears the loss of agricultural jobs in Europe with these transatlantic negotiations .
The Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection , in paragraph 4 of its opinion , fears discrimination against European industry .
The Committee on Culture , Youth , Education and the Media states in paragraph 7 that European television programmes only account for 2 % of the American market while American productions totally dominate this sector in Europe .
This really is unilateral trade where Europeans are playing the role of the ' submissive colony ' .
Finally , the American federal states do not always feel bound by the agreements signed in Washington .
We have seen several examples of this , particularly in the case of the market for electrical engineering a few years ago .
With these few comments , we can see clearly that Europe is scarcely more than a satellite of the United States , and the real objective of this report should have been to discuss that issue .
The transatlantic negotiations should aim to restore equality .
But there is no question of that .
The project for a transatlantic marketplace , as it stands , will give a little more encouragement to the colonisation of Europe by the American economic powers .
We must reject this .
Mr President , this is an excellent report but I have to say that I do regret its juxtaposition to the deep concern many of us have expressed here today about the threat to our banana regime .
Commissioner Brittan , I heard you say last Friday on the BBC that the ongoing dispute with the United States is actually not about bananas but about trade rules and the obligation to comply with them .
I have to say - and I know you are aware of this - that the poor farmers in the Caribbean are not going to be impressed by what they might see as a rather technocratic approach .
They are bewildered and frightened by what they see as a relentless onslaught on the banana regime by the United States .
If they are to grow another crop , as has been suggested , then - as you have said yourself - they are likely to resort to growing drugs .
Therefore the principles here are very important indeed .
As you rightly said earlier , sabre-rattling by the United States and the threat of sanctions against the European Union is something that we deeply regret , especially since there is no threat whatsoever to the United States ' own economy .
There are a number of questions that we need to ask .
Is this dispute likely to be about rules ; is it about hormones in beef ; is it about the Democrats ' pay-off to Chiquita bananas ?
The Caribbean bananas which enter the European market account for only 7 % of the EU 's market in bananas and also , if this wrangle is about Article 13 of WTO , there are other North-South arrangements that do not sit that happily with Article 13 .
I hope the United States recognises that as well .
This is , I hope , the very last act in this banana drama that has been going on for many years .
It needs to be shown up for what it is .
I hope that the European Union will stand firm and say that there is a moral issue here , an issue of obligation and responsibility to our traditional suppliers in the Caribbean in particular .
I hope that you will continue to make the case for real justice for the people of the Caribbean in the face of what is perceived by all of us here as the completely unacceptable attitude of the United States towards the European Union .
Mr President , I have no intention of repeating the general statements made by previous speakers on the quality of the report . It covers all the key issues and I therefore congratulate Mrs Mann .
Nevertheless , we regret the lack of mechanisms to prevent the United States from taking unilateral action in contravention of World Trade Organisation arrangements and to the detriment of bilateral relations .
I do not want to talk about bananas .
What had to be said has already been said by the other Members .
No mechanisms are included to provide for concerted action in connection with third countries , such as China or Japan .
Issues as important as the protection of databases , the protection of patents and intellectual property were omitted from the negotiations .
I regret too that the liberalisation of international telecommunications , product responsibility , the harmonisation of customs issues and the standardisation and simplification of information required for business were not dealt with either .
Mr President , we are convinced that transatlantic relations can be seen as an opportunity for Europe , especially in respect of difficulties still outstanding .
Some of these problems are sizeable - we need only think of the barriers to trade and investment . Above all else , rules and regulations are what constitute the greatest difficulty and have given rise to a number of bilateral conflicts over the years .
All things considered , the new transatlantic marketplace could serve to safeguard consumer interests , given the stated aim of eliminating by 2010 all existing tariffs on industrial goods , thanks to new agreements negotiated on the basis of mutual recognition , the so-called MRAs . These , in our opinion , should reproduce the levels of consumer protection , safeguards and environmental safety currently guaranteed by EU rules within the Community .
Mr President , first of all I should like to say that I will always be the first to defend close links with the United States : we are talking about the world 's two main blocs and they both have special responsibilities .
We believe that , apart from the bilateral links uniting us , we should endeavour to strengthen multilateral arrangements , provided that we bear in mind the interests of smaller countries as well as the United States and Europe .
Of course , we must refer to the backward step taken over the banana issue .
A mountain has been made out of a molehill .
As far as bananas are concerned , what is at stake are bananas from Madeira - as a Portuguese Member I have to speak about them - but also from the Canary Islands and certain ACP countries .
What is at stake are potential social problems for people with no alternative way of earning a living .
Unless we lend a little support to banana production , I do not see what alternatives we might offer .
I would like to add that this is not a typical issue and I hope that no others crop up . This is also feared , as it happens , by the rapporteur , Mrs Erika Mann , whom I congratulate .
I hope that this problem has been sorted out and that cooperation can be strengthened between the United States and Europe . I think that would benefit not just the two blocs but also the rest of the world .
I would like to support the excellent report of the rapporteur , Mrs Mann , and the courageous proposal put forward by our Commissioner here today , for three reasons .
Firstly , the TEP is going to give us a possibility of finding a framework to discuss multilateral issues with the United States .
All those involved in multilateral negotiations know that , unless the European Union and the United States are prepared effectively , negotiations such as the World Trade groundwork which we expect in the millennium round will not happen .
That is the first reason .
Secondly , in terms of a bilateral relationship , looking into the longer term , we are wanting to see a broader partnership .
It is not US colonialization of European decisions , it is a partnership based on broader economic aspects which will include monetary affairs and some security aspects when the Amsterdam Treaty is signed .
The last point is that this will not operate , as our rapporteur has said , unless we have parliamentary dialogue - a legislative dialogue - because the problems which we have had on Cuba , the problems which we have on bananas , come from the US Congress and therefore you need a parliamentary dialogue based on equality , balance and substance to be able to make this important initiative succeed .
Mr President , I too wish to congratulate Mrs Mann on her full and thorough report . I would also like to thank Commissioner Brittan for the clarity and determination he showed in his statement last week and in what he said to the House this afternoon .
Unfortunately , our friends and partners in the United States only understand firm and aggressive language .
It really is remarkable that last week , as the Council of the European Union was adopting the action plan paving the way for the Transatlantic Economic Partnership , our friends in the United States should spring a whole range of unilateral measures on us , in blatant disregard of the rules of the game and in clear violation of the obligations entered into within the World Trade Organisation .
Unfortunately too , experience has shown that the United States only takes the European Union seriously when we take clear , strong and determined action . This is the case , for instance , when the European Union asks the World Trade Organisation to set up a panel to deal with extraterritorial legislation , as was the case for the Helms-Burton Act .
However , we are not respected if we allow matters to run on .
I believe that , as Mr Brittan put it so well this afternoon , the United States , flaunting its obvious irresponsibility , has placed itself above the law .
It has replaced , or rather , hopes to replace , the rule of law with the rule of force .
I feel that the European Union as a whole has displayed abundant prudence , caution and goodwill when handling transatlantic relations . Therefore , Mr President , I believe the time has come for the Commission to respond in kind now that we have the ability to suspend the negotiations until reason and good sense prevail .
Thank you , Mr Salafranca .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 11.30 a.m.
Question Time ( Commission )
The next item is questions to the Commission ( B4-0705 / 98 ) .
In its capacity as guardian of the Treaties , the Commission would point out that Article 107 of the Treaty guarantees the independence of the ECB and of the national central banks when carrying out the tasks and duties conferred upon them by the Treaty and by the Statute of the ESCB .
The Commission would recall here that the primary objective of the ESCB is to maintain price stability .
Article 105 of the Treaty adds that without prejudice to the objective of price stability , the ESCB shall support the general economic policies in the Community with a view to contributing to the achievement of the objectives of the Community as laid down in Article 2 .
These objectives are concerned , among other things , with promoting sustainable and non-inflationary growth and a high level of employment and social protection .
There is no need for the Commission to present a new proposal .
In accordance with the Treaty it has always paid attention to the specific share of investment expenditure in general government deficits , as witness its recommendation of 25 March 1998 concerning qualification of the Member States for participation in the third stage of economic and monetary union .
The Commission would , however , point out that sustainable growth is not possible without a reduction in public deficits , that the reduction in public deficits is not incompatible with a sustained level of investment and that the golden rule - namely , that the public deficit should be smaller than the volume of public investment - is a principle of sound fiscal conduct .
In this connection , I can inform you that the Commission is preparing a report on the economic , fiscal and investment strategy for the Vienna European Council which will follow the Pörtschach European Council .
Mr President , Commissioner , I would simply like to ask whether you have heard about the statement made by Mr Strauss-Kahn and Mr Lafontaine at the latest German-French summit , which raised the issue of suspending the Stability Pact in a few years .
What is the Commission 's opinion on this issue , and what indeed is its view of the independence of the European Central Bank ?
Are additional security measures necessary here ?
I do not have the exact details concerning the matter you referred to .
Perhaps it might be better if my colleague , Commissioner de Silguy , answered the matter in writing .
I would just say that the Commission would be happy with a debate between the ECB and finance ministers .
That is quite understandable because independence does not necessarily mean isolation .
I will be quite happy to convey your point of view to Commissioner de Silguy .
Question No 43 by Robert Evans ( H-1023 / 98 )
Subject : Reciprocity for pensioners ' concessions in the EU
Would the Commission agree that pensioners travelling to other European Union countries should expect to be able to benefit from concessions , with particular regard to travel and cultural activities from which pensioners who are nationals of the state they are visiting are able to benefit from ?
One of my constituents recently visited Italy . On seeing that entry to a monument was free for pensioners , he asked for that concession .
He was shocked to hear from the staff that the concession applied only to Italian pensioners .
A recognised card for the over-sixties would help to avoid this problem and ensure that pensioners received the concessions to which they are entitled across the EU .
Could the Commission inform me if there has been any progress following the adoption of the Commission Recommendation of 10 May 1989 ( 89 / 350 / EEC ) on this subject ?
I give the floor to Mr Flynn to answer Mr Evans ' question .
The Commission agrees with the honourable Member 's view that it is desirable that pensioners travelling to other European Union countres should be facilitated in claiming discretionary concessions available to pensioners from the state which they are visiting .
Regrettably , the Commission knows that in practice such discretionary concessions are not always freely accessible to nationals from the state other than the one which is offering the concessions .
The Court of Justice has examined several complaints of discrimination against nationals of other Member States as recipients of services , for example , to reduced or free entry to museums and other public buildings and reductions in transport fares .
The Court , basing itself on Article 6 concerning discrimination on grounds of nationality and Article 59 on freedom to provide services , has consistently condemned discriminatory practices .
The Commission will continue to be vigilant in upholding respect for basic principles of Community law and will , wherever appropriate , have recourse to the Court of Justice .
Furthermore , for almost ten years , the Commission has been negotiating with Member States on the introduction of a European Union-wide over-60s card as called for in the Commission 's recommendation of 10 May 1989 .
The implementation of this recommendation has been hindered by practical difficulties in a number of Member States .
In order to take the matter forward , the Commission supported a first feasibility study on this issue during the European Year for Older People in 1993 .
The Commission launched a second feasibility study in 1995 aimed at updating and deepening the first one .
The final report on this study has been received and copies have been given to the members of the European Parliament Intergroup on Ageing .
The report has also been presented to the NGO members of the liaison group for older people .
The conclusions and recommendations of the report still have to be examined and discussed further with the representatives of the Member State governments .
While there is some cause for optimism in the Commissioner 's response , there are also some worries .
This is an important question about building a Europe for the people and when people are refused reductions because they are not residents of a particular Member State this is very damaging to the whole image of Europe .
The Commissioner referred to the Commission recommendation of ten years ago but it is taking a long time .
This is something that ought to be supported and which we should all want to come to fruition .
I am also looking at a similar venture , namely a European youth card .
As there is nothing to suggest that in ten years ' time we will not still be looking at the question of an over-60s card , can the Commissioner give me any cause for optimism on a European students ' card ?
At the moment we seem to be backtracking as much as moving forward .
Mr Evans , I would not be too optimistic .
I certainly would not hold my breath on this issue .
I have been trying for a number of years , without much success .
There are two main obstacles to a card for older people .
The nature , the form and the administration vary so much between Member States .
The whole question of subsidiarity and proportionality raises its head every time I try to move the question forward .
Some Member States operate a card system , others do not .
The conditions vary : in some Member States age alone is sufficient , in others age is combined with income or even residence .
The age of application varies from 58 to 67 .
Many Member States have decentralised and localised administration and services for application .
The second problem is that the picture is constantly changing .
There is a lot of commercialisation and privatisation , particularly in transport , and a lot of the responsibility is in the hands of private and semi-public agencies .
So it has not gone well and I am finding it extremely difficult to reach a point where we can coordinate the whole system .
I would like to think it could happen but , as you say , it has proved impossible so far and I do not see any great hope for the immediate future .
I wish to thank the Commissioner for his reply to the question by Mr Evans .
I certainly hope the Commission will consider bringing forward detailed proposals for a card for the over-60s in the foreseeable future , even given the difficulties .
Would the Commissioner like to take this opportunity to condemn the ageism which is widespread throughout the European Union and is still a major problem ?
I just wish to say that the Commission has already announced its intention in the 1998 to 2000 social action programme to launch a debate on the use of the future Article 13 .
Article 13 provides for appropriate action to combat discrimination based on sex , racial and ethnic origin , religion , belief , disability , age and sexual orientation .
So we are examining the possibility of legislation as soon as the Treaty is ratified .
I have just announced our intention under the programme to present a communication on the issues you have referred to as part of our contribution to next year 's United Nations Year .
We will have an opportunity to discuss the matter further at that time .
Mr Flynn , if you hold your breath for too long you will do yourself an injury and then you might need the health card .
I do not know whether you remember that some time ago we , as a Parliament , led an initiative and I presented you with a mock-up of that health card which you assured me you would strive for .
You told me that in the Republic of Ireland the introduction of the health card was being considered .
Since it was mentioned by my colleague , Mr Evans , what progress has been made on the introduction of a health card ? I remind you that one of the possibilities I suggested to you was that rather than go for a high-tech version we might just go for something which was a very posh E111 .
You know that I support the introduction of this card .
I have spent a lot of time trying to get it organised .
It has been extremely difficult because of the difficulties I have outlined to you , but we might be able to make some progress .
Perhaps more action could be taken at European level to help improve the flow of information .
It might also be helpful to have an update on the concession schemes that are available and try and promote the identification and exchange of best practice .
The Commission could consider supporting the development of a website on concession schemes available to older people in the Union .
I do not whether you think that would be helpful but it might be a first step in breaking the log-jam .
Question No 44 by Bernie Malone ( H-0925 / 98 )
Subject : Cancellation of 1999 Year Against Violence Against Women
I understand that the 1999 Year Against Violence Against Women has been cancelled at the behest of the Member States .
Given that this House itself called for the declaration of 1999 as the Year Against Violence Against Women in a Resolution in 1997 , can the Commissioner explain why the Commission was insufficiently prepared financially and organisationally for it to go ahead ?
I should like to welcome Mrs Wulf-Mathies and give her the floor to answer Mr Malone 's question .
Mr President , Mrs Malone , Parliament was late in expressing its wish to declare a Year Against Violence Against Women , with the result that the Commission no longer had time to present a formal proposal , ensure appropriate finance and plan the activities carefully .
However , in an effort to take Parliament 's wishes into account , the Commission proposed a campaign on the subject of violence against women .
Measures for this were begun following a preparatory meeting under the British Presidency in June 1998 .
The first conference will take place from 1 to 4 December on the role of the police in fighting violence against women , in particular against immigrants .
This event is partly funded by the DAPHNE programme .
Another important conference , which the Commission is organising with the German Presidency , will take place next spring .
One feature of the conference will be the presentation of an analysis of relevant statistics from the Member States .
This report is currently being drawn up jointly by experts from all Member States and the European Women 's Lobby , and will also be financed by the DAPHNE programme .
The campaign 's closing conference will be organised in cooperation with the Finnish Presidency .
The Commission is also planning an exhibition and several seminars , and will draw up and publish information literature that is to be used for prevention in particular .
The Member States are being invited to organise events in their own countries that should be aimed at the general public and the non-governmental organisations .
The Commission has also proposed launching a Eurobarometer survey on this subject in the Member States .
In addition , a report is to be drawn up for the closing conference to summarise all the measures that have been taken or introduced in the Member States during the campaign .
We would very much welcome the participation of the applicant countries in this campaign .
Against this I must say , however , that the implementation , type and scale of the measures will depend on the level of financial and staff resources made available by you for 1999 .
The Commission will therefore not be able to make a final decision on the campaign until the general budget has been passed in December 1998 .
I thank the Commissioner for her reply .
I do not normally put down questions because I do not like to waste time , but I feel very strongly about this issue .
I am disappointed that we have not been able to make further progress .
I wonder if the fact that you did not have enough resources at your disposal has anything to do with the report that was published yesterday by the Court of Auditors , which says that a lot of work is being impeded by people being on short-term contracts .
I hope that is not the case here .
Your plans are very laudable and the campaign and the points you have made are very good .
But we must also take the campaign to the schools . Educational input is very important .
Mr President , firstly , the problem of late application was due solely to the fact that we have certain deadlines to observe if the Council is to make appropriate decisions , and for this we were simply too late .
But this has nothing to do with employment contracts in the Commission .
You are familiar with the Commission communication ' on a medium-term Community action programme on measures providing a Community-wide support to Member States action relating to violence against children , young persons and women ' .
This is a programme that is to run from 2000 to 2004 , and it makes sense to accept this proposal for schools too .
You know that part of this communication and of the action programme is raising public awareness .
I agree with you that raising this awareness must begin as early as possible so that the public develop information and attitudes that make them reject violence against women and allow joint measures to be organised .
Question No 45 by Gerard Collins ( H-1029 / 98 )
Subject : EU support for computer purchases for schools
At Shanagolden Primary School in Limerick , in Ireland , a new computer room with eight computers has just been opened which will enable teachers to work with pupils , including remedial pupils , in furthering their education through the use of new technology .
This only came about as a result of various fund-raising activities and the offer of an interest-free loan .
Can the Commission outline what support , if any , is available at EU level to support the purchase of computers and / or the fitting out of computer rooms in primary and secondary schools .
I give the floor to Mrs Wulf-Mathies to answer Mr Collins ' question .
Mr President , Mr Collins , the Commission is heavily involved in improving access for European schools to new information technologies .
The actions that have already begun or are currently being introduced include the following : firstly , the Action Plan ' Learning in the information society ' , the aims of which include the networking of European schools , training for teachers and the development of strategies for developing multimedia content .
Secondly , it includes the Educational Multimedia Task Force , which brings together the educational activities of eight different Community programmes .
In this context , a joint call for proposals on the subject of educational multimedia was published in December 1996 , in which in particular Socrates , Leonardo da Vinci , TEN and three research programmes took part .
One example of the 46 projects selected is the ' European Schoolnet ' project , which involves the education ministries of the Member States .
The Socrates programme is aimed at European cooperation in education and promotes cooperation in these areas , in particular within the context of open and distance learning .
The proposal for Socrates II provides for a new action that is to promote the critical and responsible use of information technologies in schools and colleges .
Finally , there are numerous research and development actions under various research programmes , which serve to develop an infrastructure and the resources to use it , to create new tools such as simulations or virtual classrooms and to promote open and distance learning .
In the Community , provision of equipment for schools , in particular computers , is financed in accordance with the principle of subsidiarity from the budgets of the Member States or local authorities .
Those areas which are eligible for aid from the Structural Funds receive additional funding from them , some of which has helped to finance suitable computer equipment for vocational training centres and further education institutions , including in Ireland .
Thank you , Mrs Wulf-Mathies .
Mr Collins is satisfied with your reply .
Question No 46 by Marie-Paule Kestelijn-Sierens ( H-0968 / 98 )
Subject : Authorisation of the Drogenbos incinerator in contravention of European legislation
On 21 November 1997 the Flemish Ministry of the Environment authorised the construction of an incinerator at Drogenbos ( Flemish Brabant ) .
The construction of this incinerator contravenes , inter alia , the proximity principle , the precautionary principle , Directive 80 / 779 / EEC on air quality limit values and guide values for sulphur dioxide and suspended particulates and Directive 85 / 337 / EEC on the assessment of the effects of certain public and private projects on the environment .
Does the Commission consider the complaint lodged by the people living nearby to be justified , and if so , what steps will it take ?
I give the floor to Mrs Wulf-Mathies to answer Mrs Kestelijn-Sierens 's question .
Mr President , the Commission is currently investigating several complaints relating to the Drogenbos incinerator which this question refers to .
In view of these complaints , the Commission asked the Belgian Government for information at the end of August , and it is currently examining the reply from the relevant Belgian authorities .
If the current investigation confirms that Community environmental law is being violated , the Commission will decide whether infringement proceedings should be instituted in accordance with Article 169 .
I am grateful to the Commissioner for her reply , but I should specifically like to know when we can expect a decision from the Commission .
This is an extremely important problem which needs to be addressed with the utmost urgency , since it concerns an incinerator being built in a densely populated area of one and a half million people where the maximum limits for particulates and cadmium have already been reached .
I would like to press the Commission to investigate this matter with the utmost urgency .
Perhaps Mrs Wulf-Mathies could tell us how long it will take for the Commission to reach a decision ?
Mrs Kestelijn-Sierens , we are aware that this is a very sensitive issue .
This is why we asked the Belgian Government for information , which we received in October .
Please do not expect me to be able to tell you now how long the investigation will take .
However , we are aware that this issue is a source of concern for the people from that area and they are therefore entitled to receive a reply from us as soon as possible to confirm whether environmental regulations have been violated .
Question No 47 by John McCartin ( H-0945 / 98 )
Subject : Local partnership companies in Ireland
Is the Commission aware of the concern of Partnership companies in Ireland ( receiving funding under the Operational Programme for Local Urban and Rural Development under the sub-programme for the ' Integrated development of designated disadvantaged and other areas ' ) that the programme will be cut short when it has only just got up and running ( operational only in 1996 ) ?
Will the Commission make a commitment , given the importance of countering disadvantage through such local community effort , to include such a programme in the new Structural Funds regulations ?
I give the floor to Mrs Wulf-Mathies to answer Mr McCartin 's question .
Mr President , as we see it , the concern of partnership companies mentioned by Mr McCartin is unfounded .
It is not the Commission 's intention either to introduce reprogramming or to reduce funding .
On the contrary , the Commission is convinced , on the strength of the information provided by the monitoring committee for the Operational Programme for Local Urban and Rural Development , that partnership companies will succeed by the end of 1999 in dividing up between the projects all the programme funds available under the TAI Programme II .
This is particularly important given that it will only be possible to fully disburse the funds allocated to the individual projects in the following year .
The Commission would be in favour of the national authorities including , in their regional development plan , proposals on ways of promoting integrated development when making plans for the next programming period .
It acknowledges the progress that was achieved within the current programme in promoting local socio-economic development and in compensating for disadvantages , and is open to proposals on ways of promoting local development and , in particular , combating social exclusion in future as well .
I want to thank the Commissioner for her very full reply .
One of my concerns is not actually about this year or next year but about the new programme which starts in the year 2000 .
This did not commence with the present structural funds programme because there was a delay in getting it off the ground , particularly in Ireland .
At the moment people are just learning what it is about , getting their programme off the ground , and now they are concerned that it might not continue after the end of 1999 .
Will you be making proposals for it to be continued into the next programme so that they have another six years ?
Mr President , I understand the concern .
Firstly , it is simply a question of carrying out all appropriations for commitments by the end of 1999 , and this means that measures can also still be financed in the year 2000 .
Secondly , the Commission is generally interested in promoting local partnerships in the next programming period as well .
The only thing is that , without knowing the Irish Government 's programme proposals , it would be going too far at this stage to say that they will also be part of future programmes .
However , since we attach great importance , in the new proposals for structural reform , to local initiatives and , in particular , to local employment initiatives , I am assuming that continuing to promote similar measures in future as part of a programme will be an important concern for all of us .
Question No 48 by Konstantinos Hatzidakis ( H-0973 / 98 )
Subject : Defective work in implementation of Greek Community Support Framework
According to information which has come to light in Greece , a great many of the projects jointly funded from the Community budget under the Second Community Support Framework for Greece , particularly road-building , have been carried out in a slipshod manner and , in general , do not meet Community specifications .
This information came to light following the publication of a report by the expert quality control consultant appointed by the Greek Government . The report notes that for all categories of road-building projects subjected to checks , between 26 % and 95 % of the work was defective .
This is a particularly serious matter both in terms of the high percentage of defective work and the fact that such work is largely responsible for the high number of accidents and deaths on the roads in Greece .
Given that these projects are carried out with Community funding , will the Commission say whether it considers such a high percentage of defects to be normal in comparison with the situation in other Member States ?
Where does responsibility for this situation lie and what does the Commission intend to do to put an end to this unacceptable state of affairs ?
I give the floor to Mrs Wulf-Mathies to answer Mr Hatzidakis 's question .
Mr President , Mr Hatzidakis , according to existing Community law , responsibility for carrying out projects cofinanced by the Structural Funds lies exclusively with the Member States .
In other words , according to existing law , the Member States must guarantee the required quality .
Monitoring of these projects is therefore subject to national legislation . When the Community Support Framework for Greece was approved for 1994 to 1999 , the Greek Government assured the Commission that it would take measures to put right the serious deficiencies occurring in the past in connection with the execution of public works .
This was particularly important for the Commission given the significant increase in the number of new projects .
One of the measures included the appointment of an independent special adviser for quality control for projects cofinanced by the Community .
In fact , the first quarterly report of this body known as ESPEL establishes that there is still a problem of quality .
However , despite spot checks carried out on the projects , it is still not possible to submit applications for certain projects .
Therefore , the Joint Permanent Committee , whose members also include representatives of the Commission , made the proposal , accepted by the Greek authorities , to have the projects monitored systematically and thoroughly by a quality control officer from 1 July 1998 , and no longer simply by spot checks .
The results of this second ESPEL inspection are to be presented in two days , that is , on 19 November , at the next meeting of the Community Support Framework Audit Board .
Only then will it be possible to identify the quality defects for each specific project , to determine who is responsible and , above all , to proceed at the same time according to three groupings . The first of these involves projects with secondary defects that are to be put right by the companies , and the second involves projects with considerable defects that do not affect the safety of transport , for instance , but result in high maintenance costs ; these additional costs are to be settled by means of payments to the companies concerned .
The third category is for projects with serious defects that cannot be repaired , and the companies must put these right at their own expense .
The Commission has no information that would allow it to make a comparative assessment of quality problems in the individual Member States .
However , the Commission is in favour of increasing independent quality control in Greece , and it is in close contact with the Greek authorities .
It shall examine the results of the second ESPEL inspection and shall follow closely further developments to repair project defects with those responsible .
Mr President , I do not know what to begin with because the subject is far too big to be covered in just one minute .
Commissioner , whilst you know that all of us MEPs stand up for our regions and for the correct implementation of the Second Community Support Framework , trying to get more money for the forthcoming Santer package , there is unfair treatment here and we denounce that .
It is a scandal .
I have the published figures for the second quarter from the report by the Special Quality Control Council , which show that projects not conforming to specifications are found in a very high proportion : concrete materials of poor quality 77 % , substrate material of poor quality 91 % , foundation materials of poor quality 95 % , and so on .
It is a scandal , Commissioner , and frankly I would have expected a clearer answer .
To a written question I submitted to you a while ago about the Patras-Athens-Thessaloniki project , you answered that the work had not been put right even though you had asked for that to be done , and that the delay was worrying .
So I want you to tell me what action you intend to take with the Greek Government , and tell me also , since you say you have comparative figures , what is happening elsewhere .
Are there such major problems of the order of 95 % in other countries ?
Sincerely , I ask you for a more specific answer because this is an issue of the first priority for my country .
Mr President , Mr Hatzidakis , I do not have any figures from other Member States , but of course you know that for years we have been busy hurrying along improvements to the tendering procedures for public procurement . And you also know that the reform of public procurement has necessitated legislative changes that must now also be brought through Parliament by a democratic procedure .
Therefore , all of this has lasted much longer than what was acceptable to us as well .
However , we are now well on the way to obtaining really secure data .
It would be good if , together - you given your responsibility as a Member of Parliament , and we given our responsibility as the Commission - , we now waited for the meeting of the monitoring committee where we could assess the last relevant inspection .
Mr President , Commissioner , I would first like to hear from you which exactly are the projects we are discussing , who are the contractors , and who are those responsible in the various services of the Greek State for monitoring these projects .
It is impossible for us to find out specific details .
Secondly , please tell me what procedures have been set in motion for penal sanctions on the grounds of negligence , because in a written answer you gave me , you said that penalties would be imposed but I have heard of no such procedure taking place .
Do you know anything about that ?
Thirdly , if those instances of negligence , which are very major , happen to be real , will the return of the funds be demanded ?
In other words , is it possible that my country will have to return money to the European Union and the Commission ?
Mr President , I should gladly like to try that .
I have just pointed out that we have now started a very specific inspection , the results of which are to be discussed on 19 November in the monitoring committee .
Please appreciate that I do not wish to prejudge the meeting of the monitoring committee here today .
However , I have made it clear what the consequences are if defects can definitely be proved .
First and foremost , these are not things which the Commission demands from companies , but which the Member State is obliged to demand , because responsibility for the inspection lies with the Member State .
We cannot govern within the Member State , nor do we wish to .
There is not only the principle of subsidiarity , but also the need to separate the powers . However , it is clear that the necessary consequences will be discussed in the joint committees , and this is the case for both the monitoring committee , in which the Commission is also represented , and for this Joint Committee , which was set up because we realised that the system of pubic procurement is not working adequately .
Due to our discussion in Parliament today , I will also gladly instruct our representative in the monitoring committee not only to be very careful when finding out which problems have actually occurred , but also to make sure that they result in appropriate financial consequences for companies , and naturally consequences under criminal law , where this proves necessary or is indicated .
But I have to know the facts first before I start quoting criminal law here .
In this respect , I now consider this discussion to be a further impetus for the representatives of the Commission to take appropriate action at the meeting of the monitoring committee on 19 November .
Question No 49 by Glenys Kinnock ( H-0980 / 98 )
Subject : Timetable for Structural Fund negotiations
Will the Commission give a breakdown of the timetable for the remaining negotiations concerning the Structural Fund Regulations and the likely period of programme negotiations between the Commission and Member States for Objective 1 and Objective 2 ?
I give the floor to Mrs Wulf-Mathies to answer Mrs Kinnock 's question .
Mr President , I should like to point out to Mrs Kinnock that the timetable for the negotiations on structural intervention in the new programming period depends of course mainly on when the new Structural Fund Regulations are adopted .
The Cardiff European Council has declared in this connection that political agreement on the whole package is to be achieved by March 1999 at the latest .
The Commission was pleased to note that the German Government intends to keep to the Cardiff timetable during its Presidency of the Council , as stated by the German Chancellor , Mr Schröder , in his inaugural speech on 10 October .
If this is the case , Parliament could agree , in particular , to the proposal for a Structural Fund Regulation with general terms and conditions by the end of the current legislative period .
The regulation could then be finally adopted in May 1999 .
According to the Commission 's proposal , the list of Objective 1 areas is to be drawn up immediately after the regulation has been adopted .
If we take into account the period of time that is necessary for drawing up the regional development plans and negotiating the Community support frameworks , the Commission 's decisions on the distribution of the funds under Objective 1 could therefore be issued in the first quarter of the year 2000 .
The list of eligible areas for Objective 2 could be adopted by the Commission in the third quarter of 1999 , because the consultation process is longer in this area due to the flexibility that was introduced .
In the third quarter of the year 2000 , the Commission could draw up the plans for the Objective 2 programme and issue the decisions on the distribution of the funds .
However , this depends on the regulations being adopted by Parliament within the legislative period , that is , in May , and on all the follow-up decisions being promptly taken as well , because things have yet to be put in concrete terms thereafter .
I think it is therefore truly important that Parliament and the Council give a clear signal that they also intend to keep to this timetable .
I hope very much that Parliament at least will do this tomorrow at the first reading on the reform of the Structural Funds .
You may rest assured that the Commission has the greatest interest in urging all those concerned to fulfil their specific obligations now , so that the areas which need our assistance do not suffer as a result of the present standstill in the decision-making process .
I thank the Commissioner for a very comprehensive answer .
Could the Commissioner say what formula the Commission will be using to allocate Structural Fund resources to the Objective 1 areas for the period 2000 to 2006 ?
In the interests of transparency - and far be it from me to suggest that the Commission would not always want to be transparent on these issues - would the Commission do us the favour of publishing the formula it intends to adopt ?
I should gladly like to do that , because we do in fact agree on the principle of transparency .
We should like to make it clear that the basis of calculation and the indicators are transparent and can be understood by everyone .
We are therefore currently in the process of preparing a paper which will be made available to the Council and of course to the appropriate committee .
I have two supplementary questions , the first of them on Objective 6 areas .
I am keen to discover how much headway has been made with regard to Sweden and Finland . The matter was raised during the accession negotiations in 1992 .
The criteria agreed upon then still hold good , and I wonder whether they will apply unchanged with the transfer to Objective 1 .
In the run-up to the elections to the European Parliament , it would also be useful to iron out any uncertainties as to what is going to happen in the various Member States with regard to the Structural Funds .
Both MEPs and the public at large would benefit from clear information from the Commission on this point .
You know that , should there be delays , it is not because of the Commission , and I still hope that we will also manage through a joint effort to bring the discussions on the Structural Funds to a close in May , that is , before you begin the election campaign .
The Commission already submitted its proposals in March this year , and in this respect , more concrete results could have been achieved had they been wanted .
However , it is now up to the Council , and I hope that the Council will ultimately remain loyal to the decisions it made in Cardiff .
As far as Objective 6 is concerned , the principles applying to Finland and Sweden , which were laid down in their treaties of accession , are being retained ; the one exception is a region in Finland which is going to be a genuine Objective 1 area , and which will be improved in accordance with this status .
However , as was already said , this is the Commission 's proposal , and the Council and Parliament still have to agree to it .
Question No 50 by Reinhard Rack ( H-1011 / 98 )
Subject : Future substance of the Community 's Interreg initiative
The details of the future framework conditions for the new objectives 1 , 2 and 3 are now beginning to emerge very clearly .
The same is not true of the Community initiatives .
In particular I should like to know what priorities the future Interreg initiative will contain , whether one of these will be the promotion of the regions at the EU 's external borders - which the European Parliament has called for by a large majority - and what type of measures the Commission considers to be worth supporting in the context of promoting the regions bordering on the countries of Central and Eastern Europe ?
I give the floor to Mrs Wulf-Mathies to answer Mr Rack 's question .
Mr President , I should like to point out to Mr Rack that the Commission has proposed continuing and reinforcing the Community 's Interreg initiative .
It believes that in future this should comprise three forms of cooperation .
Firstly , cooperation between neighbouring border regions with a view to developing integrated cross-border economic and social areas , as well as close cross-border cooperation in all other areas .
Secondly , transnational cooperation between regional and national authorities with a view to promoting the economic integration of peripheral regions , and closer European integration , as well as deepening cooperation in regional development .
Thirdly , interregional cooperation with a view to exchanging practical knowledge and proven methods , as well as promoting the transfer of know-how between the regions in question .
As you know , only measures within the Member States can be financed under Interreg .
However , Interreg measures in the regions bordering on the applicant countries are linked to the PHARE cross-border measures , under which cross-border cooperation is financed in the PHARE countries .
This includes a large number of measures in areas such as economic cooperation , environmental protection , infrastructure , policies for small and medium-sized enterprises , tourism , and so on .
The Commission has embarked upon reform of the PHARE-CBC regulation .
The aim of this reform is to make cross-border cooperation more efficient , and to reinforce the cross-border nature of measures by means of common structures and common programmes .
As regards the nature of the measures taken , the PHARE-CBC arrangements are to be brought into line with Interreg procedures in order to facilitate genuine cross-border cooperation and , if you so wish , to make the PHARE-CBC instrument a pre-accession Interreg instrument , so that together we can also learn how to cooperate across borders .
Commissioner , what you have just summarised in your answer shows that we have already come a very long way particularly on this important matter , and above all , that we have gone in the right direction for the regions , but also particularly for you as the Commissioner responsible .
The question which is always asked in this connection , of course , is the question of how much .
Interreg was previously one of 15 Community initiatives , and funds were therefore not abundant , at least in the previous support period .
How does the situation look for the next support period , as far as you can tell ?

Mr President , Mr Rack , the funds are being extended in any case because , as you know , Interreg will no longer be one of 13 initiatives in future , but one of three , according to the Commission 's proposal . I can only ask Parliament to now also oppose a whittling away of Community initiatives .
In addition , the Commission has always believed that Interreg should be the most important of these three , and this could mean that around 50 % of the funds for Community initiatives - that is , from the Community initiatives ' total 5 % slice of the cake - should be given to Interreg .
However , this relies firstly on the Member States accepting the 5 % figure .
This is still being disputed in the Council at present .
Secondly , it requires that we resist all attempts to add further initiatives , because it is clear that the funds would then automatically have to be made available for more initiatives , with the result that Interreg would then also suffer financially .
Ladies and gentlemen , with that question by Mr Rack , we have come to the end of the time set aside for questions to Mrs Wulf-Mathies .
I should like to thank her for attending .
Since we have no more time for questions to Mrs Wulf-Mathies , Question No 51 by Mr Schröder will receive a written answer .

Question No 52 by José Salafranca Sánchez-Neyra ( H-0923 / 98 )
Subject : US-Cuba relations
Is the Commission aware of the letter of 3 August sent by Mrs Albright , United States Secretary of State , to Mr Helms , Chairman of the US Senate 's Foreign Affairs Committee , which was published by newspapers and other media ?
Does the Commission intend to respond to this letter or take a stance on this matter ?
Does the Commission consider that the interpretation placed on the terms of the declarations of 18 May by the US Secretary of State is in keeping with the spirit of the remarks made to the European Parliament 's Committee on Foreign Affairs in May by the Commissioner responsible ?
Does the Commission agree that this agreement represents an extraordinary reaffirmation of the principles underlying the Liberty Act ?
I should like to welcome Sir Leon and give him the floor to answer Mr Salafranca 's question .
The Commission is aware of the letter from Secretary Albright to Senator Helms regarding the understanding on investment disciplines .
We discussed it with Secretary Albright during the ministerial meeting in Vienna in September and the Commission informed her that there were several parts of the letter which the Commission would not have written .
The Commission does not believe that it is desirable or useful to focus on differences in the presentation of the understanding on investment disciplines .
The text of the understanding itself is detailed and explicit .
It is a text which we will respect and implement when a title for waiver of the Helms-Burton Act is granted .
Commissioner , I would be grateful for further clarification on two points .
The day after the General Affairs Council at which the terms of the Transatlantic Summit 's declaration on extraterritorial legislation , and more specifically , the Helms-Burton Act , were noted , you appeared before this Parliament 's Committee on Foreign Affairs , Security and Defence Policy . On that occasion you stated that if the United States did not fulfill its part of the agreements - I refer in particular to the amendment of Title IV - , the agreements would lapse .
Were this to prove the case , you did not rule out the possibility of again initiating proceedings in some way before the bodies of the World Trade Organisation .
The question I should like to put to you , Commissioner , is as follows : what , in the Commission 's opinion , is a reasonable period of time to allow the United States to amend Title IV of the Act ?
Is President Clinton 's term of office a reasonable period ?
Or what about the present Commission 's term of office ?
Or perhaps the term of office of the next President of the United States is the appropriate period of time ?
What exactly do you have in mind ?

Moving on to my second point , Commissioner , I would like you to confirm that you did have the opportunity of meeting with the Chairman of the Congressional Foreign Affairs Committee , Senator Gilman , and also with Congressman Bob Menéndez during your latest visit to Washington . Also , I would like you to state whether or not it is true that you - or the European Commission - were asked to put in writing your position with regard to the content of Mrs Albright 's letter to Senator Helms .
Finally , Commissioner , I would like to know whether you are in receipt of any communication from the United States ' Congress on this matter , requesting the Commission to state its position on the content of the letter in question .
The position is , that we will not carry out our part of the agreement if the United States does not carry out its part .
We have not set a deadline .
I had a number of meetings with Congressional leaders including Mr Gilman during a recent visit to the United States in which I put our position and the United States seemed more prepared to understand it .
Above all , the reasons we have not concerned ourselves to set a deadline is that , for the moment , under the agreement , the United States is taking no action against any European company under either Title 3 or Title 4 and has indicated that not only does Total get a waiver agreement but anybody else who invests in Iran on comparable terms will similarly get a waiver .
They are not implementing their law and we are not subject to it .
Although the Commissioner has told us , the United States , is not at present implementing the Helms-Burton law in certain respects , is he aware of the fact that many European businessmen have been intimidated into refusing to take the risk of incurring liability under Title 3 and Title 4 of the bill and , if they have had relations with the United States , have preferred to limit relations with Cuba or not have any at all .
In these circumstances , will there not come a time when , although no deadline has been set , further action will have to be taken to protect European businessmen from the effects of this situation .
They seem to be pretty well protected by the understanding that we have because they are apparently piling into Cuba .
Question No 53 by Jonas Sjöstedt ( H-0976 / 98 )
Subject : Negotiations on the MAI
The OECD negotiations on the Multilateral Agreement on Investment ( MAI ) resumed some time ago .
The draft agreement which was negotiated during the spring has been sharply criticised by the European Parliament and others .
What changes does the Commission wish to see made to the agreement that was negotiated in spring ?
I give the floor to Sir Leon to answer Mr Sjöstedt 's question .
This is , of course , a complicated question .
Since it was tabled I made a Commission statement in the plenary session of 20 October .
That remains an accurate statement of the current position , and I would refer to it .
I should like to extend sincere thanks to the Commission for that answer , which was brief and to the point .
My question is no longer entirely relevant in any case . It was in fact put down before the good news reached us that the French Government was withdrawing from the MAI negotiations .
It now looks probable that new negotiations will be started up within the framework of the World Trade Organisation .
I wonder if the Commission believes that the draft agreement produced at OECD level would constitute a sound basis for these WTO negotiations .
Or would it be preferable to begin again from scratch , given that the situation has now changed ?
As I explained in the debate , the position is that we favoured an agreement in the OECD .
The negotiations have not been terminated but , being frank about it , I indicated that the prospects were not good .
If we had had an agreement in the OECD , or if we have one , that seems to me to be a good prelude to negotiation in the WTO , which has not yet been agreed but which we have argued in favour of .
If there is no agreement in the OECD , I still think that the right thing to do is to commence negotiation in the WTO .
So that is the course we would favour , irrespective of what happens in the OECD .
Question No 54 by Richard Howitt ( H-1031 / 98 )
Subject : The World Trade Organisation and the Multilateral Agreement on Investment
Given the recent actions of the French Government , will the European Commission now support the removal of talks on the Multilateral Agreement on Investment ( MAI ) from the OECD to the World Trade Organisation ( WTO ) ?
Will the Commissioner ensure that equal weight is given to responsibilities of investors under such an agreement as to rights vis-à-vis nation states ?
I give the floor to Sir Leon to answer Mr Howitt 's question .
As I said in the debate I referred to in answer to the previous question , I have always believed that the WTO is the best place in the long term to create a predictable framework of investment rules .
I am glad we have made some progress in starting down that road at the WTO ministerial meeting in Singapore .
It is important that at the meeting next autumn we should continue to press the case for negotiation and ultimate agreement on investment in the WTO .
Meanwhile , there have been the negotiations on the MAI in the framework of the OECD .
We have participated in those negotiations but the chances of bringing them to a successful conclusion do not look promising at the moment .
So we need to consider what would be the best way forward now in order to deal with the situation and get negotiations going in the WTO in any event .
Could I ask the President-in-Office to comment on the second part of my question , in particular the need to incorporate binding regulatory standards , especially in the areas of labour , the environment , investment incentives and restrictive business practices in any new multilateral agreement on investment , alongside rights for investors .
I am very pleased that the British Government , as reported on 13 November in the Guardian , has said that Ministers have decided the way forward is to include labour standards and environmental concerns from the outset .
I hope that the Commission will take that view in its relations with the WTO .
I should also like to ask the Commissioner if he will ensure that as far as the WTO is concerned , there is full consultation with civil society and NGOs and that labour issues are taken into account ?
There has not been an agreement that there should be a negotiation in the WTO .
I very much hope that we will get that but there is strong resistance from a number of developing countries .
So it would be altogether premature to talk about the nature of our negotiating mandate for a negotiation that does not currently exist .
The short answer is that there is none at the moment but there will have to be one in due course .
As for consultation with civil society , that is enormously important .
The Commission organised a very large meeting with representatives from a very large number of NGOs , as well as others concerned , yesterday in Brussels on the whole range of WTO negotiations .
As Mr Barton is not present , Question No 55 lapses .

Question No 56 by David Bowe ( H-1034 / 98 )
Subject : Steel
What action has the Commission taken in response to the recent court case in the Ohio State Court in the USA which was directly aimed at preventing foreign steel from entering that particular state , an action that appears to be in contravention of US and international law ?
I give the floor to Sir Leon to answer Mr Bowe 's question .
On 27 October an Ohio- based steel producer filed an action in the Ohio State Court alleging unfair competition from low-priced steel imports into the state .
The action was meant to seek restrictions on imports into the state by a number of trading companies as well as Russian and Japanese steel producers .
This is a highly unusual move by the US steel industry which had already begun to lodge a serious of anti-dumping and anti-subsidy complaints at the federal level in response to the crisis in South-East Asia and Russia .
On 17 November 1998 , however , the Ohio State Court where the case was pending dismissed the action brought by the Ohio corporation .
Apparently the judge decided that the plaintiff was not entitled to relief under state law .
The Commission is monitoring the further progress of the case as there may well be an attempt to seek relief before a federal court .
I thank the Commissioner for that reply which I found very interesting .
I would also bring to his attention some more recent events .
In the steel industry journal The Metal Bulletin of 12 November it said that US steel company executives and trade union representatives met a few days ago with President Clinton in order to push their case for exceptional protection against steel imports .
While the report goes on to say that no decision has yet been taken , the companies are pressing for a change to the injury standard of the so-called 201 market safeguard rule which would make it easier for the Americans to shut down their market to imports but stay within WTO rules .
If the American Government gives in to this type of pressure , what is the European Union - and the Commission in particular - going to do to protect its steel companies ?
It would be unwise to speculate on what we would do in a certain speculative event but I can tell you one thing .
We would certainly wish to ensure that the United States acted in accordance with WTO rules .
As far as Europe is concerned , EUROFER has been to see me and has indicated that it will be putting forward a complaint alleging that there has been dumping and possibly other unlawful trading activities in the steel industry .
If we receive that complaint we will obviously give it very serious attention .
But the proper procedure would have to be gone through and I could not begin to anticipate what the outcome would be .
Question No 57 by Graham Watson ( H-1035 / 98 )
Subject : China-Taiwan relations
What discussions has the Commission had recently with the Chinese authorities concerning its relations with Taiwan ?
I give the floor to Sir Leon to answer Mr Watson 's question .
The latest contact that we had with the Chinese on the subject of Taiwan was in July 1998 when the Commission 's Deputy Director-General in DG I , Mr Gérard Depayre , explained to an envoy from the Chinese mission to the EU the content and purpose of our bilateral WTO market access agreement which I signed - the record of the negotiations - with the Taiwanese Minister Wang in Brussels on 23 July .
Since then there has been no official contact with the Chinese authorities on the question of Taiwan .
We do not recognise Taiwan as a separate sovereign nation but rather as a separate customs territory with which we have had increasingly intense economic and commercial links .
We attach great importance to our economic and commercial links with both China and Taiwan so we must be available to discuss these relations as and when necessary .
Please allow me to declare an interest .
I went with a group of other Members of this House from different countries and different political groups to Taiwan last week at the invitation of their Ministry of Foreign Affairs to observe their election campaign .
I led a similar group there in 1995 .
Taiwan is a free and open democracy .
They have made tremendous strides towards democracy .
It is the world 's 14th largest trading nation .
As a result of being a free and open democracy with a transparent economy they have come well out of the financial turmoil .
Would you not agree , Commissioner , that Taiwan is a beacon for democracy in the region and that the isolation of Taiwan is increasingly anomalous ?
Will the Commission support Taiwan 's early entry into the WTO and greater links between the European Union and the Republic of China ?
Mr Watson knows the official position of the Commission and indeed Member States with regard to Taiwan .
Our links with Taiwan are very strong .
They are economic and commercial though .
In those circumstances I do not think it would be appropriate for me to comment on political developments in Taiwan .
But I would say , with regard to the other points that have been made , we are negotiating in good faith and rather successfully with Taiwan on its admission to the WTO .
We have made very good progress on the market access question .
There are other aspects that still have to be considered .
We will negotiate with Taiwan on those other aspects without delay and seek to reach a mutually acceptable agreement .
More generally , as far as the economic and commercial links with Taiwan are concerned , I entirely agree with what has been said .
It is a territory that has been extremely successful economically , even in the context of the current problems in Asia .
There is enormous further potential for the development of economic and commercial links with the European Union .
Question No 58 by Paul Rübig ( H-0924 / 98 )
Subject : Directives on the recognition of diplomas and discrimination against consultant engineering firms
The first and second directives on the recognition of diplomas govern entitlement to exercise a profession , or rather the evidence entitling a person to pursue a regulated profession in an EU Member State .
The term ' diploma ' , however , includes not only school leaving certificates and university degree certificates but also a number of training and examination certificates such as , for example , those required in Austria as proof of qualifications for a licence to exercise a regulated profession .

However , some Member States , Italy for instance , interpret the directive very restrictively , only recognising , for the purposes of granting licences to consultant engineering firms , degrees from universities and higher education establishments .
This practice has even led to the prosecution of Austrian citizens for illegal exercise of the profession of engineer .
How does the Commission intend to react to this possible discrimination against consultant engineering firms with regard to the exercise of their profession within the internal market ?
I should like to welcome Mr Monti and give him the floor to answer Mr Rübig 's question .
As the honourable Member has pointed out , within the meaning of Directives 89 / 48 / EEC and 92 / 51 / EEC the term ' diploma ' may include not only school leaving certificates and university degrees , but also a number of training and examination certificates .
The directives relating to the general system of recognition of diplomas make no provision for coordination of training nor for automatic recognition of vocational qualifications .
Each Member State is free to stipulate what qualifications are required to exercise an occupation or profession within its own borders .
Thus Italy is entitled to permit only graduates from universities and higher education establishments to practise as consultant engineers .
Practitioners from other Member States must be treated in the same way as Italian citizens .
Infringement of the rules in force in the individual Member States may lead to the opening of legal proceedings , provided that any sentences are proportionate to the seriousness of the violation .
Austrian citizens wishing to practise as consultant engineers in Italy must submit an application to this effect to the competent authorities .
Should it emerge that there is a significant difference between the qualifications laid down by law in Italy and those required of Austrian citizens to practise that profession , the Italian authorities may invite the Austrian citizen to opt for an equalisation measure such as , for example , a training period or an aptitude test .
If , as appears to be the case , the Austrian practitioners possess only lower-level diplomas such as those provided for in Directive 92 / 51 / EEC , the Italian authorities may require an equalisation measure to be applied in all cases .
It will be clear from what I have said that the general position of the Italian authorities does not conflict with the provisions of Community law .
I might add that , here as in other spheres , should any specific individual cases prove problematic , the Commission is prepared to examine them and check on their compliance with Community law .
Mr President , it appears in practice that an engineer in Austria may provide a service which meets market requirements , and that when he provides the same service in Italy or in another Member State , it is then no longer admissible .
How do you intend to deal in future with these problems which constitute obstacles for the internal market ?
Here the relevant distinction is the one introduced at the Fontainebleau summit back in 1984 .
Indeed , ever since the Fontainebleau summit the vertical sectoral approach - that is , specific directives - for specific jobs and occupations has been replaced by a horizontal approach , in other words the general system based on semi-automatic recognition of qualifications without prior harmonisation of education and training systems .
Generally speaking , the Commission is not in favour of proposing new specific directives .
In these cases , therefore , the host country is entitled to restrict the exercise of a certain occupation to holders of university and higher education degrees , and then - as I said - a citizen from another Member State may opt either for an aptitude test or a training period .
The alternative to this system would be highly detailed regulatory provisions : these are appropriate for certain jobs and occupations but not for others .
Question No 59 by Antonios Trakatellis ( H-0940 / 98 )
Subject : Decision on complaint concerning the Thessaloniki underground railway and implementation of Community legislation on public contracts
Almost four years since the Thessaloniki underground rail project was incorporated in the section of the 2nd CSF for Greece ( 1994-1999 ) entitled ' Improvement in living conditions ' , and almost two years since a complaint was made to the Commission that the project was in breach of Community legislation on public contracts , the only progress has been the transfer of ECU 26 million of the ECU 60.7 m of the Community 's total contribution .
According to the Commission 's announcement in July , it had taken a decision on the complaint , on the authorization of Commissioner Monti .
Will the Commission , therefore , say whether it has taken a final decision on the complaint , what that decision is and whether it may be overturned in the light of new information ?
If that is so , how can the Commission ensure a swift review of the case when it took 18 months to make any statement on the complaint ?
In view of the fact that the Greek Ministry for Public Works has announced that the contract has been signed , can work commence without further complication due to controversy over the contract ?
Did examination of the complaint reveal any shortcoming in the implementation of Community directives on public contracts in relation to this project and , if so , how will the Commission ensure that the law is upheld in the future ?
I give the floor to Mr Monti to answer Mr Trakatellis 's question .
The Commission wishes to inform the honourable Member that it has dropped the case concerning the Thessaloniki underground railway , by Decision H / 98 / 3262 of 27 August 1998 , given that it did not come across any breach of the principle of equal treatment .
The competent authorities in Greece were informed in a letter dated 18 September 1998 .
Before arriving at the decision to drop the case , the Commission requested and obtained from the Greek authorities a guarantee that future calls for tender , in particular ones relating to contracts of a similar scale , will be drawn up and implemented with the greatest care , so as to avoid difficulties and delays of the kind which have occurred in the tender procedure for the Thessaloniki underground railway .
The Commission would point out that , as always , should any new facts come into its possession relating to an infringement of Community legislation , it could decide to open a new procedure to verify the legality of the situation .
However , the facts of which we are aware thus far do not justify such action .
If valid reasons for reopening proceedings were to arise in the future , which - I repeat - is not the case at present , the Commission would certainly require considerably less time to assess the new facts , because the substance of the matter has already been investigated in depth .
Finally , as concerns the state of advancement of the project itself , the Commission considers that all further developments must be the sole responsibility of the competent authorities in Greece .
Commissioner , thank you very much for your answer .
Firstly , I would like you to tell me this , please : you have already said that when new figures emerge clearly from the agreement signed between the Greek state and the contractor , we will be able to make an approach to the Commission with those new figures .
I would therefore like to ask you : if an approach is made , can the work begin and can payments be made , or do we first have to wait for the Commission 's decision and only then begin the work ?
Secondly , given that there has been an exchange of correspondence between you , Mr Monti , and the Greek Government , for the sake of more complete parliamentary monitoring and greater transparency I would like a copy at least of your own letter to the Greek Government .
Finally , time marches on inexorably , Commissioner , towards the end of the Second Community Support Framework .
Will it be possible for the work to begin and for payments to be made before then ?
I would add in reply to Mr Trakatellis that - as I have said - if new and different facts arise in relation to a case , it is always possible to reopen proceedings .
I would stress that , in this case , none of the information which has so far come to light justifies such action .
Therefore , as far as the Commission is concerned , this case has been dropped in the same way as all others are dropped : the relevant proceedings have been closed .
New and different facts would be required in order for it to be reopened , but that is not the situation at present .
Commissioner , you said that you have shelved the matter until you receive new figures , but that at the same time you have told the Greek authorities that in future they should handle things differently from the way in which they dealt with the Thessaloniki metro contract .
So the conclusion I draw is that the procedures followed had certain deficiencies .
Politically , therefore , the procedures were not transparent .
Legally , however - since I am a lawyer - you may indeed have shelved the matter , but the comment that in future such practices should be avoided means that the practice followed was incorrect , that it lacked transparency , that it infringed Community regulations , in other words that someone could go to court solely on the basis of what you have just told us , and blow the contract to pieces .
The question , therefore , is : will the project go ahead ?
What do you think of the syllogism I have stated , because you cannot both grant approval and say that in future the Greek Government must avoid such practices .
You must do one or the other .
Our approach in the matter under discussion was to assess whether or not Community legislation on public contracts had been breached .
In examining the complaint , the Commission found that the voluminous contract documentation contained provisions on the specific conditions demanded which were open to differing interpretations by bidders .
Nevertheless , in view of the complexity of the procedure and of the contract documentation , the Commission finally concluded that the awarding authority could not be said to have deliberately operated a tender procedure which was not genuinely competitive .
It was not possible in this context to prove that a clear infringement of the principle of equal treatment had taken place ; that would have meant opening the appropriate proceedings .
As far as the future is concerned , I can say that the guarantees sought by the Commission take the form of the experience acquired by the Greek administration and its advisers in designing and completing projects of this type ; these guarantees are backed by a firm undertaking regarding their future conduct .
Naturally we shall continue to remain vigilant .
Question No 60 by Sören Wibe ( H-0951 / 98 )
Subject : Parallel imports into the EEA
One of the effects of a judgment delivered by the European Court of Justice in summer 1998 is to prevent parallel imports of branded clothing from countries outside the EEA .
Sweden has protested in the Council against this ruling , as it affects Swedish consumers and retailers .
Sales of parallel imports in Sweden are worth SKr 30 bn a year .
Naturally enough , then , parallel imports have a very significant effect on Swedish consumers ' personal finances .
The Commission has now resumed a study of the pros and cons of parallel imports ( which according to Svenska Dagbladet of 29 September 1998 had been shelved ) , the findings of which are to be presented to the Council .
When will the study be ready ?
What will happen in the meantime ?
Does the Commission not think it would be better to defend consumers ' interests rather than those of general agents ?
I give the floor to Mr Monti to answer Mr Wibe 's question .
In its judgment of 16 July 1998 in the Silhouette case , the Court of Justice upheld the principle that the holders of trade marks in the Community have the right , on the basis of those trade marks , to object to parallel imports into the European Union of products originally placed on the market elsewhere .
This bears out the Commission 's interpretation of the 1989 directive on trade marks .
Consequently , importers and retailers may not import branded products into the Community without the consent of the holder of the relevant trade mark .
This also means that the Member States must apply the current Community rules on trade marks in accordance with the interpretation given by the Court of Justice in its recent judgment .
I am aware of the reactions provoked by this judgment in a limited number of countries , and particularly in Sweden .
Concern has been expressed that consumers are being deprived of the opportunity , thanks to parallel imports , of buying branded products at cheaper prices .
These concerns are , however , only partially justified .
I would stress that the protection of intellectual property rights is crucially important in developing innovation in Europe .
European producers invest vast quantities of money and know-how to create new high-quality products , build up the prestige of their brands and organise their distribution networks .
It should be noted here that , although parallel imports enable consumers to benefit from lower prices in the short term , in the longer term reduced profits might discourage the holders of trade marks from investing in their brands or from competing actively with other brands , which would be disadvantageous for the entire sector .
Let us be absolutely clear about one thing : parallel imports within the Community and also , more broadly , within the EEA are a key element of the single market , and the current discussions concerning the exhaustion of the right conferred by a trade mark do not revolve around this fundamental element , but relate only to parallel imports from outside the Community .
I would point out , finally , that in order to gain a complete picture of the situation , a study is being undertaken of the economic consequences of the exhaustion of the right conferred by a trade mark in the Community ; it is to be completed in the early part of 1999 .
This study will consider the various aspects of trade mark protection and the possible consequences of a change in the exhaustion system , in particular as concerns product availability , after-sales service , advice to consumers , investment in new products , price competition and employment .
I have a very brief supplementary question , which I shall preface by saying that I disagree with the Commissioner on parallel imports .
This ruling is tantamount to a ban on retail activity .
I fail to see the economic rationale from anyone 's point of view , including that of the manufacturers .
My question is as follows . If parallel imports to various Swedish retailers continue , does the Commission intend to instigate legal proceedings against Sweden ?
Given the situation which has been corroborated by the judgment of the European Court of Justice , the holders of trade marks are at liberty to demand the appropriate legal action .
This does not affect the Commission ; the Commission must see to it that trade mark holders are in a position to exercise this right .
I am very pleased to see the Commissioner here .
I did not think you would be in Strasbourg today because you did not attend the Duty-Free Intergroup .
We had to cancel it , even though you had earlier said that you would attend .
I took the floor to say that it is a shame that we cannot now deal with the two items on duty-free that are on the agenda and that some of us have come here to deal with .
We get very little opportunity to speak to the Commissioner .
We are trying very hard to change his mind on this issue with a very important report going to the ECOFIN ministers , which has just been completed by the Commission .
I would like to cross-examine the Commissioner on this report , on the implications of duty-free for jobs .
Mrs Malone , Mr Monti , this is not within the scope of the question under consideration .
Also , the time allowed has elapsed . Nevertheless , Commissioner , you may take the floor if you wish .
I believe that this is a very important matter - and I have had occasion to speak on it both here in the plenary and in various parliamentary committees - but it is wholly unrelated to the question asked by Mr Wibe .
I would therefore not wish to comment any further , Mr President .
Thank you , Mr Monti .
Mr Gallagher has also asked for the floor to put a supplementary question further to Mr Wibe 's question .
I would ask you both to confine yourselves , please , to the context of the question put by Mr Wibe .
I appreciate the time constraints , but I should like to take this opportunity while Commissioner Monti is in the House .
He has on numerous occasions in the past referred to structural funds as an instrument to be used to overcome the consequences of the abolition of duty-free .
I would say to the Commissioner that I have to hand a copy of the Commission 's working document on the proposals .
There is absolutely nothing new in this .
I believe I am being reasonable and fair in saying this document is window-dressing .
There is nothing more in it than has been available in the past .
This is no reflection on the Chair or the Commissioner .
Perhaps the Commissioner would give a number of us who have had questions tabled this evening the opportunity to meet him during the next week or so .
This is nothing more than window-dressing and it will not address the issues .
Thank you , Mr Gallagher .
I did not ask you to stop speaking because that is not my practice , but I did warn you that the issue had been discussed for longer than anticipated and that the time allocated has been exceeded .
Mr Monti may take the floor if he wishes .
He is indicating that he does not wish to do so .
Since the time allowed for Question Time to the Commission has now come to an end , Questions Nos 61 to 119 will receive written answers .
That concludes Question Time to the Commission .
( The sitting was suspended at 7.20 p.m. and resumed at 9 p.m. )

Budget lines for human rights
The next item is the Commission statement on the implementation in 1998 of budget lines for human rights and democracy under Chapter B7-70 ' European initiative for democracy and the protection of human rights ' .
I give the floor to Mr van den Broek .
Madam President , thank you for this chance to share our collective concern here with Parliament over some worrying reports which are circulating about the way in which human rights policy is being implemented at the moment .
I think it is a very good idea to clarify one or two things and then to agree on a few points which may be useful to all the parties concerned in safeguarding this policy on human rights which is very dear to Parliament 's heart , but certainly no less dear to the Commission 's heart - and that also goes of course for all the organisations which work to protect and promote the upholding of human rights .
Perhaps I can begin by trying to outline the current state of affairs and then deal with questions and comments of the kind made , for example , in a letter from the vice-chairman of the Foreign Affairs Committee , Mr Mendiluce , to the President of Parliament , Mr Gil-Robles .
When we talk about human rights policy , at least that part of it for which I have direct responsibility , we are talking about part of an ECU 97.4 million budget , that is to say a part which totals ECU 44 to 45 million and is administered by Directorate-General IA .
It comes under budget chapter B7-7 . We are talking about democracy projects , the fostering of democratic development in Eastern Europe , including the new independent states of the former Soviet Union .
We are talking about more general human rights issues , but also of support for victims of torture .
We are talking of support for a number of international criminal courts - for example the tribunals for former Yugoslavia and Rwanda .
We are talking about the monitoring of elections .
Total spending on these projects is ECU 44.7 million .
Up to the end of May , we had important and valuable outside assistance in managing these funds from the European Human Rights Foundation , with which you are very familiar .
This Foundation was involved in assessing project proposals , had a great deal of contact with applicants in the course of that work , and handled the post-completion evaluation work and the financial settlement for many of these projects .
The fact that this assistance has ceased is undoubtedly one of the main reasons for the concern which has arisen over management of the budget lines for human rights .
Before I go into the situation which has arisen following the loss of this outside assistance and answer the question of how , in these circumstances , adequate management can be assured , I first want to tell you where things stand at present concerning the implementation of this budget line .
To date some 315 applications - project proposals - for aid under the 1998 budget have been received in total .
All these 315 proposals have been assessed .
So far , the Commission has given its approval for ECU 19.1 million out of that ECU 44 million .
This is for some 35 projects , whilst preparations for decisions to be taken in the Commission are largely complete in respect of ECU 18 million , that is to say for about 41 projects .
So we really expect the Commission to have taken a decision within the next three weeks on 76 projects to a total value of some ECU 37 million - I am still talking about 1998 .
Out of the total sum of 44.7 million , that leaves about five to six million which have already been earmarked for civil society projects in Kosovo .
The quickest and most effective way of implementing that will be by transferring the sum to the budget line for reconstruction in former Yugoslavia .
Those submitting project proposals which cannot be accepted will be notified as speedily as possible .
I should stress that acceptance of a project proposal is based solely on considerations such as quality , and of course the priority which the project merits .
These are criteria which have been applied in earlier years to project assessment , and in other years too only some , a third to a quarter of all applications , were approved . In other words , over the years there have always been more applications for aid than the budget could fund .
In itself that is hardly surprising .
Of course it only makes sense for the Commission to approve these projects if there is also proper follow-up to them , in the form of awarding contracts , implementing the projects and completing the financial settlements .
There is no denying the fact that the loss of the outside assistance which I referred to before was painful .
I have the following things to say concerning that loss .
At the end of 1997 , it was decided for reasons of transparency and to encourage fair competition that outside assistance should be obtained by means of an open procedure , that is to say public tendering .
The aim was to charge the costs of this outside assistance to part B of the budget , to operating appropriations .
But before the tendering procedure could be taken further , all new commitments for the budget lines for human rights were frozen as a result of the famous Court judgment which was delivered in May of this year .
Then came our consultation and the interinstitutional agreement of late July which was concluded for the remainder of this budget year , and which thus made it possible for us to enter into new commitments .
So this was how things got moving again following the Court judgment .
When it came to a new contract of assistance based on the call for tenders , a complication then arose over whether or not the Commission could draw on outside assistance and fund it from part B of the budget . Honourable Members who sit on the Committee on Budgets will recall the discussion on this matter .
In view of the nature of the aid required to implement the budget lines for human rights and then assistance both to beneficiaries - i.e. the NGOs - and to the Commission , that is to say the debate over a joint technical assistance office , it was not possible to draw on the operating appropriations .
The budget remarks for 1998 made no provision for that , and for the same reason it was not possible to draw on part A of the budget line . So the tendering procedure ground to a halt , and with it the chance of obtaining outside assistance .
So where do we go from here ?
Given that the regulation proposed by the Commission as a legal base for expenditure on human rights policy has not yet been approved - it is still under discussion by the Council and Parliament - it looks to begin with as if we shall need another interinstitutional agreement in 1999 , and fairly quickly .
Otherwise we shall have no legal base for 1999 .
But we shall also have to ask the budgetary authorities to add some remarks on the budget lines for human rights which will enable us to draw on outside assistance in carrying out these projects .
Again , it is assistance not only for beneficiaries , but also for the Commission .
The Commission will make that request before the second reading of the budget .
These possibilities , namely the interinstitutional agreement on the one hand , plus the question of budget remarks allowing outside assistance on the other , may provide a solution in the shorter term .
If the appropriate budget remarks are secured for this outside assistance , the Commission can explore all possible ways of obtaining the requisite outside assistance in the short term and perhaps through direct contracts .
By the end of next year , that should give a greater assurance to all those involved that human rights projects will be properly selected and implemented .
1999 could then be used for carefully considered decisions on how our human rights policy should be organised in the year 2000 and beyond , because in the meantime we may gain more of an idea , for example as to the areas of implementation in which the new joint service might take part , and at the same time we can study how human rights policy can best fit in to the reorganisation which the Commission is preparing for the field of external relations and which will take effect from the year 2000 .
When we talk about how human rights policy is to be organised in future , there are also possible variants such as the setting-up of a human rights agency .
But I would prefer to discuss the alternatives with you at a later date , because we feel that for the moment our first priority must be to secure the situation for the rest of this year and for 1999 through an interinstitutional agreement and remarks in the budget .
That is what I wanted to say to Parliament in the first instance , adding a heartfelt cry of my own that obviously there will time and again be tensions between , on the one hand , the justified plea of Parliament and the human rights organisations too that we should not only provide an opportunity for large-scale projects , but also give smaller organisations and those truly working to develop civil society from the grass roots up a chance in our programmes and , on the other hand , the constant pressure which is understandably exerted on us by the Committee on Budgets , by virtue of their responsibilities , to keep the Commission 's use of outside assistance to a minimum .
Because that is the debate which has been directed at us in recent months .
I will end by saying this : give us the tools if we are to do the job .
We cannot keep helping the smaller organisations , which automatically means a lot of projects and thus a fair degree of fragmentation which is sometimes unavoidable , and at the same time be deprived of outside help in implementing these projects .
I repeat : we are in something of a transitional stage as far as the joint service is concerned , because at present I have no means of knowing exactly how much work the joint service will be taking off our hands .
This joint service was set up to achieve a certain economy of scale in the implementation of all manner of aid projects .
I think that what we are putting to you now is the best solution possible and the best guarantee possible for the period from now until the end of next year .
Madam President , the problem is really threefold : the problems over the legal base which have come down to us from the Council , the question of minibudgets where Parliament has always insisted that agreements entered into should be kept , and finally the somewhat unclear policy and management priorities which we see in the Commission itself .
If you look at the reports of the Court of Auditors , DG IA is hardly a model of sound management .
We cannot do much about the legal base for the time being .
I quite agree with Commissioner van den Broek that we must wait until things have been sorted out by regulations , and that means that the legislators must do their job first before we have any long-term solution .
The question of minibudgets will remain controversial , but there is one aspect of these which needs to be pointed out , although the Commissioner did not do so .
We increasingly get into difficulties with the Council over the minibudgets , because they are likely to mean cuts in the operating budget .
Of course the administrative load is quite heavy with small-scale projects of this kind ; in other words , cutting the operating budget becomes very attractive .
So I think we have to look for solutions other than simple outside assistance , which has to be paid for at the expense of policy .
And in my view not out of the operating budget , Madam President - I grant the Commissioner that we may not manage to find the right answer here in the short term .
I think the long-term policy which the Commissioner responsible for budgets has launched within the Commission offers better possibilities , but just now I think that is too difficult .
These are the problems which are facing us , but what we need are solutions .
In the longer term , and I agree with the Commissioner here , ad hoc solutions are no longer acceptable .
We must look for a structure within which we can work to longer deadlines .
I am quite sure that we cannot achieve it in 1999 , but I think 1999 has to be the basis for further developments .
I am so against ad hoc solutions because they lead to the kind of endless discussions we are seeing now over ECHO or MEDA and that is not good , either for us , for the Commission or the European Union .
So long-term stability is what we need .
Madam President , this means that I think the Commission will this year need to find a few extra staff in DG IA to deal with the remaining problems , because I do not know , in all honesty , whether the civil society project in Kosovo is feasible this year .
I think the situation there is still rather too unstable to allow larger-scale projects to be implemented .
So I think priority should be given to human rights problems on a rather broader base .
I wonder too if it might not be possible within the current machinery to make greater use of delegation .
The Court of Auditors ' report repeatedly tells us that we do not really decentralise enough .
This Commissioner knows full well that in the Netherlands , in the area of development cooperation , ambassadors have little stashes of money which they can spend , subject to certain conditions .
I think that kind of mechanism should be created to help small projects of this kind .
That would help us .
And then we have the proposal for a budget remark .
It is something of a nuisance to have to add a new remark at the second reading of the budget , but I think that if we can reach an interinstitutional agreement on it , that will solve our problems for 1999 , once again with all my reservations about the minibudgets which will automatically follow on from that .
But again , Madam President , the only solution is a long-term solution , and I look to the Commission for a proposal on that in the very near future .
Madam President , Commissioner , I do not wish to blame you for this evening 's empty house , as this is entirely down to ourselves .
But the failure of human rights policies to work is something for which both Commission and Parliament must take the blame .
That is what we wish to discuss this evening , and I cannot really endorse the comments made by Mr Dankert .
In my view this is not just a budgetary problem .
I would also like to broaden the context a little , as I was involved in the discussion on all of this in the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Security and Defence Policy .
You failed to make it sufficiently clear that the entire discussion over the last few days and weeks has centred on the issue of the 1998 human rights policy . You talked a little about its execution , but you were not able to tell us much about the budget for 1999 .
We have proposed a budget in which we have again had to accept some minor defects . It affects , of course , not only the human rights budget lines but also Bosnia , Kosovo , Latin America , MEDA , the Middle East and more .
Our point though is a different one . For two years now , we have been looking to have a dialogue with the Commission on various resolutions in order to find new structures , but we did not manage to achieve this .
This explains why the letter was written , which was actually supposed to have gone to the President of the Commission .
But the dialogue did not take place .
Together with yourself at first , we tried to invite the President , Commissioner Liikanen , and even the Secretary-General .
But these visits never took place , which accounts for part of our annoyance .
Even the instruments created hitherto have not worked as we had actually imagined they would .
People have been saying that for a year now .
We are constantly told that the programmes require greater transparency , and Mr Liikanen said this again this morning .
Of course this also applies to the democracy programmes .
But when we hear ( and you have not entirely denied this ) that the macro-projects just go to large organisations - the OSCE , the Council of Europe , and so on - then our view is that there should be interinstitutional agreements to clarify the role played by the European Union and the European Parliament with their resources .
The second point is that we really cannot be glad about your shifting the micro-projects to EU delegations , without central monitoring from Brussels to include the NGOs . We cannot be glad about your shutting out the agency that previously helped you , no matter what the reasons behind it and regardless of your explanations .
They are clients that help us to spread the European Union ideas of human rights and democracy far and wide . Most importantly of course , six months before an election they could really stab us in the back if we were to reclaim one of the most humane features of the European Union in a reorganisation .
I admit that all this is very difficult but perhaps we should discuss it together at some point .
When I consider that the result might be something like the course for the Masters degree in Human Rights , and that at one of its summit meetings the Council might set up a European Human Rights Monitoring Agency , a body which we really do not want as it would make it impossible for us to see where resources are going , then my urgent recommendation is that we meet here once again to have a better dialogue .
Madam President , Commissioner , you have already answered a number of questions which I shall nevertheless put to you again directly .
The Liberal Group is asking for a clear statement on how human rights policy is being implemented , either from you or from the Commission .
It would seem , Commissioner , that fine words are obscuring a far harsher reality - the reality of inability , impotence and perhaps bureaucracy .
How can it be that the Commission supposedly has hardly any officials to implement more than 1 000 projects , and how can we reconcile what you have said with the fact that 200 projects have not been implemented ?
Why has the Commission not drawn on the technical assistance which the European Human Rights Foundation could provide ?
From reports reaching us in recent months , it has become clear that chaos and poor monitoring of projects continue to be the order of the day , with no adequate measures being taken in the wake of what I have to say are administrative irregularities .
We are talking about human rights , about people , and we are talking about people not on the other side of the world , but on the other side of society .
I do not think the Commission has any right at all to gamble with their fate .
Not that it means to , but that is what is happening .
I would also like the Commission to tell us why money is being spent via the ' big ' funds , the Council of Europe and the United Nations .
I do not think we have drawn up our budget just to see development funds channelled into small projects through the Council of Europe .
The process of constant reorganisation within the Commission is damaging the Union 's human rights policy and has damaged it in the past .
The Commission has not yet altogether thrown away the Union 's good name on human rights but it is putting it in jeopardy , and we owe that good name to the work the Commission has done in the past .
The priority for the Liberal Group is microprojects so that as wide a public as possible can be reached , and it is also essential of course that the funds should be soundly managed .
I wish you a great deal of luck and staying power , Commissioner .
Madam President , Mrs van Bladel cannot be here because of a meeting on human rights , and she has asked me at all events to be here before the actual reports on legal matters come up for discussion .
But I have her authority to say just one thing , and that is in response to what Commissioner van den Broek said a moment ago .
I refer to the tension which exists between our inclination to favour small-scale projects , because these have a more direct influence on human rights in countries where this is needed , and the scrutiny exercised by the Commission .
A new case has just arisen in the Netherlands - I will not say which it is , you will be getting a question from me on the matter raised in the NRC on the misuse of funds in South Africa and so on , and I shall not go into it now - but it is most important , and here I totally agree with Mr Bertens , that you really do have the necessary know-how and powers of scrutiny to ensure that small projects are monitored properly .
I wish you every success , and I thank you for your attention .
Madam President , Commissioner , with the coming 50th anniversary of the UN Charter of Human Rights , I think it is quite shameful for this House to be engaged this month in a discussion on what is so bad about the management of DGIA .
As you began your comments with the statement that rumours were circulating , I would like to point out that you are also responsible for giving rise to some of them .
Five or six weeks ago , I wrote to you personally to tell you of my worries on this subject . To this day , unfortunately , I have received no reply .
I am having to answer telephone calls such as the one today from a colleague in the Belgrade organisation ' Women in Black ' , which reached agreement with the Commission upon a project in 1997 , carried it out , wrote the final report , and has been waiting for the final payment to be made since the beginning of 1998 .
This is because no one in the Commission has been able to read the final report , declare the work to be in order , and say that the organisation should receive the final payment because it has managed the project according to the rules .
Please tell me , what should I say to these people on the telephone ?
Should I say that there are some rumours in circulation , but that in general everything is going terrifically well in the Commission ?
Or should I say that things are not that great ?
We both know exactly what the truth is .
It is out of the question for us to take this issue of mini-budgets and legal bases , and fight it out at the expense of the NGOs in this sensitive area .
Mr van den Broek , pressure from the Committee on Budgets would make no difference at all to the mini-budgets . This has to do with the correct application of the Financial Regulation , which stipulates that money from Part A should not be used for Part B and vice versa .
You cannot say that the Committee on Budgets is applying pressure .
The Commission has known since 1991 that mini-budgets were not authorised and it has used them anyway .
I very much agree with you that a solution should now be found to this particular issue .
I was glad to hear you say therefore that in the 1999 budgetary procedure , together with the Commission and Council , we are going to find a solution for next year , and I hope for this year too , as you indicated .
At any rate , what makes the rumours so offensive is that behind all this lurks an unspoken policy change by the Commission .
That is why you must tell us whether you agree with Mr Burghardt , when he wrote on 22 October this year that in 1998 and 1999 priority will be given to payments to the OSCE and the Council of Europe , and so on .
If that is the new Commission policy on human rights , then we might as well give up , and then a new debate on the true meaning of the construction of civil society and the defence of democracy and human rights both inside and outside the European Union will begin .
Madam President , this is clearly a case of a Commission manoeuvre backfiring .
Chapter 7 was ' invented ' by Parliament and we are proud of it .
Every year more money and more resources are requested .
Every year , for example , I table an amendment asking for more officials for the internal management of this item , but this amendment is never adopted by the Committee on Budgets .
The Commission has tried to argue over a system which basically worked until it was unfortunately realised that outside bodies were acting to accelerate the contracts .
The Commission 's manoeuvre has backfired and we are the first to have said that such a system cannot work .
The lack of additional officials is clearly the Commission 's fault .
However , I believe that we too should examine our consciences to see how many of these additional items , which you have secretly removed without our approval , could have been spared if communications had been better and if our priorities had been better structured by using the essential resources provided by the admirable Part A of the budget .
Madam President , it is clear that everyone is concerned about an apparently badly structured case and an organisation which was satisfactory in practical terms and also in terms of finance and accounting given the thanks it received from the Court of Auditors .
So we now find ourselves in a very delicate situation where appropriations might not be committed .
It is clear that the European Union represents the very essence of democracy in the world .
This is because , after the horrors which our continent has experienced and in which many of our countries have unfortunately participated to a certain extent , we want to tell the world that this will never happen again .
Rather , we want to stress that we are the home of human rights and we can therefore give others assistance .
Yet we are deprived of the tools we need and the appropriations that are going to be used by others .
This situation must be resolved as quickly as possible because it is clear that elsewhere in the world , as we chose to assume a global duty in this area , the poor and the disadvantaged , those who are persecuted , exiled or wrongly prosecuted , whether individuals or communities , cannot wait for us to agree on regulations .
They cannot accept the excuse that our procedures are unsuitable and that they must therefore wait until the year 2000 for us to sort ourselves out .
Everyone must make an effort and , even though we should respect certain rules and we should have legal bases , we must be able to act quickly .
This has been proven by Hurricane Mitch , which has ravaged Central America and brought the international community to life .
Why could we not do this ourselves ?
You have made the admirable suggestion of setting up a monitoring centre , or rather an agency , together with other solutions , but the fundamental point is that we must act quickly .

Commissioner , it would be good if you could do this .
Commissioner , it is not clear from your comments whether the money which is to be committed this year is really going to be of benefit to the small human rights projects run by NGOs .
I suspect that due to the shortage of personnel in the Commission , you have decided to simply hand this year 's money over in large chunks to the international organisations .
However , in my view this contradicts the budgetary purpose of these resources , which is to build up and strengthen the grass roots organisations of democracy in the beneficiary countries .
I would be very glad if you could dispel my suspicion .
I would also like to ask what problems you had with external support .
And how would you assess these problems within the Commission in the light of the Court of Auditors report , which specifically praises this type of cooperation as the only way for smaller organisations to obtain access to this money at all ?
I have to be completely honest and say that I think these questions must be answered because otherwise the European Parliament is going to have draw its own conclusions .
Madam President , on the point about the interinstitutional agreement , I should like to ask the Commissioner by whose authority the interinstitutional agreement by which there was an advisory committee , established between Parliament , the Commission , the Council of Europe and the G24 , was unilaterally abrogated on 9 January this year .
I used to represent Parliament on that committee , and there were officials from Parliament too .
We were told it was now ended .
Since that time none of the programmes under democracy have gone forward .
It is important to know that the Commission decided then to take all these matters in-house .
Further , why , in response to a number of questions here , the contract in the tender brochure , properly entered into , which was won by the Human Rights Foundation , was never enacted .
The result of that is that the democracy programmes , which we all support here , and the human rights programmes , are now dying .
To take the last question first , Mr McMillan-Scott is aware that there are no longer two deadlines per year for submitting applications for aid , as was formerly the case , but that applications may now be submitted all through the year .
Consequently there was no point in continuing the procedure whereby a review of them was conducted twice a year .
Let me begin , Madam President , by clearing up another seemingly persistent misconception , namely that although policy in that direction has changed compared with last year , we are now focusing all our attention on the big organisations , OSCE or the Council of Europe .
I can tell you that if we look at last year , the proportion of our spending which went to those organisations was about ten per cent .
I should add , and I have not heard anyone make the point here tonight , that these projects are also human rights projects and civil society projects organised with the Council of Europe for the Baltic states , and in Albania too , and we all know what is going on there , and in Ukraine .
In other words , it will not do to regard those projects as less worthy and put all our energy into small projects .
The emphasis is still on small projects , but with all the difficulties inherent in them .
I would ask you to understand here that it was less difficult for us to deal with these small projects while we were indeed able to count on outside help - help not only for the beneficiaries , the NGOs , but also for the Commission itself , which cannot manage and implement hundreds , sometimes thousands of contracts using its permanent staff alone .
So for the benefit of Mrs Müller I would say yes , I do indeed recall your letter , which I believe recommended that we should conclude direct contracts with the European Human Rights Foundation .
Mrs Müller also knows that last year we got bogged down over this tendering procedure as regards the Foundation due to the restricted interpretation given to our freedom to use outside assistance , the whole discussion about disputes , and so on .
In other words , it is one thing or the other , Madam President , either we agree that the Commission cannot handle these kinds of projects , and smaller projects , without outside assistance , or we say no , you cannot have that outside assistance .
It is up to you to decide what Parliament wants , but I have no option but to put the emphasis on larger-scale projects , which I am not doing at the moment .
So above all let us agree on where we stand .
Madam President , I think what we are in fact proposing now is that we make sure for the immediate future that we have an interinstitutional agreement , so that in any event a legal base is created pending adoption , formal acceptance of the new regulation .
That , as we know , is currently being debated by the Council and Parliament , and with all the amendments which have been put down it looks as if it may take some time before this regulation is adopted .
So we need an interinstitutional agreement in order to be able to continue the legal base .
Secondly , and no doubt in this case equally importantly , we must at all events have a budget remark which , as I said in the first instance , will allow us to secure the outside assistance we need for 1999 , possibly by the conclusion of direct contracts .
I see no other way of restoring the good reputation we had previously established .
And it certainly is not true that we have too few staff working on this , Mr Bertens , I too read those newspaper reports , about two hundred projects still floating around somewhere and still not yet assessed .
That is not correct either .
We have reached the stage where we can say for 1998 that within a few weeks ' time we shall not only have assessed all the projects but also , as far as the Commission is concerned , we shall have accepted and approved them .
But of course that still leaves us with the whole business of contracts , implementation , payment and evaluation .
The Commission cannot do all that itself without outside assistance .
If I am raising my voice here , it is because we feel very strongly about this .
Human rights policy is something of huge importance to the European Commission , as it is important to the Union as a whole .
We have very specific contacts on that with a large number of organisations which are active in this field .
We are very much concerned , for example , with a region like Eastern Europe where the whole process of developing a civil society is naturally part of the efforts to foster an effective process of integration .
But it is not fair to hold us solely responsible for one or two hiccups last year : the first time when the Court judgment meant that we could not create a legal base ; the second time when a very restrictive interpretation was given of the freedom to use outside assistance , because of all the debate concerning disputes and the like .
It distresses me greatly , Madam President , to be told by the Court of Auditors year after year that our aid projects , PHARE and TACIS to name but two , can never be implemented with our existing staffing levels and then to be accused in a Court of Auditors ' report this year of making too much use of outside assistance , with as a result the whole debate which has now taken place in Parliament .
It prompts me to ask , what am I supposed to do ?
How can I in fact implement these projects if I cannot increase my staff , and I ask the question again .
Because once these projects are completed , the question is whether or not those people are still needed .
So some degree of flexibility has to be maintained .
We have to try to find a solution to this , and I shall certainly play a part in assessing the ideas put forward for the longer term concerning agencies and suchlike .
That concludes what I have to say , Madam President , and I must thank the House for its altogether constructive comments .
I hope that in the short term , budget remarks will in any event provide a solution for next year .
That will mean that the NGOs and those who benefit from their work do not suffer , and it will give us a little more time to consider together how best to proceed in the longer term .
I would just say to Mrs Lenz that I suggested earlier in the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Security and Defence Policy , where I am a very faithful visitor , that I might come once or twice a year to exchange views with you on human rights strategy as such .
Not management and operational matters , the place for that is a debate such as the one we have had this evening , but to trace the broad lines and hear what Parliament thinks .
I have no problem at all with that , but first we must see to it that we get the ship under way again .
I think that is the main priority .
Thank you , Mr van den Broek .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 11.30 a.m.
Patents
The next item is the report ( A4-0384 / 98 ) by Mr Añoveros Trias de Bes , on behalf of the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights , on the Commission Green Paper on promoting innovation through patents ( COM ( 97 ) 0314 - C4-0342 / 97 ) .
Madam President , Commissioner , the Green Paper we have before us has three main aims : to provide an overview of the protection afforded by patents , to examine the need for further Community action and to consider the form and substance of any such action .
Commissioner , of all the methods available to protect innovation , a patent is one of the most important .
From your point of view , however , the present system has three serious shortcomings . It is complex - national patents exist alongside Community patents - , it is costly , and it does not offer uniform protection in all the Member States .
Taking all this into account , the Green Paper queries the extent to which the parties concerned would be prepared to make use of a system of a Community patent based on a regulation , on the basis of Article 235 of the Treaty . This arrangement would replace intergovernmental agreements such as the 1975 Luxembourg Convention or the agreement signed in 1989 , which have not come into force .
A regulation of this type would enable users to benefit from an accessible and legally secure system , at a reasonable cost .
Further technical issues with a bearing on the future of a Community patent are raised : harmonisation , the impact of the information society and electronic commerce , to name but a few .
Some of the other issues referred to in the Green Paper are employees ' inventions , the use of patent agents and the recognition of professional qualifications .
Finally , the Green Paper raises the issue of the best way of modifying the system of fees within the patent system , to ensure it is appropriate for the service provided but does not deter the protection of innovation .
The proposal for a resolution adopted by the Committee on Legal Affairs proposes harmonising this legislation within the European Union in order to consolidate the internal market , which is particularly important in advance of enlargement .
The Luxembourg Convention and the 1989 Agreement do not provide unitary protection for patents within the European Union .
Such a Community patent will have no option but to coexist with national patent systems .
Further , we need to ensure that a Community patent can be converted into a European patent and devise a system whereby , conversely , a European patent can become a Community patent .
The European Patent Office should be the technical operator of the patent , in cooperation with national authorities .
In the opinion of the Committee on Legal Affairs , a Member State must not abandon its national language since a patent is a means of providing information concerning the state of the technology and legal certainty .
We therefore support the principle of linguistic equality , Commissioner , and would draw your attention to our recommendation for a procedure providing for such equality and a range of languages , on condition that this does not result in undue cost .
As regards jurisdiction , national courts must be competent both in cases of infringement action and patent revocation , as is the case in the system used in trademark law .
In our view , there should be two national courts to ensure more flexibility , greater ease and lower costs , especially for SMEs .
The body of appeal should be the European Communities ' Court of First Instance .
We feel that the issue of employees ' inventions should be settled by the Member States themselves .
In our view , the mutual recognition of industrial property agents should also be considered .
In conclusion , Madam President , Commissioner , the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights calls on the Commissioner to establish a working group with the task of preparing one or more models for insurance to cover legal expenses in the field of patents .
The working party should , for instance , study the way in which the scheme is funded , insurance cover , the level of premiums and a control authority .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I must first congratulate the Commission and particularly Commissioner Monti , who was responsible for this Green Paper on the Community patent , together with Mr Añoveros Trias de Bes , rapporteur for the Committee on Legal Affairs , on the excellent work carried out on such an important issue .
Clearly , this issue is significant not only as regards legal protection , but also from an economic point of view .
The Green Paper is subtitled : ' promoting innovation through patents ' .
The number of patents granted is often one of the measures used when analysing the importance of innovation and attempting to quantify it in the various areas .
We have evidently been found wanting at European Community level : there is not sufficient harmonisation , as no genuine European patent exists .
Mr Añoveros Trias de Bes has already remarked that we are still operating within the framework of the 1973 Munich Convention on the European Patent , and that neither the 1975 Luxembourg Convention on the Community Patent or the 1989 Agreement have been implemented .
The Committee on Economic Affairs has considered this matter and unanimously approved a series of recommendations . I have proposed these as amendments .
Essentially , they have three main aims .
Firstly , they aim to facilitate the introduction of the Community patent through fees at Community level .
Secondly , they aim to facilitate the transition from the present patents at Member State level to the proposed Community patent .
Thirdly , they aim to explore the possibility of patenting computer or software programmes as is already the case in Japan and in the United States . We have raised this issue repeatedly in many contexts , in connection with utility models or other aspects of protection and inventions .
Madam President , spending Tuesday evening discussing patents is not everyone 's idea of fun .
Yet my group colleague , Mr Gasòliba I Böhm , was right to point out how important the subject is both for individual countries and for the Union as a whole .
If we are to foster innovation and remain competitive , we need a system that works .
There is also a regional policy dimension , in that citizens around the Union are entitled to a level playing field .
I trust that a system will be devised that enables the European Patent Office to fulfil its mission , which is ultimately to spread knowledge .
As Mr Añoveros Trias de Bes says , the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights has come out in favour of equal treatment of languages and advocates decent and fair service for all companies .
I hope that the Commission will take up these proposals , and that the European patent will promote the spreading of information , benefit technology and guarantee legal certainty .
If the committee 's ideas are taken up , I am confident that this will be the case .
It would be good if the Commission could accept the creative suggestions we put forward in recital E and paragraph 2 , where we call for effective cooperation between the European Patent Office and the national authorities .
I did mention to the Commissioner on another occasion that new technology would make a decentralised approach possible , and I hope that this option will be pursued .
May I also express my gratitude to the rapporteur for the excellent degree of cooperation .
I do not make a habit of saying thank you , but Mr Añoveros has done such a good job that I cannot resist .
What is more , my Nordic soul glows at the mention of the EEA in the text of the resolution .
All too often we forget that the directives which we adopt will , in many instances , apply in Norway and Iceland too .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I should first like to thank the Commission for taking the initiative to produce this Green Paper .
If we want to ensure that Europe is competitive , we have to work on innovation .
Sponsoring research is one element of a policy supportive of innovation .
At the same time , however , it is of crucial importance to guarantee effective legal protection of industrial property throughout the EU .
In this context , it is also particularly important for all the options for reshaping European patent law to be explored , a process which the Commission has initiated with its Green Paper .
A key point , to which I - speaking on behalf of the Committee on Research - attach particular importance is improving patent protection for computer software .
Pursuant to Article 52 ( 2 ) of the European Patent Convention and the corresponding national patent laws in the European Union , computer programs are excluded from patent protection .
If we do not want to lose our competitive edge in the field of computer software technology , we need to change this legal situation .
We should , therefore , delete computer programs from the provisions of Article 52 ( 2 ) of the European Patent Convention .
In addition , the respective national provisions should be harmonised by means of a European directive .
By introducing these new arrangements , we could avoid falling behind the United States and Japan , where there is already extensive patent protection for computer software .
New rules also need to be introduced on the language regime .
The rapporteur 's preferred solution here is also the one I have supported in my opinion for the Research Committee .
A translation of the full patent specification would only be required if there were a dispute over the rights created by the patent .
This would mean that the average translation costs could be reduced from their previous DEM 22 500 to DEM 4 000 .
Once again , my thanks go to the rapporteur .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , patent policy is a very important instrument in economic policy , and licensing policy is directly derived from patent policy .
Research and development can thus lead to new products being created , and there was once a very good quotation on the subject : ' today 's research and development policy is tomorrow 's social policy ' .
A good patent policy is a particularly effective way of supporting research policy .
We need to be aware that , on the one hand , there are the small-scale inventors who , once they have invented something , face the problem of developing the idea into a marketable commodity .
Without a patent , it would be easy for a large company to appropriate this idea and exploit it .
We know of many researchers , inventors working on their own , who have spent years , if not decades , working on particular ideas .
On the other hand , many multinational companies have large research establishments which have billions pumped into them , and ultimately , of course , this investment has to pay off .
That is why I am in favour of harmonising national provisions , because it is important , for both small and large companies , to identify the basic conditions which will make a single procedure possible .
We know that inventiveness is important .
If the Japanese display a very low level of invention , and we in Europe a very high one , then there will be many patents in Japan , and not in Europe , and this will affect the balance of licences accordingly .
That is why I very much welcome the Commission proposal , precisely because international policy on patents and licences is an extremely important instrument for Europe .
Madam President , you can deduct my time from the three minutes I had on the Ferri report .
I am not Mrs Schaffner who was down to speak , and nor am I Mrs van Bladel .
But on behalf of my group , I have to say that we are particularly grateful both to Mr Añoveros and to the Commissioner for this project , which is so important to Europe because in terms of the simplicity and safeguards we are seeking here , it is far more accessible than large-scale projects which encounter far more problems , and Commissioner Monti knows that .
So I hope that the small project , which is far more important than large projects for strengthening the competitiveness of Europe 's small businesses , will come into effect and be implemented quickly , and once again my warmest thanks to both gentlemen for their contribution here .
Mr President , the patent system plays a crucial role in promoting innovation , growth and employment in the Community .
In order to play this role to the full , the European patent system needs to be thoroughly overhauled and updated .
It has two very obvious weaknesses , especially if compared with the systems in North America and Japan : it is costly and it is incomplete .
As is clear from the report by Mr Añoveros Trias de Bes - whom I congratulate on the quality of his work - there is a direct link between the competitiveness of companies and the free movement of goods and services within the single market .
A coherent and effective Community system of patent protection is a vital element in this context .
The Commission 's Green Paper has been successful in generating a very broad-based debate on this issue , in which those concerned have participated enthusiastically .
The overall message emerging from these discussions is that the effectiveness of the patent system should be boosted by fully incorporating the practical needs of users .
Moreover , as is rightly highlighted in the motion for a resolution under discussion today , the system must be restructured prior to the enlargement of the European Union .
In particular , a clear and unanimous consensus has emerged that the right approach to reforming the system is the introduction of a unitary Community patent , preferably through a Community regulation , as was done in 1994 for the Community trade mark .
I would recall here that , in late January 1998 , the Commission held a meeting of experts from the Member States , an overwhelming majority of whom expressed a willingness to engage in legal and technical discussions linked to the design of the Community patent .
The Economic and Social Committee , for its part , was virtually unanimous in adopting a highly positive opinion on the whole range of proposals aired in the Green Paper , including the introduction of the Community patent .

I am pleased to note that the proposals put forward by Mr Añoveros go along similar lines : these proposals are extremely cogent and well-balanced , and I can assure you that they will be studied in detail by the Commission as it makes the legal preparations for introducing the Community patent .
I would also say , with regard to the system of insurance to cover the costs of legal proceedings connected with patents , that the Commission will investigate the best ways of promoting this system across the Community and will involve the European Parliament in this task .
To conclude , the Commission is now thoroughly convinced that the patent system must be modified as soon as possible .
This modification must be based , on the one hand , on legislation to establish a Community right to patent protection and , on the other , on the updating and harmonisation of national rules on certain specific points , including the patentability of inventions relating to computer programmes , as mentioned by various speakers .
In addition , this new framework could perhaps include Community action to support efforts made by national patent offices to promote innovation .
I believe that the system must be developed within a Community context and not , as originally intended , through an international convention .
Such an approach will inevitably strengthen the Union 's hand when it comes to negotiating international agreements , and the role of the European Patent Office as technical operator of the Community patent will be guaranteed .
The Commission will shortly be preparing a communication on the follow-up to be given to the Green Paper ; this communication will conduct a thorough review of the consultations and announce the specific measures which the Commission intends to present in this important sector in the near future .
The European Parliament will obviously be involved in this new stage of our work , but I already wish to thank Members for the constructive way in which they have participated so far .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 11.30 a.m.
Supplementary pensions
The next item is the report ( A4-0400 / 98 ) by Mr Ferri , on behalf of the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights , on the Green Paper on supplementary pensions in the single market ( COM ( 97 ) 0283 - C4-0392 / 97-00 / 0595 ( COS ) ) .
Madam President , what is to become of Europe 's pensioners ?
The Commission 's very well-structured Green Paper addresses this question - and it does so in a responsible fashion , as do we in the European Parliament , in these times of widespread crisis when the two most crucial and worrying issues of all are the economic future of pensioners and jobs for young people .
Hence the need for this initiative taken by the Commission , which I should like to thank , and in particular Mr Monti himself .
The Commission took the initiative , with active support from Parliament , of holding public hearings with the leading experts from various European countries ; these , I believe , have shed light on a whole range of aspects .
The first point to make is that we are all convinced that the first pillar - state social security - must remain the cornerstone , the foundation of the system .
But it is not sufficient : cracks are appearing , and it cannot guarantee our economic future .
That is why , together with life assurance which is well established and well regulated , pension funds are coming under the spotlight .
A Community framework is however lacking : the Commission attempted to create one in 1991 , but the proposal was subsequently withdrawn ; there was an interpretative note from the Commission , if I remember rightly , which was then overturned by the Court of Justice ; and now here we are again making a fresh attempt .
We are calling on the Commission , given that it made such a good start , to draw up a directive taking due account of the various aspects which we have sought to highlight .
One key point in the background is of course the sustainability of the euro , which in fact changes the frame of reference for pension funds and for supplementary pension schemes in general ; in many senses , it certainly facilitates investment and cross-border mobility of workers .
I must say here that another directive , a very recent one , has tackled at a most opportune moment the problem of acquired rights , also an important aspect of this afternoon 's report .
In addition , the report sets out to cover various general aspects : taxation , in other words fiscal harmonisation to eliminate the undoubted risk of double taxation , which at present jeopardises the future of anyone working for a multinational who is transferred or even temporarily seconded and runs the risk of being taxed twice over , including from a pension point of view .
Another aspect is fund management , with administrative managers and investment managers : this is another very sensitive point which we have investigated jointly with workers and under their supervision , ensuring equal representation of men and women ; this aspect has been stressed repeatedly here , in opinions from the Committees on Social Affairs and Women 's Rights which we have taken on board .
Then of course there are organisational aspects : a Pension Forum has been proposed , and could I believe be useful for the purposes of wider comparisons ; the so-called European passport ; and a stock exchange for SMEs , which will have the task of making investments that are vital and very sensitive , but at the same time very advantageous and very stimulating .
All of this has still to be achieved , through capitalisation and the ' prudent man ' principle .
This point is an important and interesting one .
I attended a congress on pension funds in Munich , where this concept of the ' prudent man ' was discussed at length .
I took the liberty of putting forward a framework , a sort of chart with various pointers .
Naturally , the ' prudent man ' is difficult to define , but in this most sensitive of sectors his hands must not be tied , because he must obviously manage his affairs in the light of the particular historical and economic context in which he is operating .
We were nevertheless able to agree in the Legal Affairs Committee on a few little rules , which I believe are of some interest and comply with freedom of establishment , freedom to make cross-border investment , and so on and so forth .
So , all in all , I would once again thank Mr Monti - for his sensitivity and attentiveness - and all who have participated in this work . This package - explained in more detail in the text - should constitute a significant turning-point in our economic system and also in the fundamental rights of our citizens .
Madam President , Commissioner , first I must congratulate the Commission on the fact that thanks to the Green Paper a full picture has been provided of supplementary pensions and the whole question of pensions , and it is important that pensions should be considered at European level .
If the demographic trend continues as it is at present , there will in future be just two employed people funding every pensioner , rather than the four we have at present .
The reason for that is partly that most pension schemes in the European Union are funded by the pay-as-you-go system .
So we urgently need to seek other solutions , because otherwise it may be disastrous when the euro comes in .
I have said this on previous occasions here , and I think we must give it very serious thought .
Apart from that , I think it is very difficult to tell Member States which system they should choose .
But we can use benchmark studies , of the kind which the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs recommends , at least to identify the best practices in the Member States and put these before the various Member States .
The Committee on Employment and Social Affairs also thinks it important that pension systems should be gender-neutral , and that the investment returns on pension funds should be improved .
That after all may lead to lower indirect wage costs , enabling more jobs to be created in Europe .
The same goes for the pension providers ' prudential rules .
If these can be put in place quickly , I think it will mean a better investment yield on pension funds .
These are things which will also be good for jobs in Europe .
Madam President , Commissioner , I think we need to look at pensions again here as a broader-based issue .
I would urge the Commissioner to address the whole question of pensions again , including basic pensions .
Madam President , in my opinion the essential merit of this Green Paper is that the Commission clearly specifies that , in accordance with the principle of subsidiarity , it is for the Member States to decide on the role of the first , second and third pillars which form the basis of pension schemes for employees and the self-employed in the Member States .
I believe that the Community framework needed to ensure the development of a genuine single market for pension funds must be limited to removing the obstacles to the free choice of pension funds , to the free movement of persons and to the freedom to provide services .
I must stress that the prudential supervision rules currently in force in some Member States are too disproportionate to guarantee the security of funds and they prevent fund managers from determining the best capital investment strategy .
With regard to pension fund investment policy , the rules should prescribe the diversification of investment portfolios .
Taxation is clearly a potential brake on the free movement of persons and on the freedom to provide services .
I believe that tax treatment in the European Union must be harmonised , providing for tax exemption or deductibility when rights are constituted , and that beneficiaries should be taxed in accordance with Member States ' income tax rules .
Having said this , as draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Women 's Rights , I must insist on equal treatment for men and women in supplementary pension schemes .
I know that the life expectancy of women is generally longer than that of men , but gender-based actuarial calculations cannot cause the principle of equal contributions and equal benefits for beneficiaries of both sexes to be questioned .
I must also take this opportunity to stress the urgent need for the revision of the directives on equal treatment for men and women in statutory and occupational social security schemes so that we can lay the foundations for the individualisation of pension rights , fix flexible retirement ages for men and women , regulate the rights of survivors and those of divorced spouses during the splitting of pension rights acquired during marriage and , finally , ensure independent social security for spouses assisting self-employed partners in the craft sector , trade , agriculture and the professions .
Mr Monti , I hope that you will inform your colleague , Commissioner Flynn , of these requests .
Madam President , I would like to thank the rapporteur for producing this report because it is a very important one .
I would also like to thank the Commission for bringing forward the documentation , although I may have a few critical comments to make as I go on .
One of the most enriching experiences I have had in the European Parliament is a look at the structures which have governed Europe economically since 1945 .
That has led to huge economic benefits for the people of mainland Europe .
The codecision and the codetermination policy which meant that communities , workers and people involved in the businesses worked together to build up Europe after 1945 was not repeated in the United Kingdom .
In the United Kingdom we adopted the Anglo-American type structure .
In the 1950s we saw the growth of pension and insurance funds in the UK .
The figure now stands at something like £ 1.3 trillion , which converts into something like ECU 1.6 trillion , a huge amount of money by any standards .
And yet we have watched since 1979 , when Mrs Thatcher removed exchange controls in the United Kingdom , an investment drain and a portfolio investment drain from the United Kingdom to other parts of the world : from 6 % to 31 % out of the EEC , which the Commission now admits is the actual figure .
There is no effective control on these funds by the contributors .
They are set to one side as fund managers make use of the huge financial weapon afforded to them in takeovers , mergers and increases in the wages of the fat cats in the City of London .
In any casual glance at the National Association of Pension Funds in my country you would have to search long and hard to find a workers ' representative , and yet there are many representatives from the City of London .
Compare this with Holland , Germany , Sweden , Belgium and the other countries where cooperation , codecision and consultation are the order of the day .
Yet the Commission , in its White Paper , made no reference whatsoever to the possible involvement of the contributors .
I hope and trust that when the Commission brings forward the directive which I understand it is considering , there will be a clear assurance that the contributors towards these huge funds will be involved .
The Socialist Group will support the European market model of codecision and codetermination .
We reject short-termism and we expect financial and economic returns for our citizens .
For a number of years now I have studied the advancement of political democracy .
One of the people that I looked to for inspiration was Tom Paine , who took part in two revolutions , one in America and one in France , and strove for political democracy .
I believe it is time now for us to move forward in order to give the citizens of Europe an economic democracy .
I believe , with the Socialists , that democracy is best served by the European social market model .
Madam President , the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights has incorporated the principal amendments proposed by the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy in its report , and has thus made appropriate comments on the Green Paper .
Five points need to be emphasised , which the Commission should respect when drafting further Community legislation on the basis of the Green Paper .
Firstly : reforms to the scope and structure of the first pillar - that is , statutory pension schemes on the pay-as-you-go model - can only take place at national level , and must thus remain the responsibility of national bodies .
In my opinion , the Community is not competent to deal with contracts between the generations formed at national level .
Secondly : supplementary pension schemes in the internal market are also characterised by a multitude of schemes and pension funds .
Community legislation should not discriminate against pension funds , either in terms of prudential supervision provisions or in terms of tax conditions .
Thirdly : restrictions on investment can only be eased if standard prudential supervision rules guarantee the possibility of controls , the joint involvement - on an equal footing - of those entitled to pensions , and insolvency insurance .
Fourthly : basic tax conditions for supplementary pension schemes need to be harmonised and improved across the internal market , so as to better exploit the potential of the internal market in pension schemes and to make it more competitive .
The principle of downstream taxation of pension entitlements should apply throughout the Community .
Fifthly : a high degree of convergence needs to be achieved within the Community on transferring and preserving pension entitlements and on vesting periods .
I should like to thank the rapporteur , but also the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights , for endorsing the proposals made by the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy to modify the Green Paper .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , we are talking about the future , and the future is very important for everyone .
Babies born today will probably live to be 100 years old !
We know that one of our most important objectives for the future is to remain in good health until we reach old age .
That means that , even today , we need to consider how we can maintain the level of social security for the elderly .
Today we have the principle of the contract between generations , with the result that young people provide what the elderly consume , and we need to complement this , in an appropriate way , with the principle of saving .
It is a question of finding a sensible way to bring public pension schemes into line with private and company ones .
If we can produce basic conditions for an internal pensions market in Europe , then we too will be able to look towards the future with hope .
Madam President , I had not realised I would be getting one minute more , but I shall use it primarily to raise the question of freedom of movement for workers .
At present fewer than two per cent of all workers in Europe are employed in another Member State .
The main reason for that is social security , and pensions too play a major part .
I think we might find the answer to this by exploring further the possibility of a European pension passport , for example .
The directive we have at present is a step in the right direction , but if we are looking at greater flexibility in the labour market , we could have a far more work-friendly system of pensions simply by legislating to allow people to take their pension or their pension provider with them when they change jobs or move to a different country .
I think it is possible to enact legislation at European level to safeguard the value of pensions and beneficiaries ' entitlements .
Pension funds of the kind operating in my country , for example , are rather too reluctant in this respect .
I would ask the Commissioner to take this a little further .
Madam President , pension schemes are based on three pillars .
Firstly basic schemes , government ones - in our country the AOW or Working Incapacity Act , then supplementary pension schemes , social partners with full worker codetermination , and the third pillar , voluntary supplementary pension schemes .
I wish Commissioner Monti luck in this mission , which is a ' mission practically impossible ' .
I must stress that there has been great alarm in the Netherlands at some things which the Italian Prime Minister has said .
Other speakers and Mr Ferri too have already made the point that if there is any meddling with the fixed value of the euro - and rightly or wrongly we in the Netherlands have understood what Commissioner Monti and Mr Ferri have said to mean that the fixed value of the euro might be tinkered with for political reasons - that would meet with fierce opposition from those on fixed pensions .
I would urge Commissioner Monti to allay the fears which have arisen in the Netherlands and to reassure those concerned about his inherently excellent Green Paper .
My thanks to the rapporteur for the first-class job he has done .
Madam President , the Commission 's Green Paper uses the pretexts of the ageing population and the fall in the number of workers to open the door to pensions funds for supplementary pensions .
This is wrong as this approach totally eliminates any dynamic for a process of job creation and reduction in retirement ages .
Even before the consultations on the Green Paper had finished , Commissioner Monti approved a Community directive aimed at defining a liberal system for pension funds in the European Union .
This directive guarantees , for pension funds , the freedom of investment and the freedom to provide management services .
This approach runs the risk of creating a system based on private insurance which would gradually replace social security .
Health and retirement would no longer be rights but would become goods subject to the laws of the market .
The basic aim of the pension fund strategy is to channel savings towards the financial markets .
The French MEPs in my group are totally against pension funds .
This system of capitalisation is particularly dangerous and deeply unfair as it benefits the rich , who have the ability to save , and leaves the poorest with a starvation pension .
This is why we cannot accept the Ferri report prepared by the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights , given that this report conforms to the approach taken in the Commission 's proposals .

Rather , we must defend the pay-as-you-go system which is alone in guaranteeing the rights of employees and which allows the latter to claim a pension in a context of national solidarity between workers and pensioners , between generations and between the nation and its workers .
In order to find new resources and to increase the purchasing power of pensions which often lag behind the cost of living , as evidenced by the recent demonstrations by pensioners in France , we propose to apply a levy on financial products at the same rate as that applied to wages .
Mr President , the Green Paper on supplementary pensions in the single market had two main aims : firstly , to launch the widest possible debate on ways of ensuring the financial sustainability of pension schemes in the Member States .
Lengthening life expectancy and falling birth rates are likely to pose a threat to schemes based solely on the pay-as-you-go model .
Most of these schemes were established at a time when there were four or five workers for every pensioner .
In 2015 this ratio will be in the order of two to one , or even more unfavourable in certain Member States .
The Member States must face up to these changes and organise their pension schemes in such a way as to safeguard the income levels of elderly persons , whilst keeping public spending under control .
As regards the second aim of the Green Paper , we must strive at EU level to ensure that supplementary pension schemes , based on capitalisation , can benefit fully from the advantages of the single market .
The current situation is quite different : it has to be said that in many cases , pension funds face severe restrictions in respect of investments .
As the Green Paper points out , some of these restrictions - some , not all - are not justified by prudential considerations and limit the return on funds , causing pension costs to rise .
These restrictions are hampering the integration of capital markets in the Union , to the detriment of growth and employment .
Pension funds are not free to use any authorised manager established in the Union , and this limits the advantages deriving from healthy and effective competition at EU level .
Occupational mobility is hampered by the frequent absence of mutual recognition of taxation systems and of transferability of supplementary pension rights .
Finally , and in particular , because of the lack of coordination of taxation systems , life insurance companies and pension funds are not free to offer their services throughout the Union .
This situation is all the more unsatisfactory , considering the way that supplementary pension schemes are flourishing in the EU .
Pension fund assets in the Member States already constitute 25 % of EU GDP , and a growing number of countries are relying on these bodies to tackle demographic and budgetary changes .
In addition , more and more people now wish to work in different EU Member States , and they must enjoy the freedom to do so without running the risk of losing their supplementary pension rights .
The Commission has received almost a hundred responses to the Green Paper , from the Member States , the Economic and Social Committee , and financial and social circles .
A large majority of them stress how urgent it is to create a Community legal framework for supplementary pension schemes , which will allow them to develop throughout the single market .
In this way they will contribute fully to consolidating social protection and safeguarding pensioners ' incomes , taking account of the need for equal treatment of women and men - I am addressing Mrs Lulling in particular here ; it is indeed vital that women should not be penalised .
I am very pleased to note that Mr Ferri 's excellent report likewise concludes that it is necessary as a matter of urgency to create a Community legal framework governing supplementary pension schemes , and asks the Commission to propose a directive on pension fund management and better coordination of taxation systems .
This same conclusion was reached in the context of the action plan on financial services , proposed by the Commission on 28 October .
The Commission is quite determined to act along these lines , and will need active support from Parliament .
Broadly speaking , the Commission very much welcomes Mr Ferri 's report and the ideas contained in the opinions from the other parliamentary committees .
Their work has added considerably to the consultations launched by the Green Paper , and will be extremely useful in our future work .
At the beginning of next year the Commission is to publish a communication drawing political conclusions from these consultations .
Thereafter we intend to propose a directive to ensure that pension funds can benefit , under conditions of optimal security , from the freedom of investment and to provide services , which are laid down in the Treaty .
Finally , the Commission will cooperate closely with the Member States in an attempt to abolish the main fiscal barriers to the creation of an internal market in supplementary pensions .
Allow me to conclude with a comment on the remark made by Mr Janssen van Raay .
There is no doubt that supplementary pension funds are a vital instrument in looking after future generations in Europe , not least to guarantee a sustainable financial equilibrium in the long term .
Turning now to Mrs Elmalan , I would say that the Member States will clearly retain every right to determine what role the different pillars of pension schemes ought to have .
It is true that the Commission 's proposed approach to the role of supplementary pension systems is a substantial liberalisation of their assets and management , subject to specific prudential rules .
If we are keen to boost employment in Europe , as Mrs Elmalan undoubtedly is , we are duty-bound to acknowledge that a single market for pension funds will - for the same level of risk - make it possible to obtain a higher yield on pension fund assets , and hence to reduce both social contributions - for the same pension entitlement - and non-wage labour costs .
All of this naturally plays an important role in employment policy .
I therefore believe that few issues are as central to Europe 's economic and social system as this one is in several respects , and I thank Parliament once again for its most valuable contribution .

Mr President , just briefly , when Mr Monti spoke about his Green Paper there was no mention of how the contributors to these funds , i.e. people who put their money in , are to be involved in the decision-making process .
Could he give us some assurance that any of these communications or directives will include that which is enshrined , i.e. the European market conditions of co-determination and co-decision ?
Mr President , I wish to respond briefly to Mr Falconer by indicating that the possible involvement of contributors in the management of supplementary pension schemes and pension funds is , of course , important and falls within the competence of the Member States rather than within the competence of the Community .
I also wish to point out the distinction between a firm producing goods and services in which , at least in some Member States , there are forms of involvement of workers employed in it and a financial intermediary in a broad sense , like a supplementary pension scheme .
It is not the norm in financial intermediaries to have involvement of the counterparts in the management .
To me the best guarantee for contributors is that an appropriate prudential regulation is set out and implemented in practice .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 11.30 a.m.
Vehicles with more than 8 seats
The next item is the second report ( A4-0424 / 98 ) by Mr Murphy , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy , on the proposal for a European Parliament and Council Directive relating to special provisions for vehicles used for the carriage of passengers comprising more than eight seats in addition to the driver 's seat and amending Council Directive 70 / 156 / EEC ( COM ( 97 ) 0276 - C4-0545 / 97-97 / 0176 ( COD ) ) .
Mr President , given the reputation , at least in Britain , of buses being late and given the fact that this particular report is coming back to us a second time , having been delayed since April of this year , it is probably apt that we are starting a little bit late on the debate this evening .
That said , I would like to place on record my thanks to the staff of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy of this House , in particular the interpreters and translators who have quite a task in dealing with this particular report .
They have done an admirable job .
I would also like to thank my fellow members of the Economic Committee , in particular Mr Rübig who is here with us this evening , for their assistance in getting us to this stage .
A friend of mine told me about somebody she met at a bus-stop in my home town of Wolverhampton , a young mother with a child in a buggy .
A bus pulled up for her but she did not get on , she let it go .
My friend asked her why she did she not get on the bus .
She said she could not get on to that particular bus but there would be a low-floor bus along in a little while .
At one level that describes what we are trying to do this evening : to make sure people can get on and off buses .
But at another level we are quite clearly trying to put in place a further important piece of the completion of the single market .
Buses and coaches are important products of the automotive industry and we need to have certain acceptable standards so that they can freely move around the single market place .
I hope that the Commission will accept that although the proposal we have come forward with is a radical one it is nevertheless workable .
I recall being here having a short exchange with Commissioner Bangemann in April , about the derogations in the Commission 's original proposal about taking certain vehicles outside the scope of the directive .
He challenged me as to why that should be the case .
I told him that my proposals would have removed those derogations because to all intents and purposes Members of this House accept that most vehicles are safe and ought to be granted type-approval , not just in their national markets , but also in the European market .
We have come back to that proposal in this report .
A key area , certainly for this side of the House , is accessibility and the provisions for accessibility .
To achieve that the Economic Committee has put in certain definitions of what a passenger is .
We have also put in certain technical standards which we would expect a technical working party to look at as mandatory , for example : the height of the first step , particular specifications for boarding aids , wheelchair accessibility on vehicles and the safety of passengers inside the vehicles .
Allied to that , the committee has also protected the ability of national preferences and regional variations to continue , whilst at the same time accepting that certain standards of accessibility are required .
A further area that the committee has taken on board is the whole issue of driver safety .
If we are to have safe vehicles for the citizens of the European Union to use then we need to make sure that the drivers are comfortable and free from any risk .
Therefore we are calling on the Commission to come forward with a proposal six months after the introduction of the directive looking specifically at driver safety .
I accept that the report which the Economic Committee is putting before you this evening is something of a challenge to the Commission and something of a new approach .
Nevertheless I believe it merits serious consideration by the Commission .
I would challenge the Commission to accept what the Economic Committee is trying to do : to balance out the needs of the citizen ; to balance out our obligation to complete the single market , but at the same time to bring forward a report which is useable and sensible and deals with what is needed and not perhaps what civil servants might want to see .
I accept it as a radical challenge , something which the Commission may not have dealt with before , but I believe that if the Commission is willing to take this new approach on board then we will get closer to completing that single market , we will respect national and regional variations where buses and coaches are concerned , and the sort of story I started off with this evening , of a young mother not being able to get on a vehicle in my home town may never happen again .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Mr Murphy 's very good report is much more far-reaching that the title of the dossier suggests .
This is no longer just about vehicles used for the carriage of passengers comprising more than eight seats .
In presenting these amendments by the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy , we are signalling the beginning of a new era in technical legislation .
Until now , proposals have been settled down to the last detail .
I should simply like to show you the proposals here , so that you can see what huge proportions the technical legislation - just for buses with more than eight seats - has assumed .
The legislator then has to decide whether the height of the step for boarding a bus should be 240 , 260 or 280 mm .
This , however , can and should no longer be the task of this House and its Members .
We are more responsible for laying down the political guidelines and basic principles .
A bus has to be safe , stable and accessible to people with reduced mobility .
Any more detailed provisions must be agreed - on the basis of these principles - by those whom they actually affect : manufacturers , operators and users , especially elderly and disabled people .
In this regard , I should particularly like to thank Mr Murphy for placing special emphasis on this aspect .
That is why we are proposing that a permanent working party be set up to perform these tasks .
It should firstly , for practical reasons , rely heavily on the regulations which already exist in the context of the UN Economic Commission for Europe .
Secondly , European standardisation bodies will be involved , and they have accumulated a wealth of experience with this type of legislation .
Until agreement is reached on the individual issues , however , an alternative way of guaranteeing the free movement of goods and the proper functioning of the internal market will have to be found .
That is why the subsidiary principle of mutual recognition applies .
Once a bus is authorised for use in one Member State , it can be authorised for use throughout Europe .
That also ensures that the arrangements are sufficiently flexible and geared towards customers .
The demands placed on a bus in Sicily are completely different from those placed on a bus in the north of Finland , or in a large city such as London , or in a small town such as Oberplattling in Bavaria .
I believe that we need to give the market this freedom , so that customers can say what they want , and so that manufacturers - once they have learnt this - can offer what their customers wish to have .
Mr President , the Murphy report is not simply another piece of legislative work .
In my opinion , it signals a breakthrough in terms of the kind of legislation we should be adopting and how we should see the EU 's regulatory remit . Evidence has now been produced of Parliament 's faith in the market and those who operate within it .
And , as elected representatives , we have broken new ground .
I refused to take part in the first round of voting in committee last spring .
The all-embracing proposal for a directive contained mathematical formulae and levels of detail that I could not understand myself , let alone explain to my electorate .
The committee was confronted , in addition , with 135 amendments .
The PPE Group abstained at the first vote in plenary and managed to get the report referred back to committee .
We owe special thanks to Mr von Wogau , who is a political stalwart , always ready to take on ambitious reports and opinions .
He , with our support , rightly questioned the wisdom of such extensive and detailed proposals . It was high time that this happened .
I should also like to thank Mr Murphy for his insight and understanding .
As the person responsible within Parliament for the SLIM project , he presumably realises that we need to do more than simply talk . Through our actions , we have to demonstrate our wish to simplify regulatory activity and produce better , and less all-embracing solutions .
My thanks also go to Mr Rübig , who not only asked questions , but played a constructive role in this whole discussion .
Let us hope that industry - which frequently calls for less , but better regulation - does not feel put out by the radical nature of the changes we have made .
There are those who would probably have benefited from a very detailed proposal - the sort of people who take one view in general discussions and another when it comes to action which affects them in particular .
I look forward to seeing the Commission overcome its annoyance at Parliament 's pruning of its painstakingly drafted proposal . There is much to be learnt from the Murphy report .
The European Parliament has now thrown down the gauntlet to the Council and Commission . It is now up to them to demonstrate who can best meet the challenge of simplifying and improving EU procedures - fighting for a common framework , whilst trusting in the subsidiarity principle and letting the market have its say in working out standards and resolving details .
Parliament has put down a marker this week , making it clear that we want a less detailed , but better functioning EU .
We are acting on a mandate from the citizens of Europe , at a time when they are rightly questioning an institutional set-up which has in many ways become unwieldy , obsessed with regulations and bureaucracy .
Thank you , Mr Monti .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 11.30 a.m.
Aerospace industry
The next item is the report ( A4-0362 / 98 ) by Mr Hoppenstedt , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy , on the Commission communication on the European aerospace industry : meeting the global challenge ( COM ( 97 ) 0466 - C4-0547 / 97 ) .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , for a few years now the Union has been devoting considerable attention to European aerospace policy , as can easily be seen from numerous communications issued by the Commission .
The present report , however , does not merely deal with one of the many aspects of this strategic domain , but also analyses the current situation in its entirety , and on that basis devises a coherent European policy for the future .
The importance of the European aerospace industry as one of the paramount factors in our economic future is now generally accepted in Europe .
But this economic potential can only be used to the full if the present fragmented European aerospace industry is restructured to strengthen its competitiveness in the world market , a necessity arising from the increasingly complex nature of the aerospace products that are now in demand .
This becomes all the more important if we consider the significance of the aerospace industry as a source of employment which provided more than 377 000 direct jobs in 1997 .
The fact that the European aerospace industry has been affected in recent years by stiffer competition , cuts in public funding and the meteoric pace of technological development does not make the restructuring process any easier .
Alarm bells started ringing in earnest within the European industry last July with the merger of Boeing and McDonnell Douglas .
This American example of restructuring clearly shows the direction in which the European aerospace industry should also be heading .
Within only five years , three gigantic groups have emerged in the United States through mergers and takeovers .
In an almost faultless blend of technological and economic potential , these groups have brought all areas of military and civilian aerospace activity as well as defence technology under one roof .
This enables them to spread their risks as widely as possible , to strengthen their immunity to cyclical fluctuations and to ensure that , in both technological and business terms , the whole is far greater than the sum of its parts .
But even though , with a patchwork of policies based on national interests , the European aerospace industry has undoubtedly had a very different starting position to that of the United States , for example , a great number of encouraging developments have taken place on a European scale , especially over the past year .
One example is the project for a European Aerospace and Defence Company , which is surely incontrovertible evidence of a desire for restructuring within both the industry and national governments .
Following a number of meetings , Daimler Benz Aerospace , Aérospatiale , Casa and British Aerospace have devised a clear plan of approach , setting out the aims , scope and operational structure of a common aerospace policy covering both the civilian and military branches of aerospace activity .
The first step in this direction will be the creation next year of the Airbus single corporate entity .
Although this is a great advance , it is not the only one .
For instance , 1998 promises to be a record-breaking year for the Airbus in the large-capacity aircraft market .
In the first half of 1998 , the Airbus consortium , with a market share approaching 50 % , secured more contracts than its direct competitor , Boeing - McDonnell Douglas , for the first time .
Civil aviation is certainly the most important branch of the aerospace industry in financial terms , but a long-term European strategy must also be established in the other branches .
For that reason , we must welcome and develop communications-satellite projects such as Sky Bridge , the European answer to Teledesic , and the success of the Ariane programme in the domain of carrier services ; the programmes for the construction of navigation satellites and the creation of satellite navigation systems are taking us in the right direction .
In this context , it is also gratifying to note that provision has been made for this type of venture in the fifth EU framework programme of research under the broad line of action ' promoting competitive and sustainable growth ' and particularly the specific programmes under the heading of ' prospects for aviation ' .
The framework programme also ensures the provision of a specific coordinating mechanism for activities within the various thematic programmes in the field of aerospace technology .
The appraisal contained in the report spells out that Europe can only benefit in future from an unswerving commitment to progress .
The developments and examples that have been described illustrate the fact that Europe possesses great inherent potential .
But if that potential is to be fulfilled , the aerospace industry , with the support of the national governments and European institutions , must take up the gauntlet .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , on behalf of the Committee on External Economic Relations I should like to say how much I welcome the Hoppenstedt report .
I would just refer to two salient points : cooperation and dialogue between Europe and newly industrialised countries such as China ; and the Commission 's involvement in international negotiations on safety and on the allocation of the resources of space and the electro-magnetic spectrum .
From a somewhat broader point of view , I would say that the aerospace industry has emerged from the morass of a year or so ago , thanks to a number of agreements , but that so far it has only been partially restructured .
In institutional terms and in respect of ownership arrangements , the guidelines for privatisation in France have recently been drawn up , but much still remains to be done .
Mr Hoppenstedt has referred to the need for Airbus to have the status of European company , the fact that there is still no European Armaments Agency , and that the national space agencies are seeking a new role , whereas the ESA does not yet have a clear relationship with or clear mandate from the European Union and the Commission .
Two things do give me cause for satisfaction : the allocation to the aerospace sector in the fifth framework programme , which is almost double that of the fourth , and the growing consensus apparent in both political and industrial circles in Europe concerning the satellite navigation programme .
These , in my opinion , are the two positive signs within the Union ; otherwise , I fear that the European aerospace industry is not moving at a sufficiently fast pace for it to meet successfully a worldwide challenge which could be crucial in our progress towards the information society .
Mr President , Commissioner de Silguy , ladies and gentlemen , Mr Hoppenstedt , everyone knows that the European aerospace industry is a prestigious jewel in the crown of our European economy , of our economic power and therefore of our political power .
Like the rapporteur , I must firstly welcome the Franco-German-UK declaration of 9 December 1997 on this subject .
I firmly approve , as does Mr Hoppenstedt , of the European-level restructuring of our military and civil aerospace industry .
This is a necessity which cannot now be denied .
Europe needs powerful integrated industrial groupings in this area , as in many other industrial sectors .
I must at this point question the lack of desire to carry out this restructuring and to create these groupings at the right time in other European industrial sectors .
This applies , for example , to the shipbuilding industry and even the textile industry to a certain extent .
As someone who has observed these industrial matters for some years , I must be allowed to say this and to express my regret concerning this on behalf of the hundreds of thousands of employees in these sectors , many of whom are now unemployed .
The reason I am saying this is because there are many other sectors which are or will be affected .
This is now clear and we cannot pretend or say otherwise .
I must also take this opportunity to restate that Europe must stop imposing rules , constraints and limitations , in the name of triumphant liberalism , with which our international competitors do not have to contend , which means that they are at an advantage in terms of international competition .
Returning to aeronautics , like Mr Hoppenstedt , and all credit to him , I also approve the transformation of Airbus Industrie to give it more muscle .
I , too , regret our weaknesses and I hope that we will find solutions in the area of communications and navigation satellites .
The two final points which I must stress are the need to jointly develop the next generation of military equipment and airframes and never to forget in Europe the importance in social terms , and in terms of direct and indirect jobs , of the civil and military aeronautical industry and therefore obviously the need to introduce Euroworks councils as quickly as possible .

This is a good report whose subject gives just cause for European pride and is also , in my opinion , a lesson and an example for other European industrial sectors .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , may I begin by thanking my honourable friend Mr Hoppenstedt for his excellent report .
He is an acknowledged expert in this area , and I believe we must recognise that .
We have an enormous diversity of issues to deal with , and to have someone who can deal with a subject in such depth is of extra special importance .
Let us now turn to the substance of Mr Hoppenstedt 's report .
I believe that , while we must create the conditions for the development of a European aerospace industry , it is even more important that companies within the aerospace industry in Europe should get together properly , and there is still much to be done in this respect .
Above all , I believe that a European aerospace company comprising several enterprises which have hitherto operated in a national framework will not tolerate government involvement in the longer term .
I believe we shall have to organise this industry entirely within the private sector , and that remark is especially addressed to one particular country .
Secondly , as far as defence technology is concerned , or Wehrtechnik , as we would say in German , there is an urgent need for us to cooperate so that we do not fall behind our competitors .
In this domain , of course , some very delicate questions remain unanswered , and we have to recognise that whatever is developed must be distributed in accordance with the Member States ' respective market shares , irrespective of where the product has been developed .
But allow me to say at the same time that , whatever we do as a joint European aerospace enterprise , although we must make our own products in order to hold our own against American competition , there is no reason why we should not cooperate with the United States too in certain segments of the market , since some of the companies that will combine to form a European aerospace and defence group will naturally have their own links with the United States and with businesses there .
So the message is : establish a strong position , but cooperate with American corporations too .
Let me end with a word on the satellite navigation systems .
And please listen especially carefully , Commissioner , to what I have to say on this point .
I am not sure whether we in this House , you in the Commission and the governments in the Member States are fully aware of the problems associated with the global satellite navigation system .
Do we really want to become dependent on the United States by jointly developing with the Americans a system that they can switch off at their own discretion ?
We shall have to think harder about ways in which we can assert our own European identity , for this question of global satellite navigation is not only important in terms of aerospace ; it is an important factor in transport policy in general , and I believe that this is a point on which we Europeans must close ranks .
Mr President , the aerospace industry involves 350 000 people , one million jobs and a turnover of EUR 50 billion .
It is threatened , however , by the United States , which benefits from considerable aid for technological development and has been able to anticipate the consequences of international competition .
In this context , the Hoppenstedt report has come at an opportune moment .



As Europe must act quickly and appropriately in order to maintain its place in the aerospace industry , our four main objectives must be : to consolidate the initial success of the launch of Ariane V ; to develop a subsonic long-haul Airbus A3XX ; to achieve the space and terrestrial components of the European satellite navigation systems GNS 1 and 2 , and finally , in terms of research and development , to develop cheaper , lighter and more powerful satellites to meet the needs of telecommunications and Earth observation and also prevention , particularly of natural disasters .
The competition from the US must be met by a resurgence in Europe .
Manufacturers must now increasingly come together .
Only in this way will the European Union score new successes in the aerospace industry and reap the benefit of its skills through the development of new activities .
Technological developments in the aerospace industry represent aid for employment .
We must therefore pay particular attention to developing this sector .
Mr President , this report conforms to the Commission 's approach by supporting the current restructuring in the European aeronautical industry .
I will confine myself to this subject .
Although Airbus has achieved enormous worldwide success , the current upheavals appear to be fraught with danger .
The stated desire to confront Boeing and its might forms the basic argument justifying the aim of and the need for a major European aerospace grouping .
I agree that Airbus should be given more muscle but we must realise that a ferocious battle has begun between the former associates of Airbus , who are now partners , concerning the leadership of the future grouping .
This is despite an interim report having been sent a short while ago to the government .
Although we need to enter a new stage in the European aerospace industry , we should pay attention to the aim and objectives of the current restructuring .
The realisation that the purpose of this restructuring is competition and improved profitability raises concern about the future of an industry which needs long-term investment without any immediate return and whose effectiveness is particularly dependent on the skills and training of its employees , and on the recognition of their qualifications .
This is also an industry which has always benefited in France from government subsidy , to the dislike of some people .
I must stress that the explosion in worldwide requirements in the civil aerospace sector poses challenges of a new magnitude in terms of reducing environmental pollution and in terms of financing costs and democracy .
My opinion is that the reasons behind the economic war in which we are engaging cannot meet these challenges .
Mr President , it seems grotesque that we should have a report before us which purports to be about competitiveness but is actually about an increasingly highly subsidised industry .
Fifty per cent of the aerospace industry is about military production , which is kept alive by public money and public money alone .
The report speaks of efficiency .
Let me tell you that the best way of achieving efficiency and competitiveness would be to combine the restructuring of the aerospace industry with disarmament strategy and not , as is suggested here , to pursue a process of building up and renewing our military arsenals .
The Greens are particularly concerned that , in the absence of safeguards , mergers in the aerospace industry will trigger an irreversible arms spiral in Europe and that this will all happen without transparency and democratic control .
Research and development funds are being misused here .
In view of the changing climate , they would be far better spent on areas such as renewable sources of energy .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , in thanking Mr Hoppenstedt for his report , I must repeat what previous speakers have pointed out , that the restructuring of the European aerospace industry is essential .
The Member States and manufacturers are clearly aware of this and they are currently making progress towards a joint solution which will soon be satisfactory to all the partners .
Parliament must assist this approach by ensuring that social progress is achieved , particularly in terms of Euroworks councils , as has just been mentioned .
The aerospace industry is clearly a sector of considerable strategic importance both because of the guarantees which it can give for the defence of Europe and because of the developments it allows in the use of inner and outer space at world level over the next 50 years .
This is why the current restructuring must not be assessed using purely liberal or capitalist criteria .
The importance of the trade agreements resulting from this type of industry will clearly have an effect on the standard of living of people in Europe .
The Community 's financial support for research in this sector must therefore not be reduced but should actually continue in parallel with the considerable effort being made by the government of the United States in respect of the restructuring of the American aerospace sector .
As suggested by Mr Hoppenstedt , this support must act as an incentive but under no circumstances must the aid from national and European public funds be decreased as this would dramatically reduce the scope of the restructuring undertaken .
One point of particular concern is the development of the A3XX .
Despite the enormous costs , large long-haul passenger aircraft are clear proof of the know-how of the aerospace industry and constitute a powerful promotional tool for a whole family of products , as the 747 has proven for Boeing over the last 20 years .
It is therefore impossible to abstain from this project .
I must stress the confidence which we have in the capacity of all the manufacturers and particularly the workers , managers and design offices of Aérospatiale in Toulouse to successfully complete this magnificent project .
However , we must also take advantage of this ambitious financial programme to improve the organisation and distribution of subcontracting , so that this vital industrial effort can best serve the interests of industrial development in all the European regions concerned .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , no-one can be more delighted by the success of our aerospace industry , and in particular the exemplary cooperation represented by Airbus and Ariane , than the National Front .
It must be emphasised once again that these initiatives owe nothing to the European institutions and everything to the willingness of the manufacturers , technical engineers and workers .
We can only be delighted at the determination not to let our countries be subject to the domination and even in certain market segments to the monopoly of the American giant Boeing-McDonnell-Douglas .
However , we have some concerns about the ulterior motives of the Hoppenstedt report .
Under the guise of economic efficiency and the confused concept of integration , we are moving towards the simultaneous privatisation and Europeanisation of our defence industries .
Under the guise of privatisation , progress is being made both towards our national defence being controlled by the Commission in Brussels by the development of Community regulations and standardisation , and towards the weakening of our military industries by every takeover bid imaginable .
It is particularly worrying that at no time have these industrial problems been linked to the higher interest and security of the Member States , nor even of a hypothetical European superstate .
The aim behind the integration of the civil and military sectors is not to bring into play any synergies , dual technologies or possibilities of public subsidy for research , but is merely to let the armament industry join the common fate of the European economy in terms of competition at any price and seizure of control by Brussels .
With regard to the civil aerospace industry , the French Members must be warned against the immediate consequences of transforming the Airbus GIE into a single corporate entity .
In the current context , this will be lead to the relocation of the headquarters in the Netherlands , followed by the relocation of the production units .
Economies of scale and defragmentation of markets can be achieved using means other than by abandoning our companies to private capital and by Community law .
The search for these means certainly should not involve the Commission .
Problems of national security or strategic industries are too important to be left to the Commission .
In France , we are not ready to forget the Commission 's incredible actions concerning the shipyards .
Mr President , the rapporteur has very clearly emphasised the significance of the European aerospace industry as a genuinely important factor in our economic future .
I recall the parliamentary debates on other Commission communications which have repeatedly made the point that the future prospects and competitiveness of the European Union in the industrial sphere , but elsewhere too , are dependent on developments in aerospace .
That , of course , does not absolve us from highlighting and re-examining the specific political issue that arises in connection with the civil and military components of this industry .
The question we really ought to be asking concerns the extent to which the aerospace market is actually organised or whether such organisation is even possible - to what extent , in other words , the subsidisation of the military sector actually leads to the emergence of good competitive products for the civilian market , as is the case in other parts of the world .
If we recall that the European Union still has but a tiny share of the world market , and if we consider that in 1996 the value of aerospace exports just edged over the ECU 15 billion mark , which is equivalent to about 3 % of all EU exports , we cannot fail to realise that aerospace is so important that the European Union , for all its successes , still needs to achieve more in this sector .
Great challenges await the European aerospace industry .
The merit of the Commission 's communication and the Hoppenstedt report is that they really do emphasise this point , as well as indicating how fiercely the battle for supremacy is being fought in a global market , especially the market in products designed for civilian use .
The United States is still far and away the major player in the global aerospace market - and I am telling you nothing new here - with a 58 % share .
Moreover , the plain fact is that company structures are different in the USA .
That is nothing new either , and for this reason the demands for an end to the fragmentation of the European aerospace industry that have been reiterated in today 's debate can only be supported .
The large number of aerospace companies in a relatively small internal market means that research , production and marketing potential is dissipated , which is not without an influence on the competitiveness of the European Union .
Unlike the American corporations , European producers are scarcely able to cover the increasingly high development and financing risks .
This is one of the reasons why it is important to develop new forms of business cooperation which will ensure , among other things , that economies of scale can be made and that technological and organisational synergy can be produced between the various disciplines within the aerospace industry .
It is therefore essential to make up lost ground rather than falling further behind .
What makes the situation especially critical is that the European aerospace industry possesses great fundamental employment potential and a highly skilled workforce .
Aerospace is one of the top 15 industries , employing more than 370 000 people as well as sustaining thousands of jobs in component manufacturing and in other high-tech areas .
That is why I should like to put it to the Commission that it is high time their industrial working parties and task force began to highlight the employment dimension far more clearly in the papers they produce on industrial policy , including the present one , to emphasise that employees ' rights are part and parcel of the ongoing development of any industry and in particular to prescribe the principle of codetermination for key industries such as aerospace .
Mr President , pardon my smiling , but it is pleasing to be able to conduct a political debate , even at this late hour .
I should like to express my special thanks to Mr Hoppenstedt , who through patient determination is able to achieve progress in important areas such as the development of a global satellite navigation system , not only on this side of the Atlantic but on the other side as well .
It is important to carry this sort of technology in our own product range , so that the market does not depend on a single supplier , because the thought that we shall be able to combine this satellite navigation system with the universal mobile telecommunications system at some time in the future opens up completely new avenues .
That is why I , as a member of the Committee on Budgets , should like to suggest to the Commission that a precise financial framework for the development of this system is long overdue , because when the time comes we shall need the proper hardware , software and mainframes .
That will create many new jobs in Europe .
Mr President , allow me to deal with an aspect that was not expressly mentioned in this excellent report , namely the question of component supplies .
The aerospace industry awards contracts to hundreds of small and medium-sized businesses in most Member States of the European Union .
If Airbus sells a large number of aircraft , that means good business for many upstream companies , which safeguards numerous jobs .
For that reason alone , there is never too much we can do for European civil aviation or for the European space industry .
In order to obtain a proper grasp of the economic significance of the aerospace industry , the Commission should produce a study on the volume of component supplies . That would be an important step .
Above all , the study should include the percentage of total supplies drawn from small and medium-sized businesses and the number of staff employed by the component manufacturers .
It would also be interesting to catalogue the countries of origin of the supplied components , since that would enable us to determine , for example , whether the Airbus really is a pan-European aircraft .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Mr Hoppenstedt 's report contains an in-depth analysis of the situation in the European aerospace industry .
It is an excellent report and on behalf of the Commission I must congratulate the rapporteur because he has also taken into account the main events that have occurred since September , that is since the approval by the Commission of its communication .
I would remind you that the aim of this communication is to draw attention to the urgent need to accelerate restructuring and regrouping in the European aerospace industry .
As you know , only a few aerospace companies can survive at world level in the long term given what this sector represents and given the degree of competition in the world aerospace market .
The American industry has actually already begun restructuring .
In 1980 there were about 20 companies whereas there are now only four .

I can reassure Mr Malerba that we are agreeable to proper cooperation between America and Europe , of which there are some good examples , such as the Snecma / General Electric deal .
However , we must be partners and not subcontractors .
We must therefore be as strong in the world market as the Americans in order to be able to cooperate .
The situation of the European industry is clearly different , as underlined by the rapporteur , given that it remains partitioned at national level and even in terms of its products .
I believe Mrs Randzio-Plath mentioned that the European aerospace industry now has to face three main challenges , the first of which is due to the complexity of the products .
The exponential growth in development costs and the financial risks exceed the resources of the European aerospace companies , even the most powerful .
The second factor relates to the market .
No Member State has an armaments market equivalent to the American market .
The same applies to the aid for research and technological development that American companies receive from the American Government .
Finally , the third element involves the fact that the European aerospace companies cannot take advantage of the same economies of scale as the American giants .
The Member States must therefore understand that the future of the European aerospace industry is linked to the interdependence of the structures existing within the European Union .
Although the manufacturers must be the main protagonists in this restructuring , it is clear that the governments have a decisive role to play in this process .
They must promote the creation of companies at European level by guaranteeing genuine commercial flexibility based on suitable support and training structures .
In the Commission 's opinion , the success of the restructuring will depend on the level of integration of the various branches of the aerospace sector and of civil and military activities at European level .
As several MEPs have rightly stressed , the first stage in this restructuring should be the transformation , which has actually already been agreed , of Airbus Industrie into a single corporate entity involving the companies participating in the GIE .
Furthermore , the European aerospace companies would profit from a Common Foreign and Security Policy and Community rules on the public armaments market .
However , Mrs Ainardi , I must tell you that , in relation to 1980 , the European aerospace industry is now much more oriented towards the civil side .
In 1980 nearly 30 % of this industry 's turnover was civil-related whereas this figure is now 60 % .
Military activities therefore represent a small part of aerospace activities in Europe and are destined to shrink even more due to the growth in civil demand .
Despite the difficulties caused by the problem of restructuring in the defence sector , the immediate progress to be made in the civil sector must not be delayed .
I must also mention the employment problem at this point , in answer to Mrs Randzio-Plath and Mr Caudron .
The question of the level of employment in the aerospace sector is implicit in the Commission 's approach which aims to increase the competitiveness of this European industry .
It is clearly by encouraging competitiveness that employment will be assisted , not only in the aerospace sector but also in other sectors .
It is these efforts to increase competitiveness which have allowed the loss of jobs , which started in 1990 , to be halted .
The number of jobs has now stabilised at about 380 000 .
To conclude , I must stress to Mr Malerba and Mr de Lassus that the Commission is making new efforts in research and technological development to support this restructuring .
However , the Commission is also initiating developments in air traffic and satellite navigation .
You will remember that we prepared a communication on this subject in January 1998 .
The Commission will propose the approach to be taken with regard to satellite navigation in a new communication in the first half of 1999 , together with financing proposals .
Similarly , the Commission has drawn up proposals in terms of standardising and creating a single authority for aviation safety .
Finally , only integrated action by the companies involved and the Member States can provide the framework needed for the survival and development of the European aerospace industry .
Mr Hoppenstedt , your report is a useful contribution to this , and for this the Commission would like to thank you .
Thank you , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 11.30 a.m.
Euro coins
The next item is the report ( A4-0401 / 98 ) by Mrs Soltwedel-Schäfer , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy , on the proposal for a Council Regulation amending Regulation ( EC ) No 975 / 98 on denominations and technical specifications of euro coins intended for circulation ( COM ( 98 ) 0492 - C4-0597 / 98-98 / 0270 ( SYN ) ) .
Mr President , Commissioner de Silguy , ladies and gentlemen , we are dealing today with the amendment of a regulation laying down the denominations and physical features of the euro coins to be put into circulation .
Afterwards , I should like to add a few words on the subject of monetary union to my party colleague Mr Fischer in Rome .
But I shall save that until the end .
The problems that had to be resolved in this report related to the number of coins to be introduced , the denominations in which they would be produced , and lastly the choice of material and the physical characteristics of the coinage .
At the time of the first reading , Parliament advocated a reduction in the proposed number of denominations of coin from eight to six , and a direct correlation between the diameter of the coins and their value to make them more distinguishable for visually impaired and blind people .
When the Council , unfortunately , rejected this and other proposals , including moves to prevent the use of nickel on the surface of the coins , Parliament called on the Council once again in second reading to heed the opinion of the European Blind Union and reduce the number of coins .
Once more , however , our pleas fell on deaf ears ; as a result , in this draft regulation to correct a regulation that is barely six months old , we now read that slot-machine manufacturers are demanding a clear distinction between the 50 cent and 20 cent coins to avert the danger of fraudulent use of doctored 20 cent coins as 50 cent coins .
The European Blind Union is not satisfied that the 50 cent and 10 cent coins are properly distinguishable , because their excessively similar physical characteristics could lead to confusion between the two .
The Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy voted by a narrow majority against my proposing the scrapping of a denomination again in my report .
Nevertheless , we shall have to produce a clear majority tomorrow on an amendment to that effect .
The Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy did , however , favour the introduction of a gold 100 euro coin , and of course the material value and production cost of this coin must not significantly exceed its monetary value , which would mean that the 100 euro coin could perhaps be equal in size to a French 20 centime coin .
I do not wish to go into any further detail , but I should certainly like to ask Mr de Silguy to think less in terms of losing face than of the fact that this gold euro coin is an inevitability .
It is only a matter of time .
With a view to enhancing the symbolic value of the 100 euro coin as the sign of a united Europe and a strong common currency , it should not have a national side as the other coins have , but should uniformly bear a powerful symbol of the European Union .
Famous people , for instance , might feature on the coin .
I think it is possible to reach agreement on that point as well .
I indicated at the outset that I should also like to deal today with the results of the Rome meeting .
May I therefore comment on the position adopted by my party colleague , Joschka Fischer , the German Minister for Foreign Affairs , who today linked monetary union with the Western European Union , or so-called defence union .
Now that monetary union has succeeded , as it were , and the first step has been taken , the way is considered to be clear to push for a common foreign and security policy and a stronger Western European Union .
Mr Fischer is forging ahead too quickly .
European monetary union is the first step .
The second step is social and environmental union .
That is the only way to develop a European economy .
That is crucial .
Unfortunately , my colleague from the Green Party is putting the cart before the horse .
He is creating a stumbling-block for us and for himself .
If monetary union is overloaded , which is what is happening here , there is a danger that it will collapse .
Not all the European nations that have signed up for monetary union are also members of the Western European defence union .
I earnestly urge him to think about that - to think , for example , about Austria , Finland and Ireland .
The question here is whether the euro should be embraced at the expense of neutrality , which is an extremely delicate and sensitive issue .
Is this the new German foreign policy ?
Let me stress that Ireland , Finland and Austria will never submit to such ideas . Nor do I , incidentally , as a representative of the German Greens .
Anyone who plays fast and loose with the neutrality of European nations is undermining confidence in the European ideal and in monetary union .
I have emphasised that point because it has taken a long time to build up this confidence , and more time is needed to consolidate it .
Nobody , whether it be the Green Foreign Minister or anyone else , should jeopardise this progress by overburdening monetary union with other objectives .
Mr President , Commissioner de Silguy , ladies and gentlemen , I must say , like the rapporteur , that I too am aware that we currently have little room for improving the euro coins .
My aim , like the report , is to highlight the case of the visually impaired , and also of many other categories of citizens .
This is why I support the proposal to simply delete the 20 cent coin , which would solve some of the problems raised .
I also support the proposal to change the definition of the edges of the 50 and 10 cent coins , which would solve some of the other problems .
However , these problems once again demonstrate that time and money would have been saved if the citizens and Parliament had been consulted and heard more effectively .
In this respect I must again express my regret at the decisions taken which mean that too many coins and notes are having to be produced .
In addition , as a result of the ridiculous decision to have national faces on euro coins , we have a situation of longer production times , higher costs and greater risks of mistakes and fraud .
Simpler and more reasonable decisions would have reduced the three-year production period expected from 1 January 1999 to 1 January 2002 .
This period will prove to be too long and will therefore lead to mistakes , fraud and even swindles affecting the weakest members of society .
The visually impaired and all other citizens could have been better served .
The rapporteur 's proposals are therefore a step in the right direction and I support them .
Finally , I also support the request for a gold 100 euro coin .
I believe this is a good idea symbolically , economically and also emotionally .
For all these reasons , I can confirm my support for the report and for the amendments which have already been approved in the main in committee .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , a year ago in Parliament we set out our principles : the introduction of a gold euro and the reduction of the coinage to six denominations , possibly eliminating the 2 and 20 cent pieces .
Just as we did by advocating national designs on the reverse of the coins , we can use these measures to enhance people 's emotional identification with their new currency while simplifying things at a practical level .
For the period following the definitive introduction of the euro , we must also step up our efforts to study its practical implications in day-to-day transactions , or perhaps compile a study on the matter .
For example , the lowest banknote , the five euro note , which is worth about 70 Austrian schillings , replaces not one but two of the most frequently used Austrian banknotes , namely the 50 schilling note and the 20 schilling note .
These amounts will soon have to be paid in coins , which means that in future we shall have to carry large money bags around with us instead of wallets .
Or will the development of electronic money be so far advanced by then that these problems might be avoided , or is it necessary to make a one or two euro note instead of printing 200 euro notes ?
Perhaps these are not the things to be discussing when the euro is just about to be introduced , but I believe there is every reason to include such matters in our future considerations .
Finally , I welcome the fact that the most recent statements do not question the independence of the European Central Bank .
The Bank 's independence must remain one of the cornerstones of economic union in order to ensure a prudent and above all a stable monetary policy , because that is still the only strategy capable of winning the trust of the European people .
Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , clearly some of the proposed coins are vulnerable to fraud and hard to identify for blind people .
Yet Parliament pressed in December 1997 for the number of coin denominations to be kept as small as possible and for their value to be linked to their diameter , precisely in an effort to prevent fraud and make life easier for blind people .
A majority of the House , and the rapporteur has already stressed the point , thus failed to see why it should in fact be necessary to bring eight different coins into circulation , especially since electronic cash will shortly be replacing coins .
As far as I know , there is not a single currency set which has so many different coins .
The Council and Commission impressed upon us at the time that we needed to hurry , because production of the coins would be starting shortly .
Perhaps it was thought that the design and manufacture of coins was a technical matter and that Parliament knew nothing at all about that kind of thing .
Neither the Commission nor the finance ministers agreed at the time with our proposal that the 25 cent piece should be dropped .
And what do we find now ?
Even the experts could not manage to design coins which are easily recognisable to the blind and proof against fraud .
We have wasted time , not because Parliament wanted to make amendments , but because we now have to go through the whole exercise again .
It does not look as if the bodies responsible are going to take any notice of our opinion this time either - I hope I am wrong , Commissioner .
It does , admittedly , make sense that the Commission should take account of the views of the European association for the blind and the vending machine manufacturers .
I wholeheartedly endorse Mrs Soltwedel-Schäfer 's proposal , and I thank her for the way in which she has approached this matter .
Mr President , I fully endorse the substance of the rapporteur 's comments in so far as they referred to the social aspect of the coins .
The Council has shown no signs of a social conscience in this matter .
The introduction of the euro would be a unique opportunity to prove that the European Union is prepared to make a gesture for the benefit of those citizens whom fate has placed at a disadvantage .
Many Member States are still in the Middle Ages anyway in terms of facilities for the disabled , at least by comparison with the United States .
The opportunity to design these coins in such a way that those who are blind or visually impaired can easily identify their value by feeling them has sadly been squandered .
This would have been a means of giving the euro a human dimension , so to speak .
I am in favour of the introduction of a gold 100-euro coin , one reason being , as the rapporteur so eloquently put it in her report , that it would enrich the new currency by lending it an emotional aspect .
Mr President , the amendments proposed by the European Commission are to be welcomed , since they are designed to help the visually impaired , to protect consumers and to thwart counterfeiters , as the rapporteur has indicated .
To be perfectly honest , however , I must say that Parliament was aware of this a year ago and came up with some very sound proposals .
The Commission considered the proposals to be good , but not practicable because of the timetable and the early deadline .
I therefore find it regrettable that lobbying in the course of this year has resulted in changes being made to the draft regulation after all .
I thought we in the European Parliament were still supposed to be the legitimate representatives of the consumers and citizens of Europe .
I consider it right and proper that the 50 cent coin should be 0.8 grams heavier so that coin-operated machinery can distinguish more reliably between 50 cent and 20 cent coins .
I consider it right and proper that the edge of the 50 cent coin should differ from that of the 10 cent coin , since it has proved difficult for people with visual impairments to distinguish between the two .
For these reasons the proposal merits approval , but there seems to be no logical reason why Parliament 's proposals in particular could not be implemented , given that our findings should have carried at least as much weight as those of the specialised associations .
Every effort must now be made to ensure that these coins gain acceptance , not only in the financial markets and among financiers but also among the general public . Since monetary stability is so especially important to our citizens , the mints must be able to guarantee at this juncture that the currency will still be counterfeit-proof after these alterations , for I believe that was one of the arguments used against the European Parliament proposals .
I also endorse the rapporteur 's view that we need a sort of stability symbol in this economic and monetary union which will grow into a community rooted in stability .
What is the reason for minting a 100 euro coin in gold ?
I believe there is every reason .
For one thing , the proposal is consistent with the decision of the European System of Central Banks to hold only 15 % of currency reserves in the form of gold .
In view of the high gold reserves held by the national central banks , this proposal makes sense from both a monetary and an economic point of view , because it precludes the adverse effects on the price of gold that would result from any dissolution of gold reserves .
A gold euro coin can also help to build confidence in the stable foundations of monetary union . That is certainly an important reason .
In the past , many European governments have used metal and its value to prove their commitment to stability .
A euro coin made of gold can therefore continue this laudable tradition .
That is why it is high time that the European finance ministers and the central banks decided in favour of the gold euro coin , because unless the resistance of the central banks is overcome , another initiative will come to naught .
If there is a surprisingly heavy demand for these coins which creates an imbalance between their market value and their nominal value - and I say this partly to calm one or two fears - production of the gold coins could be halted .
That has happened with other coins , such as the French silver coin .
But in that case too , the effect of the initial commitment was to stabilise the franc .
The finance ministers ' argument that there cannot be a 100 euro coin because there is already a 100 euro note seems a fallacious one to me .
Such duplication occurs in certain monetary denominations in many countries .
It is possible , after all , to ensure that banknotes and coins of the same denomination are not competing for public favour .
The 100 euro coin is also an overdue successor to the 200 franc Napoleon coin which circulated throughout Europe ; it will be a collector 's piece , a coin of value , a symbol which may well help the euro to win over the hearts and minds of the European people .
Mr President , everything has been said , but not by everyone and certainly not by me .
For that reason , I should like to add a few words on the subject in general .
I find it marvellous that Mrs Soltwedel-Schäfer has been grappling so valiantly with this report and is still doing so , even though the striking presses have long been working to produce the coins we have discussed here today .
I am also gratified that all the things we had proposed in the past have now been put on the table here by the Commission , especially the proposals that affect the 11 million Europeans with impaired vision .
I believe this emphasises the fact that we are canvassing for confidence in the new currency within this section of the population too .
With the introduction of the euro only a few weeks away , confidence-building measures are precisely what is needed , and they are precisely what these proposals will help to achieve .
I find it really rather comforting to note that - as Mr Rübig has also spelled out here - the German Minister of Finance has come right back into the race at the final bend by endorsing the call for confidence-building measures , instead of standing on the sidelines casting doubt on the sovereignty and independence of the Central Bank with ill-considered statements .
I can only re-emphasise a point that is beyond doubt here in Parliament as elsewhere , namely that the European Central Bank must retain its independence - and it will , because there has been no indication that it will not - if it is to achieve its foremost objective of guaranteeing price stability .
Price stability , as we all know , happens to be one of the basic economic conditions that encourage investments , thereby promoting growth and employment .
Let me quote Wim Duisenberg again , who told us here that stable money is the best contribution that monetary policy can make to sustained economic growth and to the long-term reduction of unemployment .
I wish you all good-night !
Mr President , I have one or two minor points to make .
I understand why the rapporteur wishes to see one of the coins abandoned , but I would warn against minting a coin as big as the 100 euro in gold .
There are two reasons why I am so reticent .
Firstly , such a coin would never actually function as a coin .
Secondly , it would encourage counterfeiting and fraud .
A 100 euro gold coin is never going to stabilise the price of gold , which is dictated by supply and demand .
If the price of gold were to rise above the face value of the coins , these would find their way out of circulation .
Were the price were to drop below face value , people would be encouraged to buy gold and make their own coins .
It is worth remembering how much easier it is to counterfeit coins than banknotes .
Mr President , even if - contrary to all expectations - the price of gold were to match the face value , it would still be easy to counterfeit such a coin .
Lead weighs much the same as gold .
There is no wizardry involved in making a lead coin and then covering it with a thin layer of gold . This fraudulent exercise could be very profitable .
My message to you today is that I really do not think that putting a 100 euro gold coin into circulation would be a very good idea !
Mr President , I will try to be as quick as possible so that I do not try everyone 's patience at this late hour .
Firstly I must congratulate Mrs Soltwedel-Schäfer and thank her for supporting the Commission 's proposal .

I will very quickly answer the two questions posed , one on the content of the regulation and the second on the issue of the gold 100 euro coin in which interest was shown during the first debate on the Commission 's proposal last November .
The reasons for and content of this proposal are as follows : we have proposed amending the basic regulation for purely technical reasons .
We do not want to re-open last year 's debate on the national face or on the number of coins .
This proposal is in response to purely technical problems involving two coins , the 50 cent coin and the 10 cent coin . These problems have arisen since the adoption of the regulation .
Why ?
The answer is that the use of these coins must be made easier for the visually impaired and the blind .
They have asked us to do this and there is no reason not to meet their request . They must be able to easily distinguish between the coins .
Furthermore , we must ensure that identification of the coins by vending machines will be as accurate as possible .
These problems arose after the mint-masters , on the basis of the regulation of 3 May , produced the much more detailed specifications needed for the production of the coins and when the first coin samples resulting from an industrial production process could be tested .
Two sets of necessary but very limited modifications are therefore proposed to solve these two technical problems .
Firstly , the weight of the 50 cent coin must be increased slightly to allow easier differentiation between it and the 20 cent coin , and secondly , the definition of the edges of the 10 and 50 cent coins must be changed by replacing the coarse milling with a shaped edge with fine scallops .
This will allow the coins to be more easily identified by touch . I would point out to Mrs Kestelijn-Sierens that agreement has been reached with the European Blind Union on this point .
It was at their explicit request that we accepted these modifications which are purely technical and very limited and which do not bring into question the coinage system already specified and adopted . I would add that the production of coins has already started , or at least of those coins which are not affected by these modifications .
With regard to the second problem of the gold 100 euro coin , in the Commission 's opinion this request cannot be considered in the context of the Regulation on denominations and technical specifications of euro coins as this requires in-depth consideration .
The Commission , as the Guardian of the Treaties , must remind you that , under Article 105a ( 2 ) , the regulation relates solely to the harmonisation of coins intended for circulation .
A gold 100 euro coin would pose risks of confusion and fraud and there is also a risk that these coins would be collected rather than used .
Mr Wibe clearly explained these risks just now , specifically with regard to the existence of a 100 euro note .
The intrinsic value of a 100 euro coin could exceed its spatial value following fluctuations in the price of gold .
It is considered that for easier use and to be aesthetically pleasing , a 100 euro coin would have to have a face value of EUR 300 to 400 .
However , I have taken on board the concerns about the attachment of the population to the euro and the symbolic nature of the issue of this coin and we must examine this , together with all the competent authorities , regardless of the amendment of the regulation in line with Article 105a ( 2 ) .
Not including this coin in the regulation does not prevent the possibility of the Member States , if they so desire , issuing a gold coin whose characteristics could be harmonised by mutual agreement , on a voluntary basis .
However , under the legislation in force on commemorative and collectors ' coins , the legal status of such a coin would come under national law .
This coin could therefore be legal tender throughout the euro zone but it might only be legal tender in the country of issue .
At my request , the Commission services have contacted the mint-masters , the European Central Bank and the Monetary Committee no later than yesterday evening , and I can confirm that there is real interest in this proposal among the mint-masters .
However , there is a certain amount of reticence among the Ministries of Finance and the European Central Bank .
The technical aspects involved in the issue of such a gold coin require an exhaustive study to be carried out and these aspects cannot be defined at this stage .
Similarly , the time of issue would also have to be carefully chosen in order to prevent any risk of confusion during the introduction of the coins and notes intended for circulation .
To conclude , I must stress the importance attached by the Commission to your proposal and I must say that the Commission is prepared , even though this proposal does not come directly under its competence , to report to the Council and to assist as far as possible with a feasibility study by all the parties concerned , whether mint-masters , issuing authorities , Ministries of Finance , national central banks or the European Central Bank .
Thank you , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 11.30 a.m.
( The sitting was closed at 0.10 a.m. )
Approval of the Minutes
The Minutes of yesterday 's sitting have been distributed .
Are there any comments ?
Mr President , yesterday I raised a point regarding a camera stationed outside the Chamber with its light peering in through one of the doors .
In addition to this , I was proceeding along the corridor yesterday afternoon when a cameraman was walking backwards filming a Member of this House .
Not only was this a hazard to the cameraman 's life and limb but it was also a hazard to any Member 's life and limb .
I would ask the House and you , Mr President , as I know you treat this place with some dignity - much more than I do on occasions - to investigate these matters and perhaps advise us how these practices can be stopped .
Thank you for informing us of this , Mr Falconer .
Fortunately , this practice of walking backwards is not one that has been widely adopted either by Members or officials , but we shall look into what was going on .
Mr President , on a point of order relating to Rule 41 ( 1 ) , we obviously had a linguistic misunderstanding on Monday .
So I have to raise this matter again .
On Monday , I objected to the deletion of Question Time to the Council from today 's agenda .
You said the agenda was adopted as it stood because no group had objected .
But it says in our Rules of Procedure : ' Question Time to the Council and Commission shall be held at each part-session ' .
I wish to make that point . I believe we must observe the Rules of Procedure , even if not a single group has objected to the agenda .
Mr Posselt , this issue always raises problems because the Rules of Procedure also state that Question Time shall be held at such times as may be decided by Parliament on a proposal from the Conference of Presidents .
If the proposal from the Conference of Presidents is that it should not take place - and this is not the first time that this has happened , since it has unfortunately happened on a number of occasions - , then I cannot go against their wishes or force them to make a proposal to that effect .
It has always been parliamentary practice to ensure that Question Time takes place but there are exceptions to the rule - as in this case - and if matters on the agenda prevent it from taking place , then it may be that it does not indeed take place .
However , I note your comments and will forward them to the Committee on the Rules of Procedure so that it might inform us as to whether our interpretation of the Rules of Procedure , which has been used until now , is acceptable or not .
I would also like to point out that we have very limited scope for action in this respect because the Council is usually only present one day of the week in Strasbourg .
I have already requested that in one of the next tripartite discussions the Council be given the opportunity to extend its presence an extra day , so that Question Time can take place , although not necessarily on Wednesday afternoons .
Mr President , I want to add to what my colleague , Mr Falconer has said .
I also saw a film crew yesterday along the corridor filming some of our employees moving a trunk .
I am not sure why that should be of such importance .
I suspect the programme was not one showing the wonderful work that we do within this Parliament .
I will ask DG 3 to look into what happened and I will give you and Mr Falconer the information as soon as we get it .
Since there are no further comments , the Minutes are approved .
Mr President , I would like to inform you and all Members of the House that , late yesterday evening , the Conciliation Committee reached a conclusion on the fifth framework programme .
It has been very hard work - this was the fourth meeting - and I have to say that , as usual , codecision with a Council operating under the unanimity rule was an unequal struggle .
But all the members of the delegation and all the political groups faced up to it with intelligence , persistence and great determination .
The House will be asked to give its opinion on the work done by the delegation in December , but I think I can already say that everyone really did act very positively and I believe now is the time , while bringing you up to date , to thank all the members of the delegation who took part in the conciliation .
Thank you very much , Mr Imbeni .
This really is good news , given the particular difficulties involved in these negotiations .
And , in addition to thanking all Members , I think we also must give you special thanks for the effort you have made to secure the success of the conciliation .
Mr President , I should like to inform you that yesterday evening , after six hours of continuous voting , the Committee on Legal Affairs approved the draft Statute for Members of the European Parliament almost unanimously .
I would like to thank and sincerely congratulate the rapporteur and all the members of the committee , who have worked very hard to ensure that the agreement reached in the Conference of Presidents was observed .
We will therefore shortly be publicly debating the draft Statute for Members of the European Parliament .
Thank you , Mr De Clercq .
Agenda 2000
The next item is the statements by the Council and the Commission on the guidelines for Agenda 2000 .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Agenda 2000 is a central issue for the Austrian Presidency , as it is also in the European Parliament 's debates .
This is an important day for Agenda 2000 , because the European Parliament will be determining its positions during this part-session .
So I am glad to have this opportunity to report briefly , at the beginning of the debate , on the progress of work in the Council .
Let me underline again at the outset that the Austrian Presidency attaches great importance to constructive cooperation between the Council and the European Parliament on this matter .
Each of our institutions has a very substantial role to play in accomplishing this great reform project .
We will only manage to keep to the demanding timetable set by the European Council in Cardiff if we have an open exchange of views and effective coordination .
As early as June this year , the presidency agreed to take note of Parliament 's views through regular contacts with Parliament and through its usual participation in plenary sittings and the appropriate meetings of Parliament 's committees , to ensure that the European Parliament is kept constantly informed of progress made in the Council 's work and to inform the Council of the results of Parliament 's discussions and the content of its reports , of which the Council will then take due account .
I am glad to be able to say today that , to this end , Parliament and the Council have now agreed to initiate a regular , informal dialogue on the general trend of the discussions on Agenda 2000 .
The Commission will also take part in this dialogue .
The first meetings on the subjects of pre-accession instruments , reform of the common agricultural policy and reform of structural policy will take place at political level by the end of November or beginning of December .
They will give Parliament in particular an opportunity to clarify its positions on Agenda 2000 , which it is debating today and will vote on tomorrow .
To ensure continuity , the future German Presidency will also be represented .
The Austrian Presidency regards Agenda 2000 as one of its main challenges .
From the outset , we have considerably intensified the work in the various working groups and in COREPER .
This Agenda is an important theme of every General Affairs Council , as it is for the Ministers of Finance and Agriculture .
There is not a day that passes without intensive work on elements of the package .
Let me briefly summarise the main points relating to the state of the negotiations .
Firstly , regarding the financial perspective for 2000-2006 , there is general agreement that when the financial perspective is drawn up , account must be taken both of the need for budgetary discipline - efficiency in relation to expenditure - and of the need to make resources available for the adequate further development of Union policies .
We have managed to reach agreement on the demarcation of pre-accession and accession-related expenditure .
The overall structure of the financial perspective - allowing for the separate description and calculation of the expenditure for pre-accession and the new Member States - and the seven-year period of validity from 2000 to 2006 , with a projected adjustment at the time of the first accessions , have met with broad support , although some Member States take the view that the financial perspective needs to be reviewed for each accession .
The average growth rates on which the Commission has based this will have to be constantly reviewed in the light of the most recent economic data , since annual growth rates can fluctuate considerably over a period of seven years .
The Commission is starting out from the working hypothesis that the ceiling for Union resources should be fixed at a constant value of 1.27 % of the EU GNP as from the year 2000 .
This has also received broad support , although the negotiations on it have not yet been concluded .
Agreement on the total amounts under the various expenditure headings will probably not be reached until the final stage of the negotiations .
The bodies responsible are currently also holding intensive discussions on the concept of stabilising expenditure in the new financial perspective .
The meetings of the Finance Ministers on 23 November and 1 December will be most important .
They will be concerned with continuing the discussion on key issues and identifying options for solutions in this area .
The Commission presented the report on the functioning of the own resources system to the European Parliament on 7 October and to ECOFIN on 12 October .
The report discusses various methods of further developing the own resources system and resolving the problem of excessive budgetary imbalances .
There has been little evidence of convergence in the discussions so far in ECOFIN and the General Affairs Council .
Considerable efforts will still be required here with a view to finding generally acceptable solutions .
Regarding the Interinstitutional Agreement , good progress has been made in recent weeks in the negotiations on the Council 's position on a new agreement of this kind .
That enabled us , jointly with the European Parliament , to embark on the technical evaluation of the Commission proposal on 12 November .
I hope that this work will make good headway .
Regarding the reform of structural policy , very major efforts have been made during the Austrian Presidency .
I believe that overall we have made good progress here .
There is agreement in principle on the following points and the corresponding technical regulations .
One : there is broad support in principle for the concept of spatial concentration and concentration of the eligible Community population .
The number of objectives is to be cut from seven to three .
Two : the planning and implementation of the programmes are to be simplified and speeded up .
Decision-making is to be more decentralised than in the past . Financial management and control are to be improved .
Three : in future structural policy , clear emphasis is to be placed on job creation and safeguarding competitiveness and sustainable development .
Four : the number of Community initiatives is to be reduced substantially , while giving precedence to Interreg .
Five : transitional rules are needed for Objective 1 and Objective 2 areas losing their eligibility .
The Council has now to a large extent determined its positions on the regulations on the Regional Development Fund - the ERDF - and the Social Fund - the ESF .
Most of the technical work on the Cohesion Fund is completed .
What still remains open is the question of the eligibility for assistance of the participants in economic and monetary union .
Some of the key political issues in the continuing negotiations involve establishing more precisely the definitions and criteria of the individual objectives and clarifying the transitional rules .
Then , of course , there are also the key financial questions relating to structural policy , which will probably not be clarified until the final stage of the negotiations .
Finally , I would like to say a few words on the pre-accession instruments .
We take a very positive view of the progress of negotiations on the Commission 's three legislative proposals for a coordinating regulation and structural and agricultural policy pre-accession instruments .
Difficult questions needed to be resolved here , in particular the distribution of resources after the first accessions and guaranteeing sound financial management , together with control of the use of resources .
We are pleased that the General Affairs Council of 9 November managed to achieve political agreement on the three pre-accession instruments , subject to a reservation about the level of the ceiling of assistance rates .
That has clarified a first , important component of Agenda 2000 in political terms , although of course this aspect depends on overall agreement on that Agenda , given that it is a package .
Above all , this progress sends out a positive signal to the applicants for accession , who expect the Union to give vigorous support to their reform efforts .
I will not sum up the state of negotiations on the reform of the common agricultural policy , because as you know , my colleague Mr Molter , the Minister for Agriculture , will be giving you very detailed information on that this afternoon .
All in all , we can certainly say that concrete progress has been made on many aspects of Agenda 2000 over the past five months .
During the next very busy months , we will make further efforts to achieve real headway in clarifying the key questions .
Our aim must be to make substantial progress , so that by the Vienna European Council we have created conditions that will allow the decisive final stage of the negotiations on the overall package to start on schedule at the beginning of 1999 .
Mr President , Madam President-in-Office , ladies and gentlemen , today 's sitting marks an important step in the process which must , before the end of this parliamentary term , result in the adoption of all the measures proposed under Agenda 2000 .
The Cardiff European Council and the recent informal meeting of the Heads of State and Government at Pörtschach expressed the political will to conclude the negotiations on Agenda 2000 at a special summit next March .
I am delighted that the new German Chancellor gave a very clear indication at Pörtschach of his determination to successfully conclude this work .
My Commission colleagues will discuss in detail our reactions to your reports .
I should like to remind you of the political importance of the Agenda 2000 package . As you know , it involves the following three strands : substantial reform of EU policies , preparation for the most ambitious enlargement of the EU to date and , finally , the development of adequate and reasonable financing within the ceiling agreed at Edinburgh .
The Commission believes that it has always been clear that a reform of our policies and an agreement on financing in the context of the financial perspective were essential to prepare Europe for the 21st century .
The prospect of future enlargement adds to the importance of the global reforms contained in Agenda 2000 .
Why must we reach agreement by March ?
There are several reasons for this : firstly , the approaching European Parliament elections which will have an impact on the activities of this House from March or April ; secondly , the damage which a delay would cause to the credibility of the EU and to confidence ; and finally , practical considerations linked to the programming of the Structural Funds and the establishment of policies , and also the negative effect on the accession process itself of any delay in implementing the pre-accession instruments .
Can agreement be reached by March ?
I believe so , because all the relevant information is available , including the Commission 's 19 detailed proposals , considered in your reports , and also the Commission 's report on own resources .
Aware of the problem of financing the EU budget , the Commission chose to bring forward by a year its report on the operation of the own resources system .
This report was adopted by the Members of the Commission at the beginning of October .
I must say that this is an innovative document from the Commission as it agrees to an in-depth study of the EU budgetary situation , including the delicate question of the ' net balances ' .
What was the reason for this ?
It was not because we enjoy tackling this difficult and over-simplistic concept but because of a desire for objectivity and Community spirit , to allow the discussions to take place in an open manner and on sound bases .
Parliament 's role in this is clearly legislative , first and foremost .
While maintaining a global approach , Parliament has chosen to use every possible option to assert its point of view and , where the Treaty provides for this , to fully exercise its prerogatives .
Thanks to your cooperative attitude and substantive contributions , today 's sitting will allow considerable progress to be made .
The Commission will listen attentively to Parliament and try to respond substantively to your observations .
We all know that the concurrence of the entry into force of the Amsterdam Treaty and the end of your parliamentary term may pose certain problems .
There are some aspects of Agenda 2000 which will be subject to the codecision procedure following ratification of the Amsterdam Treaty .
I would therefore highlight the responsibility of all the institutions to rapidly conclude an interinstitutional agreement that will allow a seamless transition to the codecision procedure .
Such an agreement is generally required in all cases where there is a changeover from the cooperation procedure to the codecision procedure .
However , Parliament does not just have a legislative role .
As one of the two branches of the budgetary authority , it will be a signatory to a new interinstitutional budget agreement .
The current agreement has proven to be very useful in maintaining budgetary peace and in guaranteeing a moderate increase in expenditure .
In the Commission 's opinion , the conclusion of a new agreement that satisfies both branches of the budgetary authority is an integral part of Agenda 2000 .
I am delighted that the initial technical discussions on a new agreement have finally begun .
Yet we must not rest on our laurels .
There is not much time between now and next March and we must intensify the in-depth discussions .
The adoption of the Agenda 2000 package is in the general interest of the Community .
We should all consider the consequences that a lack of agreement , before the European elections , would have on the new impetus in the EU created by the introduction of the euro .
I would therefore ask everyone to intensify their efforts before the Vienna European Council in order to ensure a good starting point for the discussions that must be concluded under the German Presidency .
Clearly , until there is agreement on every aspect , there will be no agreement .
However , mindful of this reservation , I hope that we will achieve three objectives in Vienna .
We must firstly obtain agreement on the ' technical ' aspects of the legislative texts .
In this respect , I am delighted at the progress achieved recently in the Structural and Cohesion Funds , the pre-accession strategy and the trans-European networks .
Secondly , we must try to make progress in more political areas , for example in certain aspects of the agricultural and rural development reforms , of the structural measures and in the ' format ' of the financial perspectives .
Finally , we must outline a final package that should concentrate in particular on the financial implications of the reforms and of connected budgetary questions .
I have tried to briefly outline the challenges facing us in the coming months .
The Commission is fully aware of the important role to be played by Parliament in this respect before your parliamentary term comes to an end .
On many occasions in the past you have proven your intention to play this role seriously and with the necessary responsibility .
Today 's work must be treated similarly and the Commission will willingly contribute to this .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , we know that the decisions on Agenda 2000 are the central challenge facing the European Union , and therefore also the European Parliament , in the next six months .
Before we discuss the individual reports in detail , I would like to make a few general points on behalf of my group .
What is the real issue ?
Firstly , it is about helping the Central and Eastern European countries to become eligible for accession .
We welcome the Commission 's proposals on pre-accession aid .
We also welcome the instruments that have now been developed - or at least their main features .
We do not see this pre-accession aid as a bonus or premium for the Eastern and Central European countries , but we say that it is also in our own economic and political interest .
It is also clear , however , that it is the countries applying for accession themselves that must make the main efforts to qualify for accession .
Secondly , we ourselves , the European Union , are still not ready for enlargement .
Considerable efforts are still needed before we are prepared .
We regard the concept of Agenda 2000 , as presented by the Commission , as the master plan for making the European Union ready for enlargement over the next six months .
This applies to reform of its policies .
It also applies to the financial perspective up to the year 2006 .
In recent weeks and months , I have heard much criticism from the Member States , as also from the European Parliament and from my group , of individual Agenda 2000 proposals .
I think that is only normal .
It will happen again today .
But let me make one point at the start of the debate : to date , I have not heard any Member State , any Union body or any parliamentary group propose a counter-plan that would be as consistent in itself , as coherent and as likely to achieve a majority as the one the Commission has presented .
That is why my group will endorse the basic features of Agenda 2000 , its essential points , in the form proposed by the Commission .
Perhaps I might try to list one or two of these points .
We regard job creation , the sustained economic growth and the competitiveness of the EU regions as the most important objectives in the reform of the Structural Funds and the Cohesion Fund , but also in the necessary reform of the EU agricultural policy .
We underline the need for Structural and Cohesion Fund measures to be environment-friendly , more environment-friendly than in the past .
We want regional and local organisations , but also our citizens , to be more closely involved in the planning and implementation of regional programmes .
We also hope to see simpler and more responsible fund management , and the appropriate Commission proposals .
The PSE Group has taken a clear stance on a range of disputed points .
The group supports the EU Commission 's proposals on the Objective 1 criteria , but insists that the European Parliament must carefully examine any necessary exceptions .
The group supports the Commission 's proposal to maintain Cohesion Fund allocations of about ECU 20 billion for the least developed Member States .
The group firmly supports the aim of reducing the number of Community initiatives , as it does the precedence given to Interreg , but we call for the URBAN programme to be retained and hope an initiative will be set up for regions exposed to unexpectedly severe economic and social restructuring .
We insist that the aid for those regions that will no longer be entitled to aid after the year 2000 should be reduced gradually , while also saying that the transitional stage should last up to six years and that no distinctions should then be made .
Finally , we support the Commission 's intention to bring about greater coherence between national aids and measures and EU Objective 2 measures .
Here we certainly need greater flexibility .
These are the positions endorsed by my group , at least by a large majority .
Let me add a general point of principle : if we only discuss how much some Member States have to pay and how much a few others receive , we shall not be doing justice to the scale of the decision we are facing , in Parliament and in the Council .
In our view , all reforms - not just institutional reforms aimed at enlargement , but also reforms of our policies - are not only targeted at enlargement of the European Union ; in fact they also serve as an opportunity .
They are an opportunity to breathe fresh air into the EU policy-making of the past .
Basically , we would still have to carry them out even if we were not faced with enlargement .
To underline it once again , with these reforms we are aiming to concentrate what we can do as a Community and a Union .
We are not aiming to demolish anything in the Member States , and we are not aiming to demolish the EU 's policies .
Madam President-in-Office , you spoke of constructive cooperation and coordination of our activities .
Let me say a few words on that .
I do not have the impression that all the Member States , or rather the governments in the Council , have understood yet that Parliament 's role has changed , have understood that in fact the European Parliament now has codecision powers through assent on the regulations on the reform of the Structural Funds and on the Cohesion Fund .
That means that it must also be in the interest of the Council to enter into an interinstitutional dialogue with Parliament after this first reading , not just on the financial perspective , because that is routine and always happens , but also on the reform of EU policies and on the position of the European Parliament and the Council , which will have to be prepared in future .
If the dialogue to which you referred only consists of Parliament reporting and the Council listening but apart from that remaining silent , as would seem to be the idea , then let me tell you that is not enough for us !
Then you are in danger of seeing all the reforms that need to be made running into a brick wall .
We want to decide Agenda 2000 during this parliamentary term , before the elections .
We are prepared to adhere to the timetable .
Let the Council do the same !
We need to have the Council 's position by the end of March , so do not expect Parliament to give you a pretext for not keeping to your own timetable !
We know that the political , economic , social and ecological future of the whole of Europe is in our hands , in the hands of the Commission , in the hands of the Council , but also - and not least - in the hands of the European Parliament .
You may be sure we are aware of that !
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the success of Agenda 2000 with the necessary reforms it involves is the condition for achieving European integration at the beginning of the 21st century .
On 1 January 1999 , European monetary union will become a reality - an historic event that many people in Europe still considered impossible only a few years ago .
Monetary union is an example that shows that Europe can make great historic progress and is able to do so if the political actors summon up the necessary resolve .
But it is not enough just to have resolute political actors .
The people of Europe must be able to have confidence in the European Union 's decisions .
In fact the people do not want less Europe , they want more .
They want a convincing Europe , a Europe capable of acting at home and abroad , a Europe that is free of corruption and abuse of power , a Europe that serves the people and their interests .
It is on that basis that Agenda 2000 must become a story of success .
I would like to address four tasks .
Firstly , the top priority is enlargement of the European Union with the accession of the Central and Eastern European countries .
The negotiations to that end must be conducted as rapidly as possible , so that the ten nations of central Europe can share the European Union 's common values .
This means that the enlargement process must take a flexible and transparent form .
It means that those countries which are not in the first round of the negotiations can quickly move up that to level when they make the necessary progress .
We must avoid giving the impression that the people in some applicant countries are excluded from the negotiation and enlargement process , because it is important to these countries ' will to reform that they are also aware that they can soon share the European Union 's common values .
The second major task is to reform the common policies , with particular reference to agricultural and structural policy .
Agricultural policy must make its contribution to enabling efficient farms to stand up to competition .
But agricultural policy is not just a policy for farming ; it must increasingly include the rural area as a whole .
Conditions in Europe differ from those in the USA .
So Agenda 2000 must make its contribution to the further development of the European agricultural model and thereby to safeguarding it .
Structural policy is aimed at solidarity with structurally weak regions .
I firmly support concentrating these resources , in terms of geographical area and content , on the structurally weak areas .
But we also believe that the regions in what are regarded as the wealthier countries that are no longer eligible for EU assistance must continue to receive a certain amount of state aid , under a sensible competition policy which compares the structurally weak areas in these countries with the wealthy regions in the same countries .
The third task concerns reform of the European Union 's institutions .
We are all familiar with the Amsterdam protocol .
But the reorganisation of the Commission , the new weighting of votes in the Council , is not the crucial issue .
What really is crucial is to expand majority decision-making in the Council so that the European Union is able to act now and will be able to do so in future after enlargement .
That is the basic condition : majority decisions in the Council for European Union legislation .
Let me address a fourth aspect .
There has been a government agreement in the Federal Republic of Germany under which the government parties are to be entitled to both posts in the Commission .
This deviates from the principle that the opposition is entitled to one post .
If this becomes accepted practice in the European Union , in the Member States , it would put the political architecture in the Commission at risk .
Under the Amsterdam Treaty , the European Parliament has a new role to play .
The President of the Commission is elected .
The Commission is appointed by agreement between the President of the Commission and the national governments , after which the Commission as a whole is subject to a vote of confidence by the European Parliament .
If we were to have a one-sided Commission in the year 2000 , at the beginning of Agenda 2000 , that would not be a good start and it could lead to a conflict with the European Parliament , at least with my group .
That is why we believe we must maintain the balance in the Commission .
It must include all political persuasions so that it can contribute to stability and peace in the Europe of the 21st century .
Mr President , I must say that I cannot see in Agenda 2000 the historic values on which the idea of the European Community was founded . Instead of real values , we see monetary values - a currency .
Furthermore , it does not seem to me that the ideals have been maintained , especially in respect of the subject that I know best . This is going to be the subject of my speech as it is one of interest to my group , namely the common agricultural policy .
It does not , in fact , contain any concrete proposals but makes an underhand attempt to undermine one of the basic principles of the CAP , perhaps the most important , that of financial solidarity - which is also a form of moral solidarity - , through poorly concealed proposals to renationalise the CAP by creating national envelopes for the beef and milk sectors .
There is also a desire - one that is not concealed - to maintain the negative discriminations against less productive and less developed forms of agriculture by indexing the calculations of compensatory amounts on historical productivity rates . That will maintain a schizophrenic Europe , one divided between extremely poor countries and countries that are not poor for natural reasons or for reasons linked to their own national history .
As if Agenda 2000 and its legislative proposals were not enough , the Commission has now attacked agriculture and European farmers , especially the most fragile , in its report on the system of own resources by proposing the partial reimbursement of expenditure as direct aid from the CAP .
We are all equally aware that the CAP , the only genuinely common policy so far , is the cement of the construction of Europe . That is without referring to enlargement to include the countries of Central and Eastern Europe , or the millennium round of the World Trade Organisation .
Nor does it include even yesterday 's statements here by the President of the Court of Auditors , who overstepped his functions as a judge to give his opinion on the aid given to durum wheat in the poorest countries . This smacks of a confusion of powers and goes against what old Montesquieu and old Locke preached about the defence of democracy .
Finally , in Agenda 2000 , the least-favoured regions will continue to be least-favoured and the most-favoured will become richer and richer .
The gap can only widen ; of that I do not have the slightest doubt .
Mr President , the challenge of the enlargement of the European Union can and must be approached in such a way so as to ensure that we achieve the major objectives in the process of the construction of Europe and particularly those concerning economic and social cohesion .
This is why we feel justified in our severe criticism of Agenda 2000 , because it was drawn up in haste as an irreversible decision and without being thoroughly assessed .
It is a great paradox that Agenda 2000 was drawn up to facilitate enlargement and that , since then , it has scarcely been referred to in the proposals and arguments put forward .
Public opinion in the Member States sees the debate as one that centres on own resources and the insufficient ceiling of 1.27 % of Community GDP , as well as on the much disputed allocation of solidarity through the Structural Funds .
That is the major difference in terms of this debate with the Delors stage , when successive increases in both resources and the size of the Structural Funds were proposed .
The debate does not adequately address the issue and does not bear in mind the fact that we must not only build an internal market but that , above all , we must achieve economic and social cohesion .
Instead of simply talking about net contributors and beneficiaries , we should explain who benefits and by how much in an overall economic assessment , since the most significant economic policies are not reflected in the budget .
We cannot ignore the enormous profits that some economies in the large internal market are making , whilst others are paying the economic and commercial price .
Our main criticism in relation to the common agricultural policy is that there is no overall view and it only refers to certain sectors of production .
The reforms of the COMs will lead to substantial price reductions that will be compensated to a very small extent by income support and premiums for private storage .
Time will show this to be the case .
We are concerned about the effects involved both in social terms and in terms of employment that will affect the weakest farmers .
We are also concerned about the introduction of cofinancing since it does not solve the problems .
The solution should be found in genuine proposals to regulate direct aid aimed at correcting the present unfair imbalances .
In our opinion - and with all due respect - , the Commission 's proposal is no more than a vague attempt at regulation that will merely serve to exacerbate the present imbalances .
Therefore , we are convinced that further efforts will still be needed to achieve a successful enlargement and also to solve the serious contradictions and insufficiencies that exist in our socio-economic and institutional lives before enlargement takes place .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , after all the solemn declarations in Brussels , Luxembourg and London about the historic significance of enlargement , it now appears that the Council is moving down a gear .
There appears to be a climate emerging in which instead of the old Iron Curtain we now have a smokescreen of fine words concealing the Council 's true intentions , which are to postpone the accession of new members .
We are perfectly well aware that we are dealing with an unprecedented enlargement operation here that places extremely heavy demands on all countries , both our own and the applicant countries .
The excellent progress reports which the Commission presented to us at the beginning of November show the efforts the applicant countries have made to meet the Copenhagen criteria , but they are paying a heavy price for the changes they are having to make .
Sizeable groups of the population are now poverty-stricken , as anyone who goes there regularly will have noticed .
This is why we want to draw attention to the fact that the establishment of a smoothly running market economy often degenerates into nothing more than an insistence on rapid privatisation .
The situation in Russia , for example , shows that privatisation which enables a small number of people to monopolise a country 's wealth is definitely not a sound basis for a socially adjusted free market .
So the Commission and the Council should be insisting not just on rapid privatisation , but on responsible privatisation with the necessary mechanisms for political and social adjustment .
Compared with the enormous efforts that the applicant countries have made , the Council 's approach has been far too laid back , in our view .
What progress have we actually made ?
Institutional reform has been put on the back burner , and there is no sign yet of agricultural reform . In fact , all the indications are that we are going to continue with the old system of producer price reductions and exporting structural surpluses , rather than moving over to integrated rural development .
On finance , we are still calling for an open approach that would allow us to adjust the volume of funding if necessary .
For us , the key words here are participation and decentralisation .
Decentralisation of funding is now a reality , fortunately , but we have still not settled the question of the participation of representatives of the applicant countries in the advisory committees deciding on projects .
The recent report on nuclear safety by the Court of Auditors notes the Commission 's embarrassing failure to improve the safety of nuclear power stations in the applicant countries .
The issue was actually taken up by the western European nuclear lobby , which was intending to use its own extremely expensive experts and export its own equipment , with disastrous results on the ground .
We can understand that the Commission should play a coordinating role in all this , but none of the programmes like TACIS , PHARE , BIRD and so on were put to best use at all .
We wholeheartedly support the proposals to start negotiations very soon with Latvia and later with Lithuania and Slovakia , and we were very pleased to see in the Joint Committee that our openness towards Turkey is producing immediate results , in that the Turkish representatives are now reacting differently to the European Union .
Above all , we must prevent the Union from being held to ransom by Greece and Turkey , both of which are behaving like interfering mothers-in-law rather than caring mothers , and are only making things more difficult .
Everyone knows that the resolution of the political problem in Cyprus is an absolute prerequisite and that without it , Turkey 's accession is going to run into severe problems .
We therefore urge that the Union should appoint a European mediator to promote a more dynamic policy and bring this issue to a successful conclusion .
The debate is closed .
Welcome
I should like to welcome to Parliament two distinguished members of the recently elected Slovak National Council : Mr Peter Weiss , chairman of the Foreign Affairs Committee and now co-chairman of the Joint Parliamentary Committee , and Mr Frantisek Sebej .


We wish you every success in your work of taking Slovakia forward along the road to membership of the Union .
Pre-accession strategy
The next item is the joint debate on the following reports :
A4-0397 / 98 by Mr Barón Crespo , on behalf of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Security and Defence Policy , on the proposal for a Council Regulation on coordinating aid to the applicant countries in the framework of the pre-accession strategy ( COM ( 98 ) 0551 - C4-0606 / 98-98 / 0094 ( CNS ) ) ; -A4-0382 / 98 by Mr Walter , on behalf of the Committee on Regional Policy , on the proposal for a Council Regulation establishing an instrument for structural policies for pre-accession ( COM ( 98 ) 0138 - C4-0301 / 98-98 / 0091 ( CNS ) ) ; -A4-0388 / 98 by Lord Tomlinson , on behalf of the Committee on Budgets , on the proposal for a Council Regulation ( EC , Euratom ) amending Council Regulation ( EC , Euratom ) No 2728 / 94 establishing a Guarantee Fund for external actions ( COM ( 98 ) 0168 - C4-0302 / 98-98 / 0117 ( CNS ) ) ; -A4-0383 / 98 by Mr Sonneveld , on behalf of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , on the proposal for a Council Regulation on Community support for pre-accession measures for agriculture and rural development in the applicant countries of Central and Eastern Europe in the pre-accession period ( COM ( 98 ) 0153 - C4-0244 / 98-98 / 0100 ( CNS ) ) .
Madam President , Mr President of the Commission , the Council has left the Hemicycle and I would like this to be recorded in the Minutes .
I am going to present the report on the proposal for a Council regulation on coordinating aid to the applicant countries in the framework of the pre-accession strategy .
Let me begin , Madam President , by reminding you of a very basic but extremely important fact : enlargement is an essential political project not only within the context of Agenda 2000 , but also for the European Union . This project does not simply involve the Union giving the applicant countries a check-up , as though it were a medical examination , less still letting them come in through the back door .
Rather , it is a protracted process that requires joint and shared effort to help these countries meet the requirements set out in the treaties , which were also reflected in theso-called Copenhagen criteria . Basically , they involve consolidating the applicant countries ' democratic systems ; restructuring their economies , not only to bring them into line with our acquis but also to ensure they operate as market economies ; and encouraging good neighbourliness and solidarity between those countries , between each other and with us .
This requires political will and clear objectives .
I sincerely hope that the Vienna European Council will reach a political consensus in this regard and , in particular , that it will take account of the inclusive and global nature of this process , without creating new differences and divisions between these countries .
I also take note of some of the things that the Austrian Presidency has said and that I have interpreted as meaning that Parliament 's proposals are being taken on board . Firstly , category 7 , which distinguishes pre-accession from the reforms , has been accepted .
This is something that is positive more from the point of view of clarity rather than transparency , since transparency is not discernible whereas clarity is , and I think that we need to start talking more in terms of clarity in this respect .
The need to review the financial perspective is also accepted - since the figure of 1.27 % is not set in stone - as is the need for a certain degree of flexibility .
I believe that this may help the process .
As regards Parliament 's basic contributions to the pre-accession strategy , we think that any pre-accession strategy has to bear in mind the overall political dimension of the process and not simply those individual assessments .
It also has to take account of dimensions such as those related to aspects of political cooperation and security , which are fundamental .
We think that it is important for the strategy to reflect and comply with what is set out in our treaties .
In this respect , we would like to emphasise that the strategy must be developed through the instruments we have , that is , our joint actions and common positions .
It is important that we ourselves respect the rules we have laid down , without needing to be reminded of them from time to time by the Court of Justice .
What is more , we have carried out significant work in terms of coordinating the various committees involved with the three basic instruments that are currently in force .
I must say that the Commission , which put forward the three proposals for a regulation somewhat hastily , has changed its position and amended these giving far greater weight to the PHARE programme .
In that respect , the Commission should also take Parliament 's comments and amendments into account because they better clarify those objectives , particularly as to how the PHARE programme operates . This programme runs the risk of becoming two or three PHARE programmes : one for those countries that have already begun negotiations ; one for those that are about to begin them and hope to do so ; and one for those countries that are still not involved in the PHARE programme and that are not in the accession process either .
To conclude , Madam President , I wanted to point out that as a result of the coordination between the various committees in relation to the Hughes procedure , we were able to table amendments aimed at defining the political and economic conditions of the process while stressing the need for cofinancing . The amendments also referred to the need to assess and readjust the aid given within the limits established by the budgetary authority , to decentralisation and the monitoring of the process , to an annual report and to the European Parliament 's involvement in the entire development and monitoring process .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the European Parliament has on numerous occasions expressed its clear support for the enlargement process .
The enormous challenge now facing us is as follows : how can we on the one hand ensure that the applicant states are ready for accession , but on the other hand make the European Union and its structures ready for enlargement ?
In this context , the pre-accession instrument for structural policies for the applicant states , in short ISPA , represents an important link between countries within and outside the Union by giving support to the applicant countries for urgently needed investment and gradually bringing them into line with the methods of operation and mechanisms of European structural policy .
The success of the pre-accession strategy will depend decisively on whether all the available instruments , that is to say ISPA , PHARE , pre-accession aid in agriculture and also Interreg are coordinated as far as possible in the context of cross-border cooperation .
We cannot afford any duplication .
That would put an unnecessary added burden on the applicant countries , because they have enough on their hands already .
It must be clearly established , under the coordination regulation and any partnership agreements with the applicant countries , which instrument is to be used , where and how .
Apart from that , the pre-accession instrument for structural policies must also resolve a fundamental dilemma .
On the one hand , the applicant countries have an enormous investment need in all possible areas .
In the field of the environment alone , it is currently estimated that the cost of the necessary investment efforts in the ten countries will come to more than 100 billion euros .
In that context , the EU financial contributions now being negotiated are little more than a drop in the ocean .
So the funds must be targeted carefully .
I think , and the clear vote in the committee endorses that view , that focusing the investment on environmental infrastructure and transport infrastructure should make it considerably easier to fulfil the requirements of the acquis communautaire .
We must not fritter away our money .
Given the slender funds , it is also right , as the Commission has proposed , to provide project-based aid , as in the case of PHARE .
But that does not mean that the relevant players on the ground in the countries and regions should not be fully involved in these activities .
Apart from the infrastructure investment , technical assistance will also be given under ISPA .
It would be wrong to use ISPA to support the general improvement of administrative capacity in the applicant countries , since PHARE does that .
Given that administrative problems still exist , and given the need to catch up here , it is however necessary for the efficient implementation of the projects to ensure project-related support for the appropriate administrative bodies .
Focusing also means concentration on a few projects or project packages of relevant size .
The Commission is right to propose a minimum investment of 5 million euros , provided this is supplemented by the provision that smaller investment sums up to a certain percentage of the resources can be allocated to smaller applicant countries and also in other justified exceptional cases .
Here we need room for manoeuvre .
We can also achieve our target by applying the principle of cofinancing .
This ensures that European funds are used rationally and improves their knock-on effect if they are used in coordination with international financing institutions , such as the European Investment Bank .
The structural pre-accession instrument keeps being compared with the Cohesion Fund .
That is correct if we look at the concentration on transport and environmental projects .
As in the case of the Cohesion Fund , we shall have to ensure a good balance between the two areas .
The environment must not draw the short straw when we support investment for enlargement .
But ISPA is more than merely a cloning of the Cohesion Fund .
It must also help the applicant states become accustomed to the Structural Fund mechanisms .
That is why we say that as regards implementation and management and any other area where this proves possible , the same provisions must apply as in relation to the Structural Funds and the further development of the Structural Funds currently under discussion .
The partnership principle must be applied from the outset and as widely as possible .
With ISPA , the Union is giving a good sign that we are serious about the accession of the Central and Eastern European states .
Much has already been said in relation to enlargement about time scales , dates and annual figures .
I think we must define realistic yardsticks here .
There is no point arousing great expectations that cannot be met , but at the same time we must make it clear that we will use our instruments and that we will indeed provide financial support .
ISPA represents the financial resources we can make available .
It helps the applicant states towards self-help , no more and no less .
In that respect , we welcome the Commission 's proposal , subject to the amendments we have tabled , which we hope will be taken into account in the further discussions .
Madam President , the applicant countries are all busy adapting their farming sectors in order to be ready to join the EU on time .
Those wishing and intending to join early must demonstrably achieve substantial results in this sector if they are to be able to bring their markets , administrations and institutional infrastructure into line with those of the Union of the 15 without too much difficulty .
If the EU is to introduce a new instrument at this point to help the applicant countries in this pre-accession adaptation process , therefore , the help we provide must be strongly geared towards obtaining short-term results .
We must not make it excessively restrictive , because the field is extremely complex and the situation varies so much from country to country .
The Commission proposal to allow the applicant countries to choose priority programmes from a list of qualifying policy areas is a fair approach .
However , the proposal to demand that they draw up a rural development plan by 1 January 2000 incorporating all the programmes they have chosen seems far from fair , in my view .
Not that such plans are not useful and necessary in themselves , but they cannot be produced at such short notice in a democratic manner and with a sufficiently integrated approach .
All this does is to introduce unnecessary and even risky complications into this aid programme .
This is why I have put forward a proposal to the plenary on behalf of the Committee on Agriculture not to make these rural development plans a precondition , but instead to adopt a more pragmatic approach for the time being by funding a number of measures which are universally agreed to be useful .
We therefore call for a consultative committee to be set up made up of experts from the 15 Member States and the applicant countries .
Its remit would be twofold .
First , it would help to identify these useful measures , and at the same time it would ensure that the process of submitting them to the Commission for assessment was kept moving .
Its recommendations and support would be based on a thorough knowledge of the acquis communautaire and the process of change which the applicant countries are undergoing .
The services of the committee must be accessible to the administrations of the applicant countries and to the Commission 's departments , in close cooperation with the EU representations in the applicant countries .
This should improve quality and speed up procedures , and thus provide more quantifiable results in the short term .
To the list of measures proposed by the Commission from which the applicant countries should preferably choose their priorities , the Committee on Agriculture has added the establishment of an agricultural credit system and the accelerated and widespread introduction of book-keeping in farming .
The committee 's text also introduced conditions for a number of the measures , relating to distortion of competition and compatibility with Community legislation .
I think it is more logical for all these conditions to be listed in Article 6 , which deals with the question of compatibility and the conditions to be applied to the aid measures .
As regards coordination , we must try to ensure that the EU rules for the various aid programmes are as uniform as possible , such as the rules on budgeting and accounting .
The best possible use must also be made of existing coordination and monitoring structures , and I therefore agree with the amended Commission proposal to make the PHARE committee responsible for this agricultural aid programme too .
The system of twinning between institutions in certain Member States and those in some of the applicant countries , in the field of veterinary and plant health inspections for example , should also be supported .
The monitoring committee set up for this system should naturally continue its work under the new arrangement with our support .
In this way , we can continue to build on the current activities under the PHARE programme .
Madam President , it is appropriate that we are launching this latest enlargement of the European Union this year , which is also the year we celebrate the 50th anniversary of the Berlin airlift .
That was a remarkable international effort in the interests of European peace , stability and democracy .
It is already very clear that this enlargement of the European Union is going to require the same kind of international effort if we are to see it through successfully .
It will require unselfishness on the part of the Member States of the European Union and the applicant countries .
It is clearly a complex and extremely demanding process .
We have to commit ourselves to the ultimate goal , which is a stable and prosperous Europe .
Having said that , any solutions to these problems have to be accepted by the people of Europe , both our own voters and the voters in the applicant countries .
So our solutions have to be practical and acceptable .
Opinion polls in the European Union at the moment show that people are either indifferent or hostile towards enlargement , so we must actually sell this project , both within the European Union and in the applicant states .
As well as putting money into infrastructure and the environment we have to think about the people .
After all , as Galbraith said : ' Money is not superior to democracy ' .
I would like to see more work done on the social dialogue and on developing programmes in these countries to help people affected by economic change .
In terms of the particular instrument that we are looking at today , as Mr Barón Crespo says , there has to be greater clarity about how this money is spent and how the committees administering this money are set up .
In view of the latest Commission scandals we must make sure that this project is not tainted by any doubts about how the money is managed .
Madam President , the regulation on coordinating aid to the applicant countries in the framework of the pre-accession strategy is an extremely important step along the road towards the enlargement of the European Union .
We are currently engaged in a process that considerably changes the Union 's image of itself .
Up to now , we have always regarded ourselves as members of a European economic community , but we are increasingly coming to the conclusion , particularly in our contacts with the applicant countries , that we are primarily a confederation of democratic constitutional states .
This has also , of course , had an effect on our relations with some of the applicant countries , particularly Slovakia , and we can be grateful that the trouble we took with Slovakia in this respect may well have helped to influence its people to change the way they voted .
We welcome the fact that the new government there is pursuing a completely different policy from that of its predecessors , and we hope that Slovakia will very rapidly feel the benefits of its prospective membership .
The Council has taken account of Parliament 's desire to monitor the entire process , and we welcome this .
The way in which the aid is organised is a very instructive example of the Union 's political and administrative practices , and there is an important element here of familiarising countries with what future membership of the Union will entail .
They have to deal with three financing instruments with clearly defined aims .
They are shown how the Union manages operations , and they also get to know how things are coordinated .
The emphasis on the responsibility of the Commission is extremely important .
Article 9 , in the Commission 's version , is very clear and detailed on this point , and certainly must not be watered down .
If the Member States are involved in the coordination , it seems logical that they should coordinate their own aid within the same framework .
I think this is a point worth emphasising .
In our accession discussions with the UK Presidency , we demanded and secured a procedure which guaranteed that Parliament would be able to examine any changes or additions to the accession strategy .
We must be very careful here , which is why I do not think it is a good idea specifically to bring this dossier under the second pillar , where we have little say at the moment .
It is also a good thing that our budgetary powers put us in a strong position , and this is partly why I think that we should not adopt the Swoboda-Titley amendment , Amendment No 15 .
The PPE Group will therefore be voting against the amendments which give the applicant countries a stronger say in the aid process , since we think that the management should ultimately remain in the hands of the European Union .
After all , it is our taxpayers ' money , and we have a responsibility to them .
The amounts of aid are not particularly high - in fact , you could say that they are surprisingly low .
It is amazing that we can achieve such a high ideal at such a low cost .
Madam President , the Liberal Group supports the amendments by the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Security and Defence Policy to the Commission 's commendable proposal to streamline aid to the applicant countries .
It is very much in the Union 's interests to use the aid funds efficiently , but the budgetary scope is limited and sound management is called for , making alignment with the Member States and the international financial organisations essential .
We also support the Commission 's proposals to decentralise the decision-making powers on micro-projects , and staff and funding must be made available for this .
We oppose the proposal to make the entire enlargement dossier a foreign policy joint action .
This sounds like a good idea , given that enlargement is or is claimed to be the main element of the Union 's foreign policy , but joint action under the CFSP requires unanimity in the Council and puts the European Parliament in a weaker position .
More dynamism is required in the preparations for enlargement , as is clear from the Commission 's progress report .
There are considerable differences in the efforts which the Member States have made and the results they have achieved in preparing for enlargement .
It is primarily up to the applicant countries to do their work properly , but it is clear that the quality and quantity of the aid provided is also a factor .
It is not the financial target of 1.27 % of GNP but the quality of the preparation for enlargement that must determine the level of aid .
The Liberal Group is delighted with the objective assessment of all the applicant countries .
The Commission has rightly said that the two groups are not set in stone , and the efforts they make must be rewarded .
Lithuania , Latvia and Slovakia are all making progress in their own way , but the Czech Republic and Slovenia are proving surprisingly lacklustre .
We do not have to decide yet on moving certain countries from group II to group I. That will come next year and not just in six months ' time either , because we cannot expect the Commission to report every six months .
Madam President , Commissioners , ladies and gentlemen , I want to thank Mr Barón Crespo and the other rapporteurs for their work .
Obviously some of Mr Barón Crespo 's report is the product of the work done in the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Security and Defence Policy , and we are very grateful to him for taking on board a whole series of points and suggestions .
It is clear that the Agenda 2000 enlargement is the great challenge facing this Parliament and the European institutions .
It is an extraordinary political challenge for countries which only a few years ago could only cherish the dream of Europe , the myth of Europe , a democratic Europe , a Europe of rights and freedom .
Well , the thought of reducing all this to an accountants ' logic of how much money needs to be transferred from one place to another to help those who want to join in this great dream of liberty and democracy , strikes me as pretty simplistic .
If this is the political challenge our credibility will be riding on in the years ahead , our institutions are certainly not ready to face up to it .
It is like a car designed for six passengers which already has fifteen people in it , and now we are trying to squeeze twenty-five in .
The car is in danger of collapsing !
That is why , in my opinion , we need to deepen our institutions in this pre-accession strategy . Above all , our dealings with countries which are getting closer to Europe must not revolve around the quantitative problem of economic support , but must substantially involve exporting democratic models and citizens ' rights .
Madam President , those countries are building a constitutional state .
If there is one thing of value Europe can transmit to them , it is that very concept of the constitutional state , democracy , citizens ' rights and the ability to exercise them in every way .
Madam President , today 's debates take us into a crucial phase for defining the next Community financial framework and the guidelines and rules due to govern some of the most important policies and instruments .
I feel that these debates are taking place in conditions that are completely different from those surrounding the debates that we held on the first and second Delors packages .
But , in practical terms and to sum up , far off are the times when economic and social cohesion was presented as a point of honour and when we held heated debates about the resources to be earmarked to match our ambitions .
Undoubtedly , there is an ambition : that of enlargement .
And there are instruments - yes , there are - to carry out the various proposals made .
Nonetheless , what is lacking is the money available for the aims and instruments .
We have no reservations , in principle , about enlargement but we cannot say the same about the approaches chosen by the Commission to carry it out .
Enlargement will obviously lead to increased expenditure , undoubtedly far greater than the contributions that the candidate countries would be able to make to Community funds . This means that the European Union is going to have to make a choice between two alternatives and only two : either we must make additional financial resources available for enlargement or we will have to reduce expenditure , in other words , cut back our current aims and policies .
For our part , we are clearly in favour of the former option .
But this is not the option of the Commission . As it has made strict compliance with the Stability Pact a priority , it has opted for the approach of reducing expenditure .
This is the objective result of its proposals to maintain a ceiling on financial perspectives at current levels of 1.27 % of Community GNP and the subsequent reduction in that ceiling for the current 15 Member States to 1.13 % , or freezing the structural actions for an enlarged Union at the current 0.46 % of GNP .
This is now also the result of its proposal to renationalise CAP costs .
We reject the Commission 's option and think that this vital question cannot be put to one side at this moment in time .
That option would inevitably result in the sacrifice of economic and social cohesion .
We cannot understand how , for the sake of a new form of solidarity , we can sacrifice the solidarity that happens to be enshrined in the Treaty .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , we say that enlargement of the European Union is the greatest challenge since the cold war .
We say that the accession of our eastern neighbours can bring new stability to Europe .
The Council representative says that our neighbours await European Union support for tackling their reforms and adopting the acquis communautaire .
But let us look at the scale of the financing : it is pocket money and it is shameful .
The reality is that the applicant countries are virtually paying all the costs of the pre-accession strategies themselves .
That is why I regard the patronising attitude towards these candidates reflected in the regulation as unacceptable .
Surely they cannot be treated merely as objects of decision-making .
They must finally be recognised as partners .
The least we should do is to give them a say in the coordinating committee .
The Greens reject the concept of enlargement as a one-way street and call for an enlargement strategy based on partnership .
Let me add something on the amendments , because in my view the order of the voting list is wrong .
Mr Barón Crespo will surely accept that our Amendment No 17 to his Amendment No 7 and our Amendment No 19 to his Amendment No 9 represent , in both cases , additions rather than alternatives .
Madam President , I have some comments to make on this pre-accession strategy , resulting from my experience as rapporteur on the subject of the association of certain CCEE with the education , youth and culture programme .
Apart from the media sector , these are areas in which the acquis communautaire is modest .
However , these areas demonstrate certain imbalances from which our strategy suffers .
To start with , I fully support the rapporteur 's point of view .
Firstly , this pre-accession phase cannot be considered without taking into account the link that exists with certain Community policies and their necessary development .
Secondly , the goal of coherence and efficiency involves the reaffirmation of the political objectives in the enlargement process .
This is why it is unfortunate that , in this second phase , the PHARE programme concentrates more on technical operations to the detriment of more political reforms , for example in the social or cultural area .
Furthermore , in this obstacle course which the applicant countries must tackle , and which is modestly referred to as the adoption of the acquis communautaire , I fear there is a tendency to be content with appearances and to sometimes fail to assess the adherence of these countries to Community policies in terms of values and beliefs .
This is particularly true in the areas of the environment and transport , which are covered by this new ISPA instrument .
In this case too , I am not fully convinced that this instrument meets the intended objectives .
Madam President , we were very pleased to hear from the Commission that good progress has been made in the run-up to the negotiations with the applicant countries on accession to the European Union .
A number of sections of the acquis have been screened and the results are encouraging , although some countries are slower in moving down the right path .
However , we are also hearing some less positive noises , and it is becoming clear that adaptation to EU legislation is a much bigger task than was originally thought .
I endorse the reports before us today , but there are a few points I would like to emphasise .
A great many demands are being made of the applicant countries , such as respect for fundamental freedoms , which have to be met if they are to join .
The demand for quality in the adaptations they make must on no account be used as an excuse for delaying their accession .
The reports show how the Council has been unable to convert the implications of the decision on enlargement into a political strategy .
Is the political will really there ?
The negotiators must realise that the former eastern bloc countries have little experience of respecting democracy , human rights and the rights of minorities .
I am not saying that they should not be blamed for this , but we in the European Parliament have to acknowledge that many of them have made surprisingly rapid progress here .
We must not set the bar too high for the countries of Central and Eastern Europe to join .
They belong to western Europe , and after a period of Communist domination they are now looking to the countries of western Europe to help them achieve their legitimate aspirations to security and prosperity .
Joining the stable security structures of the European Union and NATO may help to prevent new conflicts , and the fledgeling democracies of Eastern Europe can be encouraged to develop along particular lines .
We should seize this opportunity and make every effort to ensure that these countries join as soon as possible .
If we expect the applicant countries to adapt , the European institutions should set them a good example .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the European Union is preparing for the fifth time to welcome new Member States , namely Cyprus and the ten countries of Central and Eastern Europe .
This enlargement will be much more important than the previous ones .
Europe of the 15 will become Europe of the 26 and will consist of an additional one million kilometres and a further one hundred million inhabitants .
In particular , this enlargement towards the East can be taken as a sign of the final destruction of the Iron Curtain , which has divided our continent for nearly half a century .
Since its creation in 1972 , the National Front has constantly fought against this Iron Curtain , which was built by the Communists to enclose the people of Eastern Europe in an enormous concentration camp .
In his first speech to this Parliament , Jean Marie Le Pen denounced this oppression .
For many years , although lacking resources , we tried to help our brothers in Eastern Europe but we were then a lone voice .
In France , all the other parties accepted the situation , including the Communists , of course , whose leader Marchais acclaimed the positive consequences of the people 's democracies , their socialist allies , and also the RPR and the UDF , led by Giscard d 'Estaing and Jacques Chirac who even went so far as to place flowers on the tomb of Lenin , the worst mass murderer of all time .
Similarly , in 1991 , our group was alone in supporting the struggle of the Lithuanians against the Soviet Union and that of the Croats against Yugoslavia .
At the time , Jacques Delors , the US Government and all the European leaders condemned these people for daring to rise up against communist and federalist regimes .
These same people now want to see Eastern Europe come under the control of Brussels .
We are opposed to an enlargement of this kind , as it would cost our countries dearly .
The Commission has assessed the financial cost at over 500 billion francs between 1999 and 2006 .
This is hardly surprising .
The countries of Central and Eastern Europe have been ruined by over forty years of Communism .
This cost will be borne in particular by France for it currently receives little from Brussels , to which it pays over 90 billion francs , and it will receive even less in the future .
The agricultural policy , which has already been drastically reduced , will be cut back even more .
France 's regional aid will be reduced by 20 % .
Corsica and French Hainaut will no longer be included among the regions assisted under Objective 1 .
However , money is not everything .
Lech Walesa , when he visited Brussels some years ago , said to me that we in Europe were creating a new Soviet Union .
He was right .
Madam President , although Mr Samland has not spoken yet , I would like to concentrate on Lord Tomlinson 's report .

I have to say that it is clear from this whole debate that the idealists are not practical enough and the practical people are not idealistic enough when to comes to dealing with the enlargement problem .
We have just heard a number of ideas that are extremely idealistic , such as my colleague Mr Oostlander 's suggestion that the whole enlargement dossier should be brought under the CFSP and thus handed over to a bunch of quarrelling diplomats .
I think the CFSP is far too important for this .
The fund mentioned in the Tomlinson report is a good example of something that is both practical and idealistic .
It provides aid for countries which is guaranteed by loans and guarantees issued by the Union , and it seems to have been very successful .
Of course , there are times when it becomes clear that some countries cannot pay , which is when the European Union 's guarantees come into play .
This is an important element .
The only thing is that it costs money , and this is something the Council in its wisdom failed to consider .
It thought that the guarantee in itself was enough of an advantage , but there comes a point when you have to pay up .
Thanks to pressure from the European Parliament , a fund has been created which more or less provides those guarantees itself .
The fund needs to be supplemented , but it now fortunately appears that we need less than we originally thought and that we can reduce the figure from 10 % to 8 % , which is good news .
This means that the Union has created an extremely practical instrument which is effective , which can be directly applied in the countries concerned in one way or another through the institutions which they themselves have set up with their central banks , and which is making progress .
I would even add that we have used this same model in the employment programmes in Europe , where we have also used the combination of guarantees plus loans .
It really is a very , very good model , much better than all the other things that have been proposed .
It is also a model that I can prove was purely the result of pressure by the European Parliament 's Committee on Budgets . If it had been set up as some Member States wanted , in a happy-go-lucky fashion , nothing good would have come out of it , and people would have blamed Parliament for wasting taxpayers ' money again .
But this is not the case .
I think that we in Parliament need to bear in mind that if the diplomats get it wrong , we shall be the ones who are blamed , not them , and so we need to be both idealistic and practical .
Madam President , it is vital to focus and coordinate the aid for the applicant countries effectively by means of the three instruments available if we are to achieve maximum possible benefit .
Fulfilment of the Copenhagen criteria is the basis for further development action .
Efforts must also to be made to coordinate aid to the applicant countries based on cross-border and intergovernmental cooperation in the EU with the Interreg and TACIS programmes , so that the aid itself forms a coordinated whole .
Aid to improve nuclear safety must also be concentrated in accordance with the PHARE programme .
In the allocation of agricultural aid to applicant countries we need flexibility and a clear system of prioritization on the basis of partnership agreements .
Integration with the EU 's single market and standards requires a massive amount of development work , which must focus on a policy of quality in foodstuffs production , monitoring , plant and animal health and the environment as a whole , all within the framework of sustainable production .
We have to prepare for the consequences of structural change in agriculture with an effective , wide-ranging rural policy to create new and varied enterprise action and new jobs , and that is why a high level of education and training is vital when it comes to exploiting the use of the aid given to the applicant countries .
The partial decentralisation of administration to the applicant countries under the supervision of the Commission is also a step in the right direction .
We should support the participation of the beneficiary countries , and we must also emphasise the importance of their own involvement in financing investment and discovering sources of funding .
Madam President , since we are debating a report by the Committee on Foreign Affairs about enlargement , I would like us to turn our attention to a superlatively political issue which has affected people in my country and is very worrying for them .
It concerns the accession of the Republic of Cyprus to the European Union .
We were extremely disconcerted to see a statement by France , Italy , Germany and the Netherlands , in which they link the eventual accession of the Republic of Cyprus to the European Union with a solution to the Cyprus problem , a thing which bears no relationship to the initial positions adopted by the European Union at a succession of European Councils .
It is certainly sad to see governments such as those of Mr Dalema , Mr Schröder or Mr Jospin pursuing policies which are worse and which deviate from the commitments made by governments such as those of Mr Berlusconi , Mr Juppé or Mr Kohl .
In that sense , I would stress that the worst way to solve the Cyprus problem is to say that its solution is a political prerequisite for the accession of Cyprus to the European Union , because that would constitute a motive for Turkey , which does not want Cyprus to join , to do nothing about the Cyprus problem even supposing it would otherwise have liked to find a solution to it .
In that sense , I think it is very important to stand by what Mr van den Broek once said here , and our principle should be that the accession of the Republic of Cyprus must not be held hostage by any other country .
Madam President , enlargement of the EU to the Central and Eastern European countries brings with it both opportunities and risks , not just for the applicant countries but also for the EU .
It is particularly important to the agricultural sector that we do not export the destructive system of agricultural policy we have pursued in recent decades to these countries , but that instead we support their existing regional structures , develop them and give them a chance to modernise and become more effective .
At the same time , we must resist the temptation to set in motion a form of development which , under the heading of ' structural improvement ' , would give rise to the same kind of negative trends .
That is why I do not agree with the line taken in the Sonneveld report .
It says that we must not call for plans for the integrated development of the rural areas .
This means that he is not in favour of this positive development , which we must promote , but would like to continue pursuing the old system of rationalising structures and thereby destroying jobs and encouraging forms of production that are neither species-friendly nor environment-friendly .
So we cannot endorse Mr Sonneveld 's amendments , not least out of a sense of responsibility for the development of agricultural policy in the EU .
Madam President , the accession of the countries of Eastern Europe , in particular the great Christian country of Poland and the Hungary of the former Austro-Hungarian Empire , is clearly an important and wonderful project .
I should like to examine the consequences from the agricultural perspective of the Seapared programme .
The agricultural population of the West will increase by 50 % and our land will be increased by 30 % . Of course it is good to add to one 's assets .
In the Eastern European countries , 25 % of the working population are farmers but this percentage should fall to 6 % as in Western Europe . Agricultural prices are lower with 30 % less for meat , 20 % less for cereals and 15 % less for wheat .
These countries also have problems of overproduction and plant health and they must adapt to our standards , particularly in terms of food safety .
The cost is ECU 500 million per year but I am not going to talk about this as it could be resolved if necessary .
The problem , however , is that these countries must start on the difficult journey which we in the West have already completed .
Common market organisations must be established , the right to property must be revised , veterinary and plant health changes must be made and in particular farmers must be eliminated .
This means eliminating Hungarian farmers and producers of Hungarian Tokay , the king of wines and the wine of kings .
Polish farmers must be eliminated , leading to unemployment .
Structural Funds would then be needed .
The West 's regrettably hyperproductive agricultural model must be applied with , if you will pardon the expression , concentration camp-like livestock farming , the consequences of which we have seen in the West .
My greatest fear is that the accession of the countries of Eastern Europe - to which we might agree given the strategic nature of the project - is just a pretext for certain things .
The first is for the fall in prices in the West , due to the revision of the CAP and to prepare for the negotiations within the World Trade Organisation .
The second is for the revision - currently underway - of the financing of not only the common agricultural policy but also the whole European Community , with the ensuing problems of France losing too much , Germany losing even more and part of the common agricultural policy being nationalised under the pretext of the cost of the accession of the Eastern European countries .
Thirdly , the accession of these countries must not be used as an excuse for challenging our CAP .
It must not be used as a weapon to defeat western farmers by highlighting the fact that their costs are higher and must be reduced .
Furthermore , it is impossible to do two things at once .
Can we handle Mercosur , the transatlantic market and all the costs it may incur , and open up to the East at the same time ?
In conclusion , this is clearly a major strategic project which is soul-stirring but gives the impression of being premature , badly prepared and with many negative elements for the countries of Eastern Europe , which I know want to accede , and many negative elements for us .
Perhaps discussions should be continued and intermediate stages provided ?
Everyone knows that the road to hell is paved with good intentions and that perfectionism can be counter-productive .
Madam President , first let me thank you and the House very warmly for your forbearance in allowing me to deputise for the rapporteur .
Unfortunately I could not be here at the set time because I had to talk to one of our partners about the conciliation procedure this afternoon .
That was the problem .
I must also apologise on behalf of Lord Tomlinson , who is attending an important meeting in the House of Lords today in a different capacity .
As you know , an important decision is pending there for our British colleagues .
Let me now turn to Lord Tomlinson 's report on amending Regulation 2728 / 94 establishing a Guarantee Fund for external actions .
As Mr Pronk just pointed out , establishing this Guarantee Fund was a long-standing aim of the European Parliament , because we could not agree to the Member States of the European Union giving guarantees unless these guarantees were safeguarded through a fund , especially in the event of defaults .
The entire budget stood guarantee in full for any potential defaults .
So we found it very welcome when this Fund was proposed in 1994 and accepted by the Council , because it created the basis for covering the guarantees in Central and Eastern Europe .
In the report it has now submitted on the use of these funds and the risks they are designed to cover , the Commission concludes that the target amount of the Fund should be brought down from the existing 10 % to 8 % of outstanding capital liabilities .
The Commission justifies this on the basis that potentially risky guarantees are situated at a level for which a lower percentage rate of payments into the Fund would suffice .
By how many per cent are we reducing the rate ?
In this case , the proposed percentage rate would require an annual maximum amount of EUR 150 million to match up to the present level of lending to non-member countries , which comes to a maximum of about EUR 2.5 billion .
That would allow the Fund to cover these risks .
The rapporteur , as also the Committee on Budgets , reached the conclusion that the Commission is right in saying in its report that , according to its estimates and analysis , the total of outstanding loans carrying a more than normal risk was about ECU 1.075 billion as of 1 July 1998 .
You can read that up in the report too , broken down by the various CIS member countries and the countries of Asia and Latin America .
On that reference date , the Fund had at its disposal ECU 1.186 billion .
Therefore , in the event that the total amount of loans which could be considered to be carrying a heavy risk were not repaid , the Fund would be able to cope with that loss .
It would not even be necessary to draw on the amount allocated in the budget for loan endowments during that financial year , which is to say ECU 338 million in 1998 .
In that respect , it was right and sensible to reduce the target amount .
The rapporteur and the committee endorse the Commission 's proposal in that respect .
We have , however , tabled two amendments on which we would like to hear the Commission 's position before the vote on this report .
One calls on the Commission to submit a regular report to us so that we can re-evaluate the trend in the utilisation of the credits and the funds .
I think this is the point on which we differ least .
Here the Commission will endorse our view .
It is Amendment No 2 .
But I would like the Commission to confirm this .
Far more important , however , is Amendment No 1 .
Who is to manage the Fund ?
Here we take an entirely different view .
I tend to agree more with Mr Pronk than with the Commission .
The Commission would like to transfer the management of the Fund from the European Investment Bank to its own administrative staff .
We believe such a step would be quite wrong .
In his explanatory statement , the rapporteur has once again pointed out that he considers it unlikely that European Union officials would be better able to evaluate the risks in granting loans than a bank , which has to prove itself at bank level and has to evaluate the quality of the risks as part of its usual banking business before deciding to grant loans .
So we want to maintain the existing article .
That would mean adopting Amendment No 1 .
The Commission is asked to delete the point in its proposal relating to the financial management of the Fund .
We would like the Commission to make a statement on this .
As proposed by the rapporteur , I would like to say the following : if the Commission does not accept these two amendments , we will call for the report to be referred back to committee , because we cannot in fact support it if the Commission does not accommodate us on this point .
Madam President , enlargement of the EU with the accession of the Central and Eastern European states and Cyprus is not just a project starting with the new century , it is also a task for that century .
And a project of this scale calls for an exceptional effort on the part of all concerned .
Indeed , everyone has now realised that this primarily means the applicant states .
But in the light of the real differences between us and the applicant states , for instance in the economic and social field , I continue to believe that in general the European Union is still not making enough efforts to meet this challenge , not least in financial terms .
But be that as it may .
In the given circumstances , I believe the Commission has nonetheless submitted proposals that are for the most part viable and at least still give us a chance to master this important process of accession to the European Union and give it a positive shape .
I would like to address one detail .
I believe it is more necessary now than in past enlargements to familiarise the public administrations in the applicant states with the aims and procedures of the acquis communautaire at all levels- not just at the highest level , where this is certainly already the case , but also at lower levels .
In my view , we are still underestimating the background situation of the majority of these states , namely a dictatorship system with the corresponding type of administration .
Moreover , we all too often forget that the same people are still working in the lower echelons of this administration , who are of course now endeavouring to work under the new system .
But we should gear parts of our pre-accession aid much more specifically than in the past towards retraining the administration .
On the other hand , it is probably less necessary now for western Europe to finance new studies .
I believe it is enough to analyse what we already have in that respect .
Let me come back to our task for the new century .
We should approach the interests not only of the applicant states but of course our own interests too in the most fair and balanced manner .
But above all , as European democrats we should also be thankful that we can take part in this historic process .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to follow on from Mr Botz 's last comment .
Indeed we do not need to carry out any more feasibility studies ; instead we need operational resources , and I believe that is the road the Commission has been pursuing for some time .
We are quite prepared to support the Commission in terms of concentrating more on that approach .
Setting infrastructure and the environment and the support measures for supervisory staff and investment financing as its objectives is the right starting-point , as is the strong emphasis on promoting democracy and the rule of law and viable administrative structures , together with a sensible judicial system .
But we must now spend these funds rapidly and unbureaucratically , so that they can make a fairly rapid impact .
We are facing a difficult task , namely how to bring about an economic and political balance on a continent that was once mercilessly divided both economically and politically .
Our major task in connection with this process of rapprochement must be to fuse the two parts together again .
Here we must also take a look at ourselves and remember something we tend forget : that what we represent as the national interest can in fact be assimilated with the interest of the Community .
When we look at the opposition between national interests , which are often considered in a short-sighted way , we may see short-term difficulties here and there , but in truth we want enlargement because it is also to our advantage , and not just to the advantage of the applicant countries .
If we realise this , if we really define our interests in the political , security and economic areas , then we will also be in a position to muster the ability to compromise and achieve the balance that we need if we are to make progress here .
One thing is clear : until now we have enjoyed the benefits of strengthening trade relations between Central and Eastern Europe on the one side and the European Union on the other .
Our citizens may have gained the impression that up to now all this has simply cost a lot of money ; but the reality is that we have actually earned more than we have spent on these countries , simply because of the imbalance in trade relations .
I believe we should make that clear to our people too if we are to mobilise the necessary political support for this accession process .
We must also take the time factor into account , since it is an important factor if we want the citizens of the applicant countries to continue giving their support .
That means the programmes have to be of a high quality .
Mrs Schroedter , I am delighted to hear you say that shamefully little money is being spent !
I would cordially ask you to invite your Foreign Minister and your Chancellor to take your words to heart , so that we can achieve a better policy here !
Madam President , the reports on ' Agenda 2000 ' that the various committees are presenting hang together like spider 's web .
But acceptance of the proposed reforms must be wholly subject to maintenance of the Community policies contributing to cohesion between the Fifteen and to measures to facilitate the accession of the applicant countries .
As regards relations ahead of the pre-accession strategy , we agree with the rapporteur and with those who assert that the criteria defined at Copenhagen must be respected : the constitutional state , democracy , existence of a market economy , respect for the acquis communautaire .
We take the view that the new accessions represent a historic opportunity to reconcile our continent with its past and that they are needed to define the Europe of the future .
But the Commission 's proposals are prudent and pragmatic as they have to take account of the strong divergencies between the states , divergencies which underline what the Alleanza Nazionale has long maintained : that a great Europe is one where political union is the precursor of economic union .
Political union should be and should have been refined before initiating the pre-accession negotiations , so that the new states could actually be presented with a precise and well-defined framework for the whole .
So the proposal lacks a political introduction , which we think is necessary and which would have buttressed the central problem that the new accessions raise - the future financing of Europe .
Plus we deplore the fact that the opening presented to the six states does not respond to precise political choices , and we suspect that it may be just an accounting device to make it possible to achieve the enlargement while maintaining the Community budget on the current base of 1.27 % of gross domestic product until 2006 .
To be complete , the construction of Europe must unite all its peoples .
But we must point out , with some regret , that the institutional reforms , the future financing of the budget and other problems are still waiting in the wings , while there is a need for unambiguous political will on the part of all the governments to handle European affairs politically and not as a purely economic and financial negotiation .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I detect in our joint debate a discrepancy between a pre-accession strategy that is admirable and full of ambition and an Agenda 2000 that should prepare the Union for welcoming the applicant countries and in fact involves the necessary alignment of our common policies .
With regard to the pre-accession strategy that I wish to discuss this morning , I feel that we desperately need to take an overview of this . This overview would show that the enlargement for which we are preparing is not just a simple case of adding together two units .
The EU must remind the applicant countries of this .
We cannot engage in a bilateral process with each Member State .
We must assess the overall impact of this strategy .
Less than a year after the adoption of a list of applicant countries that the EU could initially integrate , we now see that the map has already changed .
Malta has resubmitted its application , the Commission is envisaging the accession of Turkey under new conditions and there is a renewed possibility of two Baltic applicants being accepted .
More than ever it seems that the European Conference is essential , in its role as a forum for producing this overview , and I feel we must return to this .
I cannot stand to see this gap between the global and inclusive process that we have always wanted and the absence of an overview .
We need to debate and consider the frontiers of the Union , the political objectives of the Union , the methods for decision-making and governing with more than 15 countries , and the methods for defending this body and for making its voice heard in world affairs .
The amendments proposed by Mr Barón Crespo are in line with this and I fully support them .
However , we must all be careful : if the devil is in the details , we are in danger of becoming blind to these details sometimes .
As you know , ladies and gentlemen , our agenda this morning has been organised to take account of the formal sitting .
That is why the votes are taking place now , and also why we unfortunately cannot complete our debate this morning , as we could have done if we had held the votes at midday .
Welcome
Ladies and gentlemen , I should like to welcome a delegation from the National Assembly of Mauritania who have taken their seats in the official gallery .
This delegation is led by the Speaker , Mr Sid 'ahmed Ould Baba , and I would point out that this is the second interparliamentary meeting with the relevant delegation of the European Parliament .
Our relations are based on friendship , cooperation and partnership , and I very much hope that this second meeting will enable us to strengthen these relations further .
Thank you , and a warm welcome to Strasbourg .
( Applause )
VOTES
Mr President , on a point of order .
I should like to ask you to join me in welcoming into the public gallery Helga Stevens , from the European Union for the deaf , who is observing this vote on behalf of the 500 000 profoundly deaf people within the European Union , as we vote to reaffirm this Parliament 's support for the official recognition of their language - sign language - in every Member State of this European Union .
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
Mr President , I do not know whether it is our machines that cannot keep up with Scottish technology or whether you are going too fast for the machines but there is a whole row here that is not working properly .
I think it is probably something to do with the Liberals .
Mr Watson - a good Scot - you will have kept up , I am sure .
Mr President , I think we need to get away from the destructive tribalism of your last comment .
We voted on 12 amendments with one vote .
I should like to have your ruling as to whether that counts as 12 roll call votes or not .
( Laughter )
It is a productivity deal and I am afraid it is one move of the finger , one count .
Welcome
Mr President , as chairman of the Delegation for Relations with Japan , I would like to point out that an important delegation from the Japanese Diet is present .
They have travelled a long way and I hope that we can give them a warm welcome .
( Sustained applause )
Thank you very much , Mr Pompidou .
In fact I was going to leave it to the President to make the greeting but I shall do so with pleasure myself .
It gives me great pleasure to welcome to the official gallery a delegation from the Japanese Diet , led by Mr Taro Nakayama .
This is the 19th meeting between our respective delegations and , on behalf of the European Parliament , I wish to welcome them officially to this working session of Parliament and wish them every success on their visit .
( The sitting was suspended for a formal sitting and resumed at 12.30 p.m. )
VOTES ( continuation )
Mr President , it is an unmitigated disaster that Members have only received this amendment at 10 a.m.
I wonder what the Liberals are up to ?
The wording in the Swedish text says ' shorter working hours ' , but the Liberals would prefer it to be ' flexible working hours ' .
Low inflation is mentioned , but not in the translation , which is absolutely terrible !
I was , of course , opposed to this proposal , which was fine in the original , so please can we have the original version back !
Something also has to be done about the translation !
You are quite right .
The one safeguard we have is that the language services always ensure that the amendments correspond to the original version .
But there is a problem in getting amendments to people on time .
Amendment No 2
Mr President , after consultation with the various groups , I should like to make two small , but to some people important , changes to Amendment No 2 .
In the first section , ' European investment programme ' should be changed to ' European investment strategy ' and ' develop ' to ' extend ' .
This last change is mainly a point of accuracy .
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
Welcome
Before we move on to the next vote , I have great pleasure in welcoming to the official gallery a delegation from the South African National Assembly led by Mrs Frene Ginwala , Speaker of the National Assembly and leader of the South African delegation , who are with us for their fourth interparliamentary meeting with the relevant European Parliament delegation .
This is an historic moment in the relations between South Africa and the European Union : negotiations are currently under way to conclude a trade , development and cooperation agreement , and we hope that they will be concluded successfully shortly .
Our respective assemblies will then be consulted on this agreement , which will help to bring the countries and the peoples which we represent closer together .
I wish the South African delegation every success and a pleasant stay during their visit to Strasbourg .
( Applause )
VOTES ( continuation )
Mr President , on behalf of the Green Group and pursuant to Rule 129 I must ask for this report to be referred back to committee .
During yesterday 's debate , Mr Sainjon put forward arguments justifying this request .
Unfortunately he cannot be present today but as I fully agree with him I am repeating his proposal .
Both arguments relate to current events .
Firstly , we are actually voting on a Commission communication that we know is no longer applicable .
We are in fact going to adopt a report which Mrs Mann has had the goodness to adapt in accordance with the new political situation .
The current context involves a Transatlantic Economic Partnership dealt with in a Commission / Council agreement and , more recently , in fact just a week last Monday , in a Council agreement on an action plan which we have never seen .
We received a copy of this in English in the Committee on External Economic Relations but Parliament has never been able to debate this text .
This is the first current event which means that we risk voting on a text which is out of date in terms of the policy and the issues and which , more seriously perhaps , risks causing confusion and even contradiction in Parliament .
This would not be good for this House .
In conclusion , the second current event is the American position on bananas .
Everyone is aware of this situation so I will not go into it .
I believe that the context in which we debated this in committee , and even yesterday , has changed .
We cannot be conciliatory towards a discussion partner who is being arrogant .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I am sorry but the proposal from the Greens is absurd .
Just listen a moment !
That is no way to achieve what you want .
If you want Parliament 's voice to be heard , both in the Council and in the Commission and also by the Americans , you will have to state your position today .
The next summit between the United States and Europe will take place in early December and this particular report will be discussed there too .
That means that you will achieve nothing at all by preventing Parliament from stating its position on it today .
Why do you not just look at the realities !
After all , the political reality outside our doors does not depend on the position of the Greens !
( Heckling and applause ) We have adapted everything .
We are not pronouncing on an old report !
I have specifically included all the Council 's new decisions .
I have pointed out that Parliament would like to have a new report .
I have pointed out that these reports should go to all the committees .
The Commission has agreed , the Council has indicated that it too would take note of this .
That is all you can do .
That is the way to ensure that Parliament and the committees can reconsider precisely that decision at a future date .
If you refer the report back to committee , you will be depriving us of any chance of making a political statement .
I would ask my colleagues in this House to agree that we vote on it today , and that we also vote in favour .
Mr President , the Group of the European Radical Alliance agrees totally with the request submitted by the Green Group and Mr Lannoye , and we also agree with the reasons put forward .
We can give an excellent incidental reason , namely the banana affair .
The European Banana Market Organisation uses the basic rules of our Community to ensure both internal and external solidarity , particularly with regard to the ACP States . We are being subjected in this case to an American diktat that has not yet received an appropriate European response .
This is our circumstantial reason .
However , we also have more general substantive reasons and , without wanting to offend Mrs Mann with regard to her excellent work , we do not share all her assumptions , particularly not those contained in the initial recitals of the draft resolution , which assert the similarity of the models of society on each side of the Atlantic .
On the contrary , we believe that these models are different and that the banana affair perfectly illustrates the difference between one model of society based on rules of liberalism and competition and another model based on values of humanism and solidarity .
Mr President , this will not become the rule here in Parliament , but in this case the European People 's Party entirely agrees with the Social Democrat rapporteur .
We have held a very detailed discussion , which has taken full account of relations between the USA and the European Union .
The report makes some very critical comments about American policy .
If all these critical comments on American behaviour are to find a hearing , the report must be adopted now , and not at a time when there is no chance of our view being heard .
I am therefore against the ideological and hyper-critical attitude of the Greens , and ask for this motion to be rejected .
( Parliament decided against referral back to committee )
Mr President , I found it difficult to understand the translation of the amendment from the Liberal Group in the earlier work and it is even harder to understand Amendment No 1 from the UPE Group .
In the Swedish version it has been left out altogether .
I apologise to Mr Pasty for my incomprehension .
That may not necessarily be the translation .
Mr President , I believe you made a remark which I consider to be rather personal .
In reply to Mrs Thors , you indicated that the stupidity of Amendment No 1 might not just be a result of the translation but that it was perhaps intrinsically idiotic or stupid .
My conscience has led me to reread this amendment which simply says that , in the negotiations with the United States , we must respect the acquis communautaire .
I will let you and this House judge whether there is anything stupid in this amendment .
Mr President , our group wholeheartedly supports the resolution on sign language , and we call for our policy on the deaf to pursue two objectives .
First and foremost of these is greater accessibility , by which we mean equal access to education and public services and equal opportunities to take part in public meetings and hearings .
There are about half a million deaf people in the European Union .
By improving accessibility for the deaf , we are strengthening democracy .
Secondly , we call for better integration for deaf people , and there are five things that will help us to achieve this .
First and most important is better training for sign language interpreters .
Integration for the deaf is perfectly possible through the use of interpreters , so we need to provide adequate training opportunities for those who wish to learn sign language .
It will be difficult to achieve general recognition for sign language .
In Sweden , Denmark and Finland , sign language is already recognised in education , and the other Member States should follow suit here .
We also need recognition for sign language in contacts with the public authorities and in the fields of employment and culture , perhaps following the United States ' example .
We must also ensure that the deaf have equal access to information .
They have the same rights as those who can hear , but while this is obviously the case in the United States , it is often not so here in the Union .
Another glaring problem is the incompatibility of text telephone systems .
In my country , Flanders , alone we have at least three different systems that are not compatible , which gives you a good idea of the scale of the problem throughout Europe .
This is completely unacceptable in the single market .
There are no absolute standards for these communication systems , which is why deaf people currently tend to use faxes , though this is not two-way communication .
They are now investigating possibilities using the Internet , which offers them huge opportunities to improve communication with those who can hear .
Here again , the question is whether all chat systems are compatible and whether everyone can afford to buy the necessary equipment .
In conclusion , I should like to stress the importance of multimedia applications and of ensuring that the deaf are fully involved in their development .

One final point : the Community has few powers in these areas , but I think that we in Parliament , as representatives of the people of Europe , have a duty to speak up on behalf of half a million deaf people .
The incompatibility of the text telephone systems is clearly an internal market problem , so I hope we can rely on the Commission to come up with some proposals here .
In any case , I hope that this resolution has more of an impact on the Member States than was the case with our resolution of ten years ago .
We should like to thank the rapporteur for his excellent work on an urgently needed report .
The proposed directive relating to special provisions for vehicles used for the carriage of passengers comprising more than eight seats in addition to the driver 's seat is of great importance in enabling people with reduced mobility to lead fuller lives , as well as making it easier for them to use public transport .
We are pleased to note that to a large extent the report takes account of the needs of people with reduced mobility , so as to make it possible for them to travel in the types of vehicle covered by the directive .
The rights of people with reduced mobility must come before the private interests of bus manufacturers .
There should be a Union-wide coordinated approach to dealing with the issue , since to allow Member States to decide matters for themselves , or to leave it to the market , would only worsen the chances of people with reduced mobility having their needs met .
Although we voted for the report , we are still critical - for the reasons expressed in our previous explanation of vote - of the form of legislation it represents .
In the different areas , legislation should be the principal and guiding mechanism , while technical specifications at profession level should be left to professional bodies and be applied through special regulations .
Mr Murphy 's report is topical in dealing with what constitutes one of the most difficult problems for the European Union and the internal market .
The free movement of goods presupposes either the establishment of a minimum requirement , which applies to all Member States , or that Member States mutually agree to approve each other 's goods .
In both cases , Member States with high minimum requirements can be forced to lower them .
In our view , the minimum requirement recommended by Mr Murphy in his report is so wide that there would be no serious risk of Member States having to lower their own minimum requirements .
Neither does the report make any mention of compelling Member States to change their current regulations to make buses that are now in service undergo alterations .
Instead , the report recommends that vehicles which comply with the requirements contained in the report would automatically be acceptable in all Member States .
We have decided to vote for the report for the above reasons .
It should be a foregone conclusion that all Member States , manufacturers and operators have a duty to ensure passenger and traffic safety and that the special needs of disabled people are met .
Any loophole in the laws of Member States should be rectified at national level .
There is no need for an EU directive to legislate on total harmonisation or detailed specifications relating to the construction of buses , for example the width of seats , height of boarding platforms , provision of palm-operated buttons , or size and location of exit signs .
Furthermore , it is absurd for MEPs to have to adopt a position on 143 pages of technical data , drawings , and so on .
It is evident in both the Commission communication and the report that it is the existence of protectionist measures with regard to trade in buses within the internal market which is the prime concern and is the reason for both the report and the Commission 's proposal .
I voted against the report for the above reasons .
I would have preferred the Commission to have viewed the issue from the standpoint of passenger and traffic safety and with the problems of disabled people in mind , and to have put forward a recommendation that would have improved safety and accessibility .
In our explanation of vote , we should like to stress that we still think that the design of the euro coins should take into consideration the needs of blind and elderly people .
As regards the proposal to introduce a 100 euro coin , we have decided to bow to the opinion of the PSE Group , although for our part we view the issue in a more neutral light .
This report gives me an opportunity to draw attention to a problem about which the public is becoming increasingly concerned : the proliferation of euro coins .
In addition to the euro coins minted by each of the 11 Member States in the euro zone , it seems that states that have a monetary agreement with one of the Member States in the euro zone are requesting that they be allowed to mint euros with national faces .
This request is being made by San Marino and the Vatican City in Italy and by Monaco in France .
I must say that this request is absurd .
Not only would it mean that countries which are not part of the euro zone and which do not therefore have to fulfil the very strict obligations for this would have the right to issue euros , but it would also contribute , if accepted , to the proliferation of euro coins . This would add to the public 's confusion , which will be widespread anyway given the numerous commemorative coins that will undoubtedly be issued around 2002 to celebrate the advent of the euro .
In addition , as the Prime Minister of France , Lionel Jospin , has already indicated , authorising the Vatican to mint euros with an image of the Pope on the national face would risk causing constitutional problems in countries where there is a clear separation of Church and State .
For all these reasons , the issue of euro coins must be strictly limited and the three states indicated must consequently be refused the right to mint euro coins .
The Council 's proposal amending the Regulation on denominations and technical specifications of euro coins intended for circulation has two aims . The first is to alter the weight of the 50 cent coin in order to meet the requirements of vending machines , and the second is to change the definition of the edge of the 50 and 10 cent coins , at the request of the European Blind Union , to facilitate their use .
We agree to these substantive changes as we believe they are practical . On the one hand , they are intended to facilitate the daily life of the visually impaired and , on the other , they should prevent fraud .
However , we must consider the consequences in terms of cost of these last-minute changes , given that production has already started .
It is rather curious , not to say unacceptable , that these changes have been made at the last moment when the minting of the coins has already begun , at the end of a full-scale campaign to promote the euro throughout Europe and after many technical studies and numerous hearings of experts !
Once again the cart has been put before the horse .
It is saddening that disabled people were not taken into account earlier , while the practical aspects are still not fully settled !
The Council , Commission and Parliament should all share responsibility for this .
A little more precision in the first place would obviously have helped the introduction of the euro .
High rates of unemployment and the falling demand for labour are fixed variables preventing our Union 's social policies from coming into line .
If we introduce factors like the future economic and monetary union , the ageing of the population or the future enlargement to the CEECs into the analysis , the paradigm gets even more complicated .
The Union 's philosophy on policies for employment and mobility and on differentiating work typologies must be based on three types of approach : the first is optimising action ; the second relates to financial support ; and the third to the legislation which should underpin the new social action programme .
Like the rapporteur , we must first deplore the way the Commission keeps insisting on resorting to the use of instruments that are not legally enforceable , when , in our view , in areas such as the organisation of work , workers ' individual and collective rights and social measures regulating the free-market economy , rules should continue to take the form of directives .
In our view the Commission would be able to act more vigorously if it included a series of provisions in the new social programme .
The most important of these would be reducing the fiscal pressure on small companies and raising employees ' wages through profit-sharing schemes , practical measures which should certainly be accompanied by initiatives to define the future of social dialogue precisely , and promote the adoption of a charter of fundamental social rights , also extending it to those partner countries which have not yet ratified it .
We should like to thank the rapporteur for his excellent work , both as regards the presentation and contents of the proposals contained in the report .
The new Social Action Programme is very important in the Union 's development of its social and labour market policies .
The Commission 's proposals are basically sound , but they would have been noticeably improved by the inclusion of the committee 's amendments .
We agree with the proposals put forward in the report , in particular as regards the following : a clearer focus on the social dialogue , a move to incorporate provisions relating to individual rights in the social sector in the Treaty , an action programme against discrimination , legislation on sexual harassment , the need for stress to be included in legislation on the protection of employees , and their right to information and representation in the workplace .
The report warrants a number of amendments which constitute urgent matters in themselves . However , it would be better to deal with them in another report that is more relevant to the areas they touch on .
We are not voting in favour of the Hughes report on the Social Action Programme 1998-2000 , since it contains proposals for directives on workers ' individual and collective rights and the social regime which will disregard the Danish system of agreements .
We are going to vote against the report , because we do not think that it is appropriate to legislate at EU level on matters relating to the organisation of work and workers ' individual and collective rights .
Labour rights and related issues should , in the main , fall to the competence of individual countries .
We agree with many of the rapporteur 's proposals to improve the new Social Action Programme , for example on promoting worker involvement in company decision-making and strengthening the rights of employees ' representatives , as well as the proposal to promote civil dialogue - we think that biannual forums are inadequate .
However , we do not agree that directives are an appropriate form of legislation in areas such as the organisation of work and workers ' individual and collective rights . Instead , we think that negotiated agreements between the partners in the labour market are a workmanlike and appropriate way to achieve success in this area .
We also have reservations as regards legally binding legislation on sexual harassment .
We have therefore decided to abstain in the final vote .
The Social Action Programme , commonly known in Brussels jargon as the ' SAP ' , was submitted for our approval today . The French abbreviation is ' PAS ' and this reminds us of unfortunate recent events in France when the French National Assembly considered the now notorious PACS - ' Pacte Civil de Solidarité ' , which is a legal framework for two cohabiting people .
We have voted against this SAP .
There are several simple reasons for this , and they basically relate to our very conception of social Europe and what this must be .
Social Europe is not the Europe of the devotees of Maastricht and Amsterdam .
It is not the Europe of the general minimum income or of voting rights for immigrants .
It is not the Europe of no borders and company relocations .
It is not the Europe of ultra-liberals , free traders and internationalists .
Social Europe is first and foremost the Europe of homelands , national preference and social welfare .
As a tool for social peace , social welfare must have the nation as a development framework and must come under the responsibility of each state .
Unlike the rapporteur , we believe that , in the context of the internal market , social matters must require unanimous approval by the Member States .
Decisions taken on social matters have such extensive effects on all labour relations and on the lives of our citizens that all decisions taken by a qualified majority , where these are compulsory and therefore imposed on all the Member States , are dangerous for all citizens , whether working or unemployed .
We have therefore voted against this report which is dangerous in addition to being demagogic .
Prioritising employment is a positive move .
EMU , the single currency and a permanent anti-inflation policy make it more difficult to increase employment .
The Social Action Programme should preferably be a non-binding instrument for analysing problems that lead to social exclusion , poverty , unemployment and discrimination .
Legislation on social issues , individual rights and so on should preferably be carried out by Member States and not through EU Treaty provisions .
In paragraph 2 of the report , Parliament expresses its disappointment that the Commission is increasingly resorting to the use of regulatory instruments in the field of labour legislation .
Instead , the report establishes that ' in areas such as the organisation of work , workers ' individual and collective rights ... rules should take the form of directives ... '
I am wholly in agreement with the report as regards the importance of basic labour rights legislation .
However , I should like to point out that this is mainly a matter of national concern , and EU competence only extends to areas involving the organisation of labour and the working environment .
In other areas , it is important to recognise Member States ' cultural differences .
For example , Sweden does not have a legal minimum wage ; the issue is decided through collective bargaining and agreement .
I am in favour of an EU directive on minimum standards in the areas of organisation of labour and the working environment .
In many Member States , it will enable workers and their representatives to enhance their working environment .
However , I have serious reservations about an EU directive in the field of labour legislation .
It is also very important to encourage the European social partners to commit themselves to a binding agreement .
Agreement has shown itself to be the most effective way of achieving a functioning labour market .
Getting the social partners to take greater responsibility for reaching agreement considerably strengthens the labour market .
There should be no recourse to legislation by Parliament until the social partners have articulated the causes of their disagreement .
We should like to thank the rapporteur for his excellent work on an urgently needed report .
The report should be praised for the way in which it undertakes the adjustments to the employment guidelines that are needed in order to make them more effective .
In particular , we should like to stress the importance of ensuring that employment is placed within the context of European macroeconomic policy .
The scope of the report in this respect is to be commended , and goes in the right direction for achieving a dynamic employment policy within the framework of the European labour market , as the predominantly social democrat Council acknowledges .
Amendment No 1 on the need to prevent unfair tax competition is particularly interesting from Sweden 's point of view , on account of the recent high-profile transfer of profits by Pharmacia and Upjohn to Luxembourg .
The Danish Social Democrats have voted in favour of the report on the employment guidelines for 1999 .
We firmly support the new form of European cooperation on employment .
Exchanges of experience and annual assessments for the Member States will hopefully bring results in the form of more people moving into work .
We are also pleased that the emphasis has been placed on continuity in relation to the employment guidelines for 1998 .
The initiatives which are under way need time to operate in practice .
Equal treatment is the area in which the Member States have lagged most behind in 1998 .
It is therefore right that it should be given greater prominence in the guidelines for 1999 .
We need to have some quantitative objectives in terms of equal treatment .
We do not support the call made in paragraph 2 for VAT to be reduced .
The van Velzen report contains a long series of parameters designed to guide the Member States ' employment policy in 1999 which we are unable to support .
It is clear from the report that an important part of the European Union 's drive towards integration is to ensure social convergence .
At the same time , it stresses the importance of the Member States acting in accordance with the Stability Pact .
In principle , we do not believe that social and labour market policy should be a matter for the Union .
It should be left to the individual Member States to determine the guidelines for these policy sectors on a sovereign basis .
The power to regulate should therefore remain at national level , and as close to individual citizens as possible .
The report stresses the need to raise the level of qualifications in the workforce and to mainstream equal treatment policy and promote policy initiatives in favour of the disabled .
It is important to give priority to these sectors , not least because there is still a large group of women who , despite the fact that they do the same work as their male colleagues , are paid less for it .
However , it is problematic for the EU to combine these initiatives with its attempt to establish common European guidelines for Member States ' employment policies and to encourage social convergence in the EU .
We believe it is crucial for the EU system to respect the different social and labour market policy traditions in the Member States .
Establishing social convergence is therefore a step in the wrong direction , because for a number of countries , many of the Commission 's proposals will in the longer term result in a gradual dismantling of their social security systems , thereby actually worsening the situation of the disabled and other vulnerable groups in society .
Thus in the Commission 's communication dated 14 October 1998 - COM ( 98 ) 574 - it is emphasised that , in order to promote employment , the Member States should set a target for ' reducing the overall tax burden and , where appropriate , a target for gradually reducing the fiscal pressure on labour and non-wage labour costs ' .
Combined with the monetary policy contained in the Pact on Growth and Stability and the requirements for Member States ' monetary and financial policy , we believe that this economic strategy will ultimately result in the Danish social policy model being put under pressure .
I welcome the fact that our rapporteur has raised the question of coordinating economic policies and , in particular , of using tax harmonisation as one of the main weapons in the fight against unemployment .
I am also delighted that he has emphasised the need to develop entrepreneurial spirit , and that he has stressed the need for better targeted use of the Structural Funds in order to promote employment .
On the other hand , it would have been better if a number of unrealistic and economically questionable solutions had not been put forward .
As a result , I am concerned by our rapporteur 's persistence in asking , on several occasions , that working time be reduced by means of a centralised procedure .
There is nothing to stop a company appealing for greater flexibility in working time whenever the opportunity presents itself .
But to want this decision to be taken , at all costs , at the highest level of our European institutions would be pure nonsense .
There is another proposal that strikes me as particularly worrying : some sort of European ' New Deal ' that involves using the currency reserves of the National Central Banks to stimulate investment !
Without going as far as debating the validity of a Keynesian upturn , such a measure would only accelerate the fall in the dollar and , in doing so , would work against recovery in Europe .
I do not believe that this is what we wish to achieve .
This report on the proposed guidelines for Member States ' employment policies for 1999 contains a series of recommendations relating to Member States ' action plans .
We are all keen that Member States should cooperate and coordinate their strategies in order to create lasting employment .
Sometimes it is justifiable to ' urge on ' Member States , but there are also times when Parliament wants to go too far .
Amongst other things , the proposal in paragraph 6 of Mr van Velzen 's report , concerning a European Pact that should include the coordination of economic and financial policy , goes too far in our view .
Despite the fact that we are voting against this paragraph and have abstained on another , we are still going to vote in favour of the report as a whole , because it encourages job creation .
The van Velzen report contains some very sensible proposals on employment policy .
However , I think it would be useful to look more towards tax reliefs and less towards aid measures .
But I have no sympathy at all for giving unilateral support to women in paid employment , while at the same time discriminating against women who bring up their children themselves .
It is high time we recognised that bringing up children in the family is a real and highly-qualified job and remunerate it accordingly .
The relevant studies show that a clear majority of mothers want to bring up their children themselves but are forced by material pressures to take a paid job , which means they then have to put their children into child care establishments .
The job of bringing up children within the family deserves to be fully recognised as such .
After all - to put it in business management terms - it produces valuable human capital .
I will vote in favour of the van Velzen report .
Nevertheless , the European Parliament should have been clearer about how much macroeconomic manoeuvre was allowed to stimulate growth , particularly as Parliament maintains , with the French and German Governments , that there is a need for a fresh cut in interest rates in countries in the euro zone .
Parliament also supports the requests from the Head of the Italian Government that the vice-like grip of the Dublin Stability Pact be loosened , particularly to promote investment .
The report should have placed greater emphasis on the urgent need for major developments in infrastructure by setting time limits and suggesting ways of financing them , for example by means of a major European loan .
We fear that this idea , which has been raised many times , might remain only on paper and might not become a reality . There is also cause for concern that it has not fulfilled the desired objectives - namely job creation - as it has been diluted over time and has not reached significant critical financial mass .
Lastly , the plea for a reduction in working time is rather feeble as the objectives do not provide figures or dates and the 35 hour week is never clearly stated .
More serious still is the wording of paragraph 19 , which links flexibility to a reduction in working hours .
As everyone knows , flexibility does not create jobs but , on the contrary , destroys them . Flexibility is a characteristic of jobs that do not have normal status and leads to an increase in part-time work and to job insecurity .
I will therefore vote against this paragraph .
Whilst the European Union does not have a true founding treaty for a social Europe , whilst employment , according to the Amsterdam Treaty , still falls under national jurisdiction and whilst European initiatives are restricted by the Stability Pact , there is a real danger that Europe will not be capable of taking decisive action that may help reduce mass unemployment .
So , if current growth is a bonus , it must be consolidated , and if we assume that it will continue at the rate recorded , it would take decades to substantially reduce the mass unemployment we are currently experiencing .
Finally , what can we say about full employment , other than that it is still the only valid objective for supporters of a European social model !
I am delighted to note that the employment issue looms large on the EU 's programme of work .
This report is proof of that .
It contains many good ideas on ways of tackling mass unemployment , but there are also a number of omissions .
In my view , we will only achieve full employment through combined and vigourous efforts .
Most importantly , countries should be pursuing an economic policy aimed at full employment - to stimulate the economy with the ultimate objective of combating unemployment .
Apart from the imperative of ensuring that the fight against unemployment is the constant and top priority of economic policy , there are three other important areas in the struggle to achieve full employment : education , job security and a wages policy .
I welcome the report 's aim of increasing employment .
However , with regard to reducing taxes on employment , I would like to point out that there is no correlation between that and increased employment .
Technical and empirical studies have failed to show that an overall reduction in employment taxation would increase employment .
The extensive and independent studies that have been carried out reveal considerable uncertainty as to whether lower taxes affect employment .
In the Scandinavian countries , in particular , such studies have failed to identify any such correlation .
I am happy to vote for this report , noting as it does that an extra 750 000 jobs were created across the EU in the last year .
But as we all know , other jobs are threatened by traditional problems such as skills shortages and by new problems such as the knock-on effects of financial market crises in East Asia and other parts of the world .
The stark fact that more than half of all unemployed people aged 25 or more are classed as unskilled underlines the depth of the challenge we all face in the EU to raise our skills and raise our competitiveness in the global economy .
I am glad that the New Deal for young people introduced by my own country 's Government is to extend to older unemployed people in response to this challenge .
We are in a long war against unemployment and we have to bridge the skills gap if we are to win the struggle .
The report rightly calls for more quality childcare places to allow parents who do want to work to find and keep a job and thus support their family by their own efforts .
Again , I would commend the British Government 's radical national childcare strategy for further study in the rest of the EU .
Of course , each country has to adopt policies to suit its own particular unemployment challenges , but I believe that the great changes in British policy embodies by the New Deal and the national childcare strategy are British answers to the common European problems of skill shortages and parents trapped on benefit with no childcare available .
We should like to thank the rapporteur for his excellent work on this important report .
Promoting social dialogue will be of the greatest benefit in strengthening the Community 's policy on employment , labour markets and the enhancement of working life , as well as on social issues .
The committee 's proposal clarifies the role of the social dialogue in the provision of information and the intensification of negotiations . At the same time , a wider view of the importance of the social dialogue in partnerships for employment is put forward .
As regards Amendment No 3 on the CEMR 's participation in the combined sectors of information , consultation and negotiation , we do not support the proposal as a matter of principle .
With regard to negotiations involving the different sectors within the framework of the social dialogue , which this amendment touches on , we do not think that the EU institutions should interfere in the selection of representatives to participate in the negotiations between the different partners .
This is a matter for the social partners to decide for themselves , without any of them being deprived of their role by the Council , Parliament or Commission .
We should also like to see the partners , when they so wish , involve the CEMR in the negotiations on the social dialogue , but only on their own initiative .
We should like to point out the significance of paragraph 13 on the number of representatives in the new composition of the Standing Committee on Employment .
A reduction in the number of representatives to no less than 12 would appear to be unavoidable . However , additional arrangements are required if the partners are to carry national authority .
Paragraph 13 highlights this point , but the Commission should devote more attention to the practicalities of achieving this .
Finally , we should also like to stress the importance of the Standing Committee on Employment being given the chance to discuss the EU guidelines on economic policy as well as the guidelines on employment policy .
A strong employment policy in Europe clearly has an economic perspective which goes beyond the employment guidelines .
So it would be quite natural for the Standing Committee on Employment to discuss the economic guidelines as well .
We are unable to support the report on adapting and promoting the social dialogue at Community level , because we believe that the basis for the dialogue between the partners in the labour market is ultimately the establishment of what will in fact be EU agreements .
At the same time , we think that it is problematic for the partners in the labour market , as it says in the report , to be involved ' in economic policy in the context of EMU ' .
Denmark has an exemption from the third stage of EMU .
In our view this is an important exemption , because we do not agree with the Union 's economic policy , which gives priority to combating inflation at the cost of measures to create jobs .
Particularly in recent years , the labour market has been a focal point of EU regulation .
This regulation is having ever greater consequences for the Danish system of agreements , and this is putting the Danish tradition under pressure .
We feel it is important to retain the Danish model , which ensures that trade unions have substantial influence through the collective agreements that are negotiated , unlike the EU system , which is based on centrally dictated individual rights laid down by law .
Transferring to the EU the responsibilities in this sector which previously lay with Denmark represents a fundamental break with the traditional system of collective agreements which has been very important in shaping the Danish model of society .
This trend may therefore ultimately have implications for the system governing the labour market and society in Denmark .
The labour market is undergoing rapid change , whereas the social dialogue is based on the corporatist viewpoint and is likely to preserve the old structure and create unnecessary regulations at EU level .
I and my group are sceptical about giving any encouragement to the social dialogue which confers on the partners in the labour market a unique position under European legislation and an absurdly large degree of direct influence on policy-making - at a time when fewer people are choosing to join trade unions and many are remaining outside the labour market , with the result that the number of entrepreneurs and proprietors of small businesses , consultancy work and new types of employment conditions are all on the increase .
Popularly elected politicians have a responsibility to reform labour market legislation , not to give the partners the right to introduce yet more rules .
I have therefore decided to change my position in the final vote .
European integration is a whole in which all Europe 's citizens should be involved .
If we wish to have greater cohesion , the social dialogue must fit in with the construction of economic union .
Therefore , I must once again welcome the fact that the Protocol on Social Policy has been included in the Amsterdam Treaty .
Nevertheless , it must be emphasised that , evidently , the European Parliament 's role within this framework is still unsatisfactory as , in effect , the Protocol abides by the general principle of Community law , according to which Parliament must give its assent on this matter .
I therefore welcome the Commission 's statement that it wishes to inform Parliament , comprehensively and in good time , to give it the opportunity to deliver its opinion before Council makes its decision .
I agree with our rapporteur that the Commission 's positive attitude should be interpreted as the first step on the road towards Parliament 's full and complete participation in this procedure .
Having said this , we must specify that true dialogue can clearly only take place between independent partners who have freely chosen to negotiate at the same table , and when all parties actually sit at that table .
None of the actors in economic and social life can be kept out of the social dialogue against their will .
SMEs should also be involved in the social dialogue , in the same way as other parties involved .
In addition , there is a need to develop the social dialogue if we wish to resolve the major social and economic issues that are as yet unresolved , in a peaceful manner and in everyone 's interests .
Obviously , and most importantly , these issues include problems relating to employment .
Although the latest figures published by Eurostat on the subject of unemployment within the Union are encouraging , they do not mask the widespread and lasting nature of this problem .
What has just been said is particularly valid when it relates to data on the enlargement of the European Union to include the applicant countries .
Therefore , we must welcome the Commission 's wish to develop the social dialogue in these countries .
We agree with the Peter report on the need to adapt and promote the social dialogue between both sides of the world of work .
In this text , there are also some grand and noble declarations of principle on the role and missions which should be allotted to the two sides of industry , and we must welcome them .
However , we voted against this report due both to some irrelevant aspects and to its shortcomings and omissions .
In fact , the Peter report does not talk about the persecution of the national trade unions in France .
It is because of this persecution that it is not possible for workers in France to create new trade unions or to stand freely as candidates in union or workplace elections , unless , of course , they belong to the trade unions that are recognised and restricted by law .
Such violations of union and electoral rights are serious and unacceptable .
The truth is that the official trade unions , which represent workers less and less , are only good for banning any form of competition .
So , if Mr Peter wants to adapt and promote social dialogue , then let him start by taking an interest in the repeated attacks on trade union rights and in what is really happening in the countries of the EU .
Then , and only then , will it be possible for dialogue and negotiation between workers and employers to take place without pretence or hypocrisy and without being dictated to by political correctness .
The social dialogue should , above all , be based on consultation and agreement between the partners in the labour market .
Legislation is not an end in itself , neither at national nor European level .
National authorities and EU institutions should stress the importance of encouraging negotiations between self-governing and independent partners , rather than legislation .
Power is unevenly divided in the labour market .
It is still the case that employers ' representatives have an advantage over those representing employees .
The report is well-intentioned and is favourable towards the setting up of a real dialogue between the labour market partners , but it does not contain any meaningful analysis of the division of power in the labour market .
Without this analysis and a recognition of how power is allocated , there can never be a real dialogue on social conditions in the overall labour market .
In quite a short time the issue of the social dialogue has again come up for debate in the European Parliament .
In view of that , we wish yet again to stress that the development of broad and productive thinking about the aims , content , results and future of the social dialogue at the Community level is a positive thing , to the extent that it leads to specific measures to strengthen that dialogue and to reverse the trend that the EU and its Member States are promoting , which involves degrading it or using it as an excuse to promote anti-labour measures and as a damper to suppress the social unrest and reactions brought about by the economic and social policies currently being implemented .
For us , the central question is on the one hand the representativeness of the spokesmen for social agencies who take part in the negotiation procedures , and on the other hand the degree to which their views are taken into account when formulating the attitudes of the Community 's bodies and those of the Member States .
It is a characteristic fact that SMEs are still excluded from all forms of dialogue at Community level .
It worries us in particular that the social dialogue in progress today in most cases has little connection with the central issues which concern working people in the EU , as a whole and in the various branches , sectors and regions .
It is also not focused on the search for specific solutions to their very acute problems , on the effort to safeguard and extend their individual and collective rights , on the development of initiatives aiming to address the profound crisis that is affecting the EU and on the promotion of a progressive alternative solution to the liberalisation and globalisation dictated by the multinationals .
The touchstone for all these things can only be to address the problem of unemployment and work , which cannot of course be dealt with on the basis of the Thatcherite model of shared unemployment or by creating ' jobs ' governed by a regime of labour and security dumping .
A real social dialogue cannot ignore the tragic results of the policy of liberalising the markets , the policy signalled by the criteria of EMU and the stability pact .
A real social dialogue cannot ignore the fact that the overthrow of even the most elementary acquisitions of the trade union movement is being promoted , with collective labour agreements first in line .
In our opinion , the most basic form of expression of the social dialogue if it is to play its part correctly , is collective bargaining aimed at the signing of collective labour agreements .
Only in that way and in view of the increased legal force of such agreements , can working people be protected from the individualisation of labour relations , from the attempt to cut back their rights in the name of ' increased competitiveness ' and more intense competition .
Experience shows that whatever substitutes are put forward from time to time only aim to reduce the negotiating power and force of the trade union movement , to disorientate , fragment and undermine its champions , and ultimately to promote misrepresented views about class cooperation and cause it to abandon the role which it has historically been called on to play in the class struggle .
What working people and their unions need today is the reinforcement of collective bargaining at EU and Member State level , solidarity from all who are fighting to oppose the overthrow of any notion of collectiveness , and decisive action against those who are undermining collective , structured and targeted dialogue and the central means for stating worker demands , namely collective labour agreements .
Mr President , the trade negotiations that are about to begin with the United States on the Transatlantic Economic Partnership will follow a procedure that is far from clear .
As this procedure will relate both to sectors which fall under Community jurisdiction - goods and public markets - and to sectors which fall under national jurisdiction - services and intellectual property - one would be forgiven for thinking that representatives of the Member States would be engaging in negotiations alongside the Commission .
Yet this is not the method that has been chosen .
The Commission will negotiate with the United States , both on behalf of the Community and on behalf of the Member States , by means of a global mandate .
For sectors under national jurisdiction , we are told that the Member States will ' be involved in negotiations ' but we are concerned that they will not be in charge of them , not even for their own sectors .
It seems rather improper that this procedure has been chosen , particularly as we know full well that the Commission wishes to promote a free-trade area with the United States and that France experienced considerable difficulty in ruining the previous attempt , known as the NTM or New Transatlantic Marketplace .
This procedure casts an interesting light on Paragraph 5 of the new Article 133 of the Amsterdam Treaty , currently being ratified in France .
This text provides for the Council , acting unanimously on a proposal from the Commission , to extend Community competences to include international negotiations on services and intellectual property .
I also note in passing that this procedure - which would deprive the French Parliament of its right to approve the ratification of Treaties as laid out in Article 53 of our constitution - seems as reprehensible as a very similar procedure on the movement of persons provided for in Article 67 and which has already been censured by the Constitutional Court in its decision of 31 December 1997 .
It may seem improper to allow the Commission engage in negotiations on services and intellectual property in view of the way it dealt with the Uruguay Round negotiations on goods .
However , the form of negotiation used for the Transatlantic Economic Partnership clearly shows that , short of abandoning the Amsterdam Treaty now , the Member States are in danger of falling back into the same trap as before .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the content of the report by our colleague Mrs Erika Mann raises several questions , both in the field of economics and in the field of security and defence relations .
Following Mrs Mann 's lead , I believe that the parliamentary bodies should be involved as much as possible in the negotiations .
I hope that we will not find ourselves in a situation similar to that of the MAI , where legitimately elected political leaders are consulted in the last resort , and whose importance , dare I say it , was deemed negligible .
Therefore , we must keep a watchful eye on the content of this future agreement , particularly as regards the level of public aid .
It is unthinkable that some of our partners impose draconian conditions whilst they themselves are exempt from such orders .
In these negotiations , the European Union must be seen as a power in its own right and must be capable of making its voice heard without having unilateral decisions imposed upon it .
This is probably one of its most glaring weaknesses .
For the record , I would like remind the House of the directive on shipbuilding , where we hurried to apply measures which now work against our interests as we are the only ones who follow them .
In this respect , I find it rather damaging that the Commission did not protest over the funds made available by the IMF to safeguard Korean shipyards that are already heavily subsidised by public authorities .
Although I do share the concerns outlined in the text as regards health , consumer protection and the environment , I am more cautious and worried about promoting core labour standards together with the United States .
I admit that I do not share the enthusiasm for a country which , for years now , has been the champion of exaggerated ultra-liberalism , which displays its inhumanity day after day .
For many , the European Union is a relatively well-balanced pole of development that attempts to preserve economic dynamism and social justice .
Let us ensure that we do preserve them !
The American diktat on European banana imports shows to what extent establishing an economic partnership between the European Union and the United States is still premature .
This partnership would not only involve solving current disputes , but also asserting our ability to develop global and balanced relationships .
Recent experience has proven the need to widen the scope of this type of negotiations to include the whole international community , particularly within the WTO . The outcome of the MAI and of the draft NTM should be reason enough for the European Commission to exercise greater caution .
Therefore , whatever the common values and interests which unite the European Union and the United States , the very different attitudes to development , social policy and protection of the environment , as well as the need to preserve cultural sovereignty with all its diverse components , make the principle of privileged transatlantic relations in itself rather a deceptive one .
It is for these reasons that the ARE Group has asked that this report be referred back to committee and this is also why we abstained from voting on this report .
I will not vote in favour of Mrs Mann 's report despite the quality of the work done by our rapporteur on developing a suitable framework for bilateral relations between Europe and the United States .
Unfortunately , the reality of the situation is completely different and the European Parliament should voice loudly and clearly its disagreement with the attitude of the United States of America , particularly in the light of recent decisions - unilateral ones - made by that country .
The United States ' attitude towards the banana market , the fact that it announced unjustified protectionist rules and used pseudo dumping as an excuse to tax steel , all highlight the fact that opening the market is a good thing for the United States when it is to its own advantage and a bad thing when its interests are challenged .
We are being deceived as there is no sincere commitment from this country towards balanced bilateral agreements .
In fact , the Americans hope to benefit not only from their position of world domination , but also from Europe 's weakness and from Europe 's inability to react efficiently or to announce protective rules in retaliation , rules which convey an idea of shared progress .
Europe could , for example , create socio-taxes and refuse products made using child labour or carried out without the least respect for ILO standards .
The issue of environmental standards is equally important .
The unacceptable attitude of the USA at the last summit on climate change in Buenos Aires is proof of their lack of respect for the general interests of the planet . It also highlights the threats that the transatlantic partnership agreements pose to European legislation on health and the environment .
In effect , there will be an increase in the arrival of large quantities of products containing GMOs or made using procedures that do not respect our environmental regulations . Europe could find itself being penalised if it does not impose an environmental framework on its imports that is as rigorous as measures within the European Union .
Lastly , the ambiguous attitudes of the Commission and of Leon Brittan have weakened the EU 's links with the United States .
Fortunately , the Council has rejected the MAI and the NTM but , in a bid to protect itself from fresh manoeuvring , it has drawn up a restrictive framework for monitoring the Commission which , in fact , puts Parliament on the sidelines , and this has extremely serious implications for the future .
So the European Parliament should now say that this cannot go on .
American domination and the Americans ' lack of respect for the rules cannot continue .
Europe must retaliate .
The lack of social and environmental standards in world trade cannot be tolerated for much longer .
Multilateral agreements or bilateral agreements cannot be signed without such standards .
The European Parliament can no longer be kept out of these negotiations .
If it wishes to make itself heard , the European Parliament cannot be kept out of these negotiations .
And in order to make itself heard , Parliament should have formally voted for this report to be referred back .
It did not do so .
Therefore , by voting against this report , I would like to express my severe discontent with the way Europe has backtracked and capitulated to the United States .
The FPÖ rejects the report on ' The New Transatlantic Marketplace ' because first we need a comprehensive and public discussion of the objectives and impact of this kind of partnership .
The rejection of the Brittan plan was intended to throw dust in the eyes of all those who reacted strenuously to the creation of a new transatlantic market which would put working people in Europe in an even more difficult position .
The substance of that plan remains unchanged even after today 's developments , the only difference being that the rate at which the specific plans are promoted will be different and greater flexibility will be shown in their implementation .
But the principles of the new agreement are still to protect major capital and its unimpeded movement , to safeguard the unaccountability of the monopolies and of market liberalisation , and to restrict the ways in which the Member States and even the European institutions themselves can intervene and exercise control .
These measures are regarded as essential for the preparation of the new round of multipartite negotiations in the context of the WTO and the talks on the Multipartite Agreement on Investment in the context of the OECD .
They are an attempt to create new faits accomplis .
The political agreement achieved during the recent summit between the two sides and the Commission 's action plan for transatlantic economic cooperation give cause for serious concern and raise some pointed questions , since important issues concerning public health , labour relations and the rights of working people , consumer protection , matters related to the free provision of services and the liberalisation of public contracts and to the promotion of regulatory cooperation and the abolition of technical trade barriers , are to be determined without any democratic or political control .
Characteristically , in order to prevent possible reactions , the Commission has chosen the method of sectoral agreements on which the European Parliament delivers non-binding opinions , instead of a framework agreement requiring Parliament 's approval , thus avoiding any possibility of greater control and intervention .
Besides , it is not by chance that the provisions establishing the procedures for the EU 's trade policy were not amended and enable the Council and the Commission to employ suitable devices to achieve the signing of very important agreements without much ' interference ' .
Indeed , the fact that such a method was chosen after the reactions provoked at national and Community level by the publication of the draft OECD multipartite agreement on investments and the Brittan plan leads us to the natural conclusion that working people and the popular movement must remain vigilant and intensify their struggles . The danger is not only not past but , on the contrary , is greater than ever , because the various substitutes for those agreements being promoted are presented as ' more prudent ' and less ambitious in their formulation and timing , though they follow exactly the same anti-populist direction .
The Mutual Recognition Agreements constitute an ingredient of the new agreement .
Their aim is to facilitate the flow of trade , with a decisive role for technocratic committees subject to no democratic control at all .
This lends strength to the view that the existence of legal provisions to protect public health and the environment constitutes an artificial barrier to trade , and seeks essentially to abolish safety requirements .
There is also serious concern about the provisions for further liberalisation of public procurement and about the services and the coordination envisaged in the context of the new round of multipartite negotiations on investments , agriculture and intellectual property .
No concern at all is shown about social rights , about reinforcing provisions that protect working people , or about any commitment to incorporate the basic ILO conventions in the WTO system .
On the contrary , the increasingly frequent statements that labour legislation must not constitute a means of ' protectionism ' convince us that once trade in goods and services has been liberalised , the next item on the agenda will be to dislocate labour relations and restrict state authority in the matter via the WTO , in other words to promote the related provisions of the Multipartite Agreement on Investments within the framework of the multipartite trade system .
We believe the plan for transatlantic economic cooperation fails to represent the interests of working people on either side of the Atlantic .
On the contrary , it supports the choices of the major multinationals , which have been working since 1995 in the context of the ' Transatlantic Business Dialogue ' towards the abolition of provisions that restrict their activities .
It is an agreement which again signals the EU 's compromising attitude towards the USA and its frequent attitude in favour of promoting the schemes of major capital in its frontal assault against working people .
Besides , this is clear from the settlement agreement on the extraterritorial Helms-Burton and D 'Amato laws , and also emerges from the provisions for agriculture and for the opto-acoustic industry .
This agreement discloses the true nature of international trade negotiations on so-called equal terms .
The report by the Committee on Foreign Affairs we are debating , despite the few welcome comments it contains , accepts that framework overall and we will therefore vote against it .
We share the rapporteur 's desire to improve trade relations between the EU and the USA .
This is a comprehensive report covering a wide range of issues relating to the new transatlantic marketplace .
However , we do not agree with the assertion in recitals B and C , as well as in paragraph 1 , that the EU and the USA share the same security and defence policy , as well as economic , political , cultural and environmental values .
As regards security and defence polity , this is even more relevant in Sweden 's case since it is a non-aligned country and not a member of NATO .
We welcome the clear indication in paragraph 25 that the Helms-Burton and D 'Amato Acts are unacceptable , and we wholeheartedly support the recommendation to speedily eliminate them .
I am happy to support this report by my colleague , Erika Mann .
It is often the case that close links with other countries are most important when we have disagreements with them .
This could not be more true than this week with the US Congress apparently set to start a trade war with the EU over objections to our support for banana growers in former British and European colonies in the Caribbean .
Like many people , I believe that we should have as free an international trade system as possible , free from distortions to fair and open competition .
However , free trade needs to be fair trade as well , as in the case of the Caribbean banana growers .
A little assistance to their exports to the EU does not threaten the already massive market share of US-owned banana producers in the EU and the rest of the world .
The kind of close dialogue called for by the London EU-US summit earlier this year should be established as soon as possible , to help both parties in the new transatlantic community to defuse and hopefully avoid such disagreements in future .
That is why I urge fellow MEPS to vote for Erika Mann 's sensible report today , and not egg on the Republican zealots in the US Congress who would love us to react in kind to their trade war bluster .
Regular EU-US dialogue would allow us to point out the errors of Congress ' approach to the EU 's support for Caribbean banana exports to Europe , which keeps their economies going in a legal trade , and stops the temptation which would otherwise exist for farmers there to grow even more hard drugs - and both American and EU politicians know the damage they do to our young people when the drugs reach our streets .
( The sitting was suspended at 1.25 p.m. and resumed at 3 p.m. )

Pre-accession strategy ( continuation )
The next item is the continuation of the joint debate on the pre-accession strategy .
Mr President , the very title of the Barón Crespo report on the proposal for a Council regulation on coordinating aid to the applicant countries in the framework of the pre-accession strategy summarises the faults and handicaps that afflict European integration , which , at the dawn of the 21st century , is still trudging along very slowly .
Once again , priority has been given to economics and not to politics , and the plan for European integration appears to be nothing more than a regional version of globalisation of the economy .
Economics is what divides Europeans .
Politics and culture are what unite them .
Yet , the closer we get to political union , the further away it drifts from us .
It is , as I have already said , the modern version of the torment of Tantalus .
Economically speaking , I also believe that we are taking the wrong path by refusing to fight in the world economic war , by not accepting the principle of Community preference championed by Maurice Allais and which I have so often pleaded in favour of in this House .
I should like to conclude , Mr President , by returning to the main issue , to the primacy of politics over economics .
Eventually , Europe must learn to eat to live and stop living to eat .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen - and let me give a warm welcome to our visitors from the Central and Eastern European countries in the gallery - what we are trying to achieve here in the European Union is basically not enlargement but the integration of the Central and Eastern European states , the integration of people who are of course Europeans and who have not so far been given the chance to join this Community .
So they are partners , with whom we are working together , and when we look at current developments in , for example , the field of trade , we find that here there is unfortunately a dramatic imbalance against the applicant countries and that we must ensure that this imbalance is corrected , since we can only be partners if we work together on an equal footing in this economic area as well .
The Polish President said something remarkable this morning , which is true for both sides : ' One does not refurbish the house merely because there are guests coming ' .
That means that the European Union , the 15 Member States , must also do their own work first , especially in a sector that always tends to be pushed to one side , the agricultural sector .
Basically , the Central and Eastern European states find themselves in an absurd situation here .
On the one hand they are to adopt an acquis communautaire , the European Union rules , while on the other hand the European Union has not taken any major step forward in even formulating the agricultural reform , the new agricultural policy .
If we now take a critical look at ourselves , and if the pace at which the hard-baked representatives of the interests of the agricultural lobby are pursuing these vital reforms is to serve as a model for the Central and Eastern European states , it will take several decades before these states can become integrated .
That is another self-criticism we shall have to accept .
We must also take these representatives critically to task and say : if they do not want the reform of the common agricultural policy , then logically they do not want enlargement of the European Union either , or only enlargement on the medieval model , whereby these areas would merely be colonies , markets for selling our goods ; that is not democratic enlargement .
Social policy plays an important role in this enlargement !
Here we must tell our partners clearly , and emphasise during the discussions , that at present every single Member State of the European Union is responsible for its social policy and that naturally those countries that want to join us will have to be responsible for their social policy , for instance their labour market policy .
That is not a disadvantage ; basically it is also part of adopting the acquis communautaire .
Mr President , 60 seconds of speaking time is not enough for a comprehensive analysis .
So I would like to concentrate on one aspect of the Barón Crespo report .
The rapporteur would also like to finance agricultural development measures out of PHARE funds .
Only recently , Parliament took some ECU 200 million from the PHARE programme for the 1999 financial year and allocated it to other areas of external relations .
Its reasoning was that the absorption capacity of the Central and Eastern European states was exhausted .
Is it not absurd to decide a few weeks later to give further PHARE support to the tune of ECU 1 560 million ?
In the light of the irregularities that have occurred in connection with PHARE , I am against supporting agriculture in the Central and Eastern European countries with funds from that programme while EU farmers have to accept massive losses as a result of Agenda 2000 .
Mr President , Commissioner , people can only say the kind of things the previous speaker has just said if they believe they can turn back the clock .
The European integration process is marching on , if not perhaps at the pace President Kwasniewski suggested here today .
He beautifully described the dynamic of the Polish development process , and also said that Poland would probably no longer need any transitional periods .
I do not share his view .
I believe that Poland will certainly need transitional provisions with regard to economic and environmental matters , and not just concerning the free movement of workers .
But I do not want to go into that any further at this point .
The fact is - and I am assuming that we all want this integration process - that the quality of the EU enlargement process very much depends of course on the quality of the preparations for it .
That is why it is extremely important to coordinate the aid and the structural policy instruments .
The Committee on Employment and Social Affairs was particularly concerned with social and employment policy questions .
We must firmly support social policy mainstreaming .
That is why it is so important not just to strengthen the administrative structures of the institutions , but also to promote the social dialogue .
Here the aim is to develop , structure and support employer / worker relations in European policy .
That is the only way to make European policy at all meaningful and transposable .
The social partners are best able to do this .
The PHARE instruments , which are primarily designed to support institutional development , provide the framework conditions for promoting social dialogue in the appropriate manner .
Mrs Wulf-Mathies addressed this matter yesterday , when we were discussing the social dialogue in Europe , and Mr Flynn also underlined its importance .
If that applies in Europe , it also applies in the integration process .
That is why we must support the concept , and of course the further development of the social dialogue in the framework of enlargement .
Mr President , as a member of the European Parliament representing Portuguese voters , I should like to make three points very clear :
we are in favour of the enlargement of the European Union and the negotiation procedure under way ; -we are in favour of the institutional review that is needed to strengthen Europe internally and for its external representation and presence ; -we are committed to the debate on Agenda 2000 , the reform of the common agricultural policy , the new framework for the policy of cohesion and regional development , own resources , and so on.What we cannot accept is the attempt by some people , behind the scenes , to break off the contract of internal solidarity enabling the various European regions and countries - especially those with delays and development problems - to participate fully in the European project and to offer their peoples legitimate hopes of progress within a political and economic area without first-class citizens and second-class Europeans .
I should also like to make it quite clear here and now that the amendments tabled by Mr Berend , calling into question the Cohesion Fund , will lead us down a slippery slope with very serious consequences .
There are many other points that we are hoping to clarify in the negotiations and they are negotiable ; but this point is not negotiable .
My country and other Member States have made an enormous effort and , against all the odds , they have succeeded in meeting the conditions for participating fully in the euro .
They cannot and must not be penalised and , in any case , that would violate the provisions in the treaties .
We shall definitely be making our contribution towards financing enlargement .
What we cannot accept is that the poor countries will end up paying .
Mr President , this debate is about what we in Europe can do to facilitate the enlargement process , which must be a burning issue for us all .
In a world once split by dissent , we now have a chance to demonstrate our capacity to overcome the difficulties as we contemplate a major political step .
The Sonneveld report clearly shows that substantial funding - ECU 3 billion per year in all - has been made available to help the applicant countries to make the necessary changes for future membership of the EU .
In my view , this is not a matter of ' pocket money ' , and I share the rapporteur 's opinion that resources should continue to be concentrated on strategic actions .
The resolution which will be discussed later today calls for an in-depth analysis of Europe 's financial situation following the accession of the countries of Central and Eastern Europe , so that we would then have a sound basis for a decision .
Nevertheless , I would like to highlight the dynamic effect that enlargement of the Union would have , and also my belief that the positive results would very quickly outweigh any budgetary effects .
The Commission 's proposal on agricultural reform , as set out in Agenda 2000 , goes mainly in the right direction .
It should help to place the global market on a firmer footing and enable the EU 's agricultural industry to play a more active role in the market .
As a result , enlargement would be made considerably easier and any negative budgetary consequences for the EU would not be overpowering .
The transitional arrangements will also facilitate the process .
Regardless of the problems we will encounter , it is vital that we never lose sight of the overriding goal of making Europe a better and more harmonious place by means of enlargement .
Mr President , Europe 's progress towards genuine integration , the enlargement with the accession of Cyprus and the eastern European countries , the one plus ten countries , is a historic decision which has been taken and is not questioned by anyone , always in accordance with the clear Copenhagen criteria in force .
This is no longer just a political aim to be achieved eventually , but a colossal enterprise which has already started and has a clear timetable .
I believe that the precise effect of today 's debate on the Commission 's proposals is :
to prove that a decision of such historic scope can be achieved by a specific strategy , as complex and detailed as necessary but at the same time one which is cohesive , harmonious , and has clear mechanisms , procedures and legal bases ; -to demonstrate that the European Parliament has powers and responsibilities in this great matter and aspires to exercise them.So : pre-accession aid for the applicant countries , enhanced where necessary , and in parallel internal reforms in the European Union .
That must be the European Parliament 's message to the citizens of Europe 2000 , the citizens of the 15 Member States and those of the one plus ten applicant countries .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Commissioner , we find it unacceptable for the EU Commission , so far at least , to take it upon itself alone to define the eligible areas for regional and national funding too .
I was pleased to read in the Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung last week that you are prepared to meet us halfway here .
I would sincerely ask you actually to do so .
Countries like Germany and regions like Bavaria really must continue to be able to determine their own priority support areas in future too .
Amendment No 47 by Mr Schiedermeier calls for just that possibility , which is in our view quite self-evident , namely that we can determine our own priority support areas with our own money .
We cannot have our hands tied and not be able to allocate aid where we consider it necessary to do so , on the basis of our analysis , for the purposes of structural policy .
The Commission must not be able to tie our hands here completely .
We are happy to show solidarity with the structurally weaker areas .
But in return we expect a minimum of solidarity with our problems , given that we are dealing here not with EU funds but with our own support funds .
I know the final decision on this has not yet been taken , but we want to make it clear here and now that we see a link between the reports being considered today and the ones that are still to come .
My CSU colleagues and I regard this aspect as so important that our vote on the Hatzidakis report will depend on whether Amendment No 47 is accepted .
Thank you for your attention , and let me point out that I have used ten seconds less than my speaking time .
Mr President , in creating the pre-accession aid programme for applicant countries the Council was aiming for a flexible system .
The varying backgrounds and needs of the applicant countries have to be taken into consideration when planning such aid programmes .
Already at this stage of the initial screening and negotiation process it has become clear that there is a need for investment under the PHARE programme in all countries concerned , particularly for ' institution building ' in order to implement Community law and modernise the legal systems .
This will also have a multiplier effect on matters such as the rooting out of corruption and the fight against organised crime .
While we are discussing whether the aid given by the European Union will prove to be adequate , it is worth remembering that the main force for change in the enlargement process is not and cannot be the Union 's present bottomless purse but a natural desire on the part of the applicant countries to achieve the standards required for EU membership as quickly as possible .
The applicant countries must themselves finance most of the changes required .
This is the only way we can both ensure we have the approval of the citizens of the present Union and guarantee the success of policy decisions taken with regard to the enlargement process as a whole .
The aim of flexibility in pre-accession partnership also means that the Union needs new policy-making tools to increase cooperation with applicant countries , and one of the most significant elements here must be considered to be the Union 's northern dimension , as presented at the Vienna Summit on the initiative of Finland .
Via this northern dimension cooperation networks could be established , for example , in the areas of environmental protection and nuclear safety with the Baltic States , and we would get Russia involved in large-scale regional security projects .
Mr President , the substance of our policy and the grandeur of the historic political enterprise which we call the European Union is expressed through the policy of economic and social cohesion , in other words through the practical expression of solidarity towards the less favoured countries .
The Union 's political and economic interests make it necessary to outline a strategy which will create a climate of security and hope for all parts of the European continent , which will abolish the divisive lines of the past , and which will guarantee a decent life for all social groups and will in practice confirm the principles of European humanism and the values of peace , equality , democracy and solidarity .
Enlargement must come about with generosity and dignity , with planning and rapidity , with imagination and vision , with participation by the citizens and with care for the preservation and use of Europe 's multicultural wealth .
I wish to stress that any attempt to change course on the conditions for the accession of the Republic of Cyprus would call into question the Union 's authority and credibility as a whole .
And when talking about enlargement , let us also not forget that the European continent includes all the countries between the Atlantic and the Urals without exception , if we really want to do away with the divisive lines of the past and build a united and strong Europe .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , a few days ago , official negotiations opened on the accession of six - or , as we keep saying , 5 + 1 - countries to the European Union .
We have completed seven chapters of the acquis screening .
We now know that considerable progress can be made in this area too if we work consistently .
Let us perhaps look back a few years , or even longer .
We see that in those days , Europe was facing problems with dictatorial regimes , that we were at war , and that in founding the European Union we were endeavouring to establish a system of democracy , market economy and security in Europe .
I believe we must always regard these as the central aims .
The Pope did so during the visit to Vienna .
He said that we do not want enlargement of the Union - we are in fact Europe , and we should try constantly to move closer towards the same principles in a common Europe .
I believe a comprehensive concept for the accession strategies is quite simply necessary in order to prepare the applicant countries for the single market and political union .
I myself am vice-chairman of the Slovakia / European Parliament delegation .
It has become particularly evident in the case of Slovakia that our policy has done much to change the system , that its positions are now clear , and that the country is also perfectly adapted to accession .
I believe we should make it quite clear , again and again , that we are not urging accession , but that the door to Europe stands open .
However , it is up to these countries themselves how quickly they can meet the conditions which are plainly set out before them .
Mr President , everyone accepts that enlargement is a historic challenge and a historic step .
However , this means that the European Union has many responsibilities to live up to , and I am sorry to have to stress that although all the reports by our colleagues on the eligibility of the various countries , one by one , speak of the conditions to be fulfilled by those countries , there is no mention of the fact that the European Union itself has obligations in the same parallel process , in other words the present 15 Member States must also fulfil their own obligations .
The structure we wish to extend must have firm foundations and it must be functional .
But how can it be functional when at present , between Maastricht and the present day , the European Unions 's most vital policy , the Common Foreign and Security Policy , has not only failed to be promoted but is being dangerously afflicted ?
For example , in conflict with the European Union 's commitments on the Cyprus question , a few days ago four Member States of the Union expressed views which are provocative towards another Member State .
What sort of example are we setting for the countries which we are inviting in and which we are even trying to help before their accession , when the European Union does not abide by its own basic policies and statutory obligations ?
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 9 a.m.
Structural Funds
Mr President , I want to begin by saying that although this concept has been much discussed already , we must return to it in today 's debate and consider its importance .
I refer to the concept of economic and social cohesion , which is directly related to the present debate .
Economic and social cohesion is one of the European Union 's basic pillars and is directly related to the single market , and in my view , to the establishment of the single currency as well .
The single market could make rich areas richer and poor ones poorer under certain conditions , and that was why , as early as the 1980s , the then European Community correctly conceived the mechanisms of the Structural Funds so that weaker areas would be supported .
The same applies to the single currency .
Coincidence of name is not enough to achieve the European Union 's objectives and to establish a really strong euro .
There must also be real convergence and the economic and social cohesion policies contribute towards that .
In that context , the Structural Funds play a very important part .
It would be unjust if I were now to try and decry the contribution they have made so far .
They have contributed substantially in all areas , regions and countries where they have provided help .
They have assisted convergence , vocational training and the education of the workforce , but of course there is always scope for them to help still more substantially .
I now come to the heart of today 's debate .
This review is taking place at a turning point which we identify with enlargement and with the next millennium .
Great care must therefore be taken to learn lessons from the past and to lay emphasis on certain sectors .
Clearly , the areas covered by the Structural Funds must be limited .
They cannot cover 52 % of the Union 's population .
Emphasis should be placed on the poorer regions , on the problems of unemployment and equal opportunities , and of course , we will have to consider alternative methods of managing the Funds .
We will have to simplify the procedures and encourage greater participation by the private sector in the activities of the Structural Funds , because then , from the European Union 's point of view , we could achieve much more with the same money .
Beyond that , I wish to refer to some points in the report that Mrs McCarthy and I prepared , which I regard as particularly important .
I think that Objective 1 must be the point on which the strongest emphasis is placed .
For that reason , we believe Objective 1 should receive exactly two-thirds of the resources . Not approximately .
Just as we say that structural activities should take up 0.46 % of the resources , we should talk about the amount to be earmarked for Objective 1 with equal clarity .
I also consider that the European Union 's poorer areas , in other words those regions in which the per-capita GDP is below 70 % of the Community average , should be co-financed more extensively up to as much as 85 % , as happens now for example with the remotest peripheral regions .
In the context of the Interreg initiative , I think it is important to have a special sub-programme for cooperation between islands and for cooperation between mainland regions and islands , to flesh out what we voted for in Amsterdam , in other words the amendment of the Treaty which provides special treatment for island regions .
I also wish to stress that we oppose the Commission 's proposal that there should be an effectiveness reserve amounting to something like 10 % of the resources .
That 10 % corresponds to ECU 20 billion , or an entire Cohesion Fund .
Consequently , we oppose that proposal .
It creates uncertainty in planning and enables the Commission to deal with a very large sum without accountability , and we therefore do not think that proposal by the Commission should go through .
We also should not approve the Commission 's proposal that unspent amounts should be given to other Member States two-plus-one years after they were first committed .
We consider that at least in the first phase they should be held for the same Member State .
( The President cut the speaker off )
Mr President , it is a great pleasure for me to present the report on the cohesion fund on behalf of the Committee on Regional Policy .
Last March the Commission presented its proposals to Parliament for the next programming period running from 2000-2006 .
These proposals are set out in a series of draft regulations and as far as the cohesion fund is concerned the Commission has tabled two sets of amendments .
The first set concerns the articles of the regulation itself and the second set concerns Annex II to the regulation which sets out in detail the provisions for implementing the basic principles .
My report on the cohesion fund respects the main guidelines set out in the Commission 's proposals and also welcomes the fact that the Commission fund will remain largely the same .
Eligibility for the cohesion fund as stated in the report will apply to Member States with a per capita GNP of less than 90 % of the Community average .
This is explicitly stated in Protocol 15 on economic and social cohesion of the Treaty .
It is my belief that despite the significant benefits that the cohesion countries receive from this fund and despite the strong economic growth of recent years there is still a significant infrastructural deficit in the cohesion countries .
These countries - Spain , Greece , Ireland and Portugal - simply do not have the same level of basic infrastructural facilities which typify the rest of Europe .
A gap still exists between them and the more developed regions of Europe .
The Commission 's funding proposal is therefore consistent with generating long-term growth and promoting economic and social cohesion .
Continued EU funding is necessary to help consolidate the progress made so far .
The recognition of this by Agenda 2000 proposals is very welcome .
Despite comments made in some quarters I categorically reject any link being made between economic and monetary union and the cohesion fund .
In fact , as Irish Minister for Foreign Affairs I participated in the negotiation and the signature of the Maastricht Treaty , which included the agreement on economic and monetary union .
At that time it had also been decided that Ireland , Spain , Portugal and Greece needed an increase in structural funding in order to help them catch up with the EU average economic performance .
No link whatsoever was made between monetary union and cohesion fund eligibility at that time and I do not see any reason to establish one now .
Certain innovative measures contained in the Commission 's proposals are in principle correct .
I welcome the Commission 's efforts to improve the functioning of the fund .
However , the practical implementation of the new measure needs further clarification .
For example , the ' polluter pays ' principle can be supported with a view to ensuring high environmental standards for projects .
However , guidelines need to be set out for the application of this principle which should logically take into account the particular circumstances which exist in the four Member States to which the fund will apply .
As far as project financing is concerned , a single advance of 10 % as a first payment is too limited .
The initial phase of a project is crucial from a qualitative point of view and a significant percentage of the total available money is generally necessary to guarantee the commencement of a project .
Moreover a small advance could lead to discrimination against regions which are unable to generate sufficient start-up financing from their own resources .
Even though I am extremely sensitive to the Commission 's concern to keep the total cost of the plan and the annual breakdown in line with implementation on the one side and the progress of work in line with the advances paid on the other , I still consider that a 10 % advance is too limited and it would be too heavy a burden on less-favoured regions to support the initial phase of a project .
In view of the difficulties encountered in the previous programming period with regard to financial corrections and , more precisely , reducing , suspending or cancelling aid in the event of an irregularity , it seems to me that the appropriate response is to reduce or cancel the advance only in respect of the irregularity and not the entire project .
Irregularities can easily be detected and corrected without interrupting the continuation of the project .
By the same token the principle of automatic cancellation of assistance , in other words the cancellation of any commitment for which a payment application has not been made by the end of the second year , should certainly encourage Member States to implement their projects within time limits .
However , the amount decommitted should be reassigned to the same Member State in order to penalise the region or , better still , just the project , but not the whole country .
Finally , I wish to express my concern over the consequences of a strict application of the mid-term review as it stands in the proposal .
My report points out that if , at the time when the mid-term review is carried out , any Member State ceases to be eligible , it would be advisable to foresee some kind of an arrangement for phasing out , as is being actively considered with regard to the structural funds .
The end of eligibility for the cohesion fund is obviously a matter which will be decided on the basis of the relevant statistics .
However , sudden cessation of funding to a country which has made good use of the funds could have too severe an impact on the country 's economic wellbeing .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , there is no doubt that today we are holding a joint debate of great importance .
As the democratic representatives of the citizens and peoples of Europe we are debating what should be the guidelines for the Commission 's policy in Europe for the next seven years .
I think that the European Parliament , and particularly its Committee on Regional Policy , has risen to the occasion .
Our contributions , which tomorrow will be taken on board by the entire Parliament , define and improve the Commission 's proposals .
In this set of proposals , the ultimate regional financial instrument is the ERDF , which , under Article 130c of the Treaty , is assigned the role of redressing the main imbalances in the Community .
The specific quality of the ERDF is the fact that it identifies with the central core of the cohesion policy , which , in the words of Article 130a of the Treaty , is aimed at reducing disparities between the levels of development of the various regions and the backwardness of the least favoured regions , which is why more than 50 % of funding for the cohesion policy between 1998 and 1999 has been made available through the ERDF .
The Commission 's proposal does not offer a great deal that is new to a Fund that is as broad and versatile as the ERDF and that , in addition , has generally worked very well .
Your rapporteur believes that the European Parliament has enriched the proposal , defining the priorities and adding different political connotations to the technical proposals , connotations that have come from the amendments of the different parliamentary groups and committees . Moreover , it gives the proposal as a whole a coherent structure that also , undoubtedly , identifies better with the problems that concern citizens and the less developed regions of Europe .
The European Parliament report combines economic and social cohesion with European territorial cohesion by developing regional planning .
Regional planning means better communications , greater attractions for industry and greater opportunities for growth .
In short , it means more development , employment and welfare .
Territorial cohesion means fighting to overcome the permanent geographical disadvantages of peripheral or island regions , and to promote the building of links among those regions and between them and the central regions of the Community .
The ERDF has an essential challenge in this field and , in order to promote the development of these backward and peripheral regions , the majority of which are maritime regions , the European Parliament is calling for the development of maritime transport , an issue that is unresolved in the Community . This would reduce congestion in land transport , help the environment , and thus contribute to the development of the backward regions .
Our report also advocates the explicit inclusion of cultural investments that create employment , that tend to protect natural and cultural heritage , and those aimed at developing sustainable tourism , eco-tourism and cultural tourism .
It develops the Commission 's proposal to explicitly include those investments that are aimed at preserving or recovering a region 's industrial basis , or those specifically aimed at local development .
Our report is in favour of maintaining the Community initiative URBAN , which , along with INTERREG , has clearly brought added value to the Community .
Support for Interreg has been unanimous and there are great hopes for Interreg III , both in its traditional field of cross-border cooperation , in which the European Parliament is now asking for the explicit inclusion of inter-island and maritime cooperation , and in its new section C on transnational cooperation between large regions of Europe - a field that is also very closely linked to regional planning .
Finally , the report includes a broad development of specific business activities aimed at promoting small and medium-sized enterprises and cooperation between enterprises , services for enterprises , renewable energy sources and respect for the environment .
The Commission can say or will say that its proposal already enabled the Member States to include these and other aspects , but the European Parliament , through its various political tendencies , wanted these issues to be clearly specified . They could thus identify with the views of the citizens and peoples that we represent , guiding and also giving priority to the activities that in due course will have to be included in the programmes to be funded by the European Fund for Regional Development .
Therefore , as well as having a good technical document , we now also have a good political document .
I think we have done a good job at first reading and I would like to conclude by thanking the Members in the various parliamentary groups and committees who , with their amendments , have contributed to enriching this report for which I had the honour of being rapporteur .
I would like to end by mentioning the structural aspects of fisheries .
Today , I would particularly like to make my voice heard in this House - in order to represent the regions that are dependent on fisheries , whatever their aims - in strong support of the position widely held by the European Parliament 's Committee on Fisheries on the future FIFG regulation .
I would like to highlight point 13 of the report on the general regulation and to ask why the fisheries sector does not receive the same treatment as agriculture .
Commissioner , the fisheries sector needs a serious , rigorous , single and horizontal structural regulation that covers all its measures and gives legal certainty to its potential beneficiaries .
I hope that you can do so in time and that you will rectify this and accept Parliament 's position .
Mr President , this is really a first-reading type debate under the Hughes procedure and I must say that I shall welcome the new rules for the Hughes procedure when they come about and hope that the second reading will be subject to them .
I am presenting , on behalf of the Budgets Committee , one report and five opinions .
The report is about new rules for financing the trans-European networks .
It is a rather technical report about the Commission finding more money to be available to fund the already agreed policies .
As I say , it is a technical report and it will be my intention to resist amendments which are about policy and not about the subject of the report .
We shall be voting on that tomorrow .
It would take too long to list the five resolutions on which the Budgets Committee is offering an opinion in my name .
The objective in the Budgets Committee is not , in any way , to intervene in the policy arrangements of the spending committees .
But as the Budgets Committee we are concerned by two things in particular .
One thing was referred to by the President of the Court of Auditors here yesterday .
He said that for two years running the number of irregularities in the structural funds were growing at the same time as those in agriculture , which has long been a problem , were falling .
The other is the regular annual underspend of the regional funds .
So , we as a committee welcome the new rules being put forward in this way by the Commission .
The amendments are to all five reports and are technical amendments .
They are in no way seeking to alter the policy-making processes of the spending committees .
The one exception might appear to be the Budgets Committee 's support for the performance reserve .
Another name for the performance reserve is efficiency reserve .
Can you imagine the Budgets Committee being able to resist the idea of something called efficiency ?
I know - because I am a member of that committee too - that the Regional Committee is seeking to promote the idea of the performance reserve .
However , if the Commission 's proposals hold true , the Budgets Committee believes that we should be having proper financial rules to cover it .
In no way should the decision-making view of Parliament be by-passed by use of the performance review , although it is tempting for a budgets committee to find support for this .
The amendments have not been welcomed in large sections of the House .
I think that is a great pity and I would invite Members to read them .
Any suggestion that we might be using the Financial Regulation should not raise hostility .
Any suggestion that we should follow the financial rules should not cause people to be greatly concerned but I do understand that there are several Members of the House who are worried about those and I would invite them to read those amendments before they come to vote tomorrow .
Mr President , Commissioners , ladies and gentlemen , although the European Social Fund reform is much less controversial than the reform of the other funds , there are still problems associated with it .
The first thing to emphasise is that the Social Fund is the only labour market instrument we have at European level .
It also accounts for an impressive 10 % of the budget .
Precisely because it is our only instrument for supporting the European employment strategy , we absolutely have to whip it into shape for the big new challenges in labour market policy .
We must use it to open up new employment opportunities above all in the third sector , the non-profit-making sector .
By this I mean the environment , culture and social services .
It is also necessary to use local employment initiatives to create more employment .
Over and above that , we should be using Social Fund support not only to develop new forms of work , but also to do more to test them . This applies to two particular cases .
Firstly , as regards women , we need to enhance the compatibility of family and working life . Secondly , for older employees , we need to facilitate the transition from working life to retirement .
In future we also need to take greater care of a new problem group , workers in their mid-forties , who are generally the first in line to lose their jobs .
Experience shows that regardless of age , doing a training course under the Social Fund increases a person 's chances of finding a job by a third compared to someone in the same age group without this training .
Another novelty is that whereas up to now , education measures were only possible in Objective 1 areas , in future they are to be promoted throughout the EU .
On this subject , I am very happy that yesterday the European People 's Party was also able to agree to a compromise on this , which allows us to offer hundreds of thousands of young people in Europe the opportunity to improve their employment prospects through better education .
This point is particularly important to me because taking Portugal as an example , in that country alone 600 000 young people are profiting from education under the Social Fund .
In Spain the figure is 152 000 . In Ireland , in the current promotion period alone , ECU 380 million has been deployed for education under the Social Fund .
But it is not only poor Member States that need this assistance .
The United Kingdom , France and Italy have all implemented appropriate measures as well .
Dear colleagues from the PPE , that is why it is a good thing that you agreed at the last minute .
These are new priorities for assistance that have the support of all groups .
But there are also two PPE amendments which the committee has already rejected , and which my group certainly cannot support .
Opinions diverge fundamentally on a preventive labour market policy and , unsurprisingly , on assistance for women .
Now to begin with the first contentious issue , which is the expenditure of 15 % of Social Fund resources on a preventive labour market policy in Member States .
This policy approach was introduced so successfully to Europe in 1994 by the Social Fund , that it quite naturally found its way into the Luxembourg Employment Guidelines , which is why I cannot for the life of me understand why you are against it now .
The present division of funds between Objectives 3 and 4 is already quite similar .
The present ratio between the resources for fighting long-term unemployment and for measures to facilitate the adaptation to industrial change is 80 : 20 .
Turning now to the second controversial issue , everyone here knows that mainstreaming for women is not enough to reduce the discrimination against them in the labour market .
If we really want to make progress in realising equal opportunities , then here too Europe must adopt a pacesetting role and make 50 % of the Social Fund resources available for very specific additional measures to assist women .
Anyway , I hope that by tomorrow , my dear colleagues in the PPE , you will have come to your senses on this .
Mr President , Commissioners , ladies and gentlemen , in 1994 fisheries became a part of the Structural Funds for the first time and the financial instrument for fisheries guidance ( FIFG ) was set up . The main objective of this instrument was to reorganise the chaotic situation that existed up until then in terms of the system of funding for the fisheries structural policy , which involved , on the one hand , the Structural Funds , and on the other hand , an instrument called the European Fisheries Guidance Fund .
This situation involved serious management problems , administrative inflexibility , a lack of coherence and a lack of transparency .
The idea was to find a new and different way of dealing with the issue of funding measures related to the fisheries structural policy by simplifying instruments in order to overcome the flaws evident in the previous system .
The 1994 reform covered all the areas of the European Union dependent on fishing as it was in the form of a common policy .
In addition , as part of this reform , Community initiatives appeared for the first time .
Among them was the Fisheries Initiative , which was set up to complement the Structural Funds .
It seems , however , that the Commission has now forgotten the reasons that led it to make that reform . With the model it is currently proposing we are in danger of going back to absolute chaos in the fisheries structural policy , as well as the lack of coherence that the Commission is presenting us with in its proposal for a new regulation .
The Commission 's proposal does not move further along the path taken with the 1994 reform .
It is incomprehensible that we should be presented with a document in which details are not even given of the measures to be taken and in which structural action in the fisheries sector is not clearly expressed .
The result of this shortcoming is that instead of the fisheries sector , it is the Commission that is benefiting from extending its discretion in an unthinkable manner in other sectors , such as agriculture or rural development .
Perhaps the fisheries policy is not such a common policy as the agricultural policy ?
What Parliament is proposing in view of the lack of coherence , the contradictions and the discriminations that we find in the Commission 's proposal , is something as simple as a single legal framework , a horizontal regulation within the framework of national programmes with the aim of maintaining the coherence necessary to fulfil the objectives of the common fisheries policy .
We are proposing a document that is the result of reorganizing and simplifying all the instruments available for structural measures in the fisheries sector , and that covers all the regions that are dependent on fisheries .
This more pragmatic approach would enable us , on one hand , to cover all the structural measures and , on the other hand , to cover all the regions that really need those measures to be implemented , disposing of ideas such as that introduced by the Commission of selecting areas for the new Objective 2 on the basis of employment criteria and not of fishing activity .
This would inevitably cause a significant distortion as it is forgetting the ultimate reason for the fisheries structural policy , that it should be aimed at regions that are dependent on fisheries , and not exclusively at regions with employment problems in the fisheries sector .
These are completely different concepts that should not be confused .
To this I should add that , in general , regions that are dependent on fisheries do not have a particularly high level of unemployment .
Usually , the problems in those areas are of a different order .
The regulation would enable the fisheries sector to have its own structural policy so that it might maintain its competitiveness , and would enable the Member States to resolve internal issues , taking into account the particular characteristics of various sectors .
In addition , this system would mean that there could be considerable simplification in terms of programming , as many existing regulations that are complicated , and at times inconsistent with each other , would disappear .
In short , we need to establish a single legal framework that brings together all the Community regulations on fisheries and that includes all the measures on modernising and renewing fleets , joint ventures , processing and marketing , socio-economic measures , aquaculture , etcetera .
In short , we need measures that enable the fleet to maintain its competitiveness in an open global market .
Ladies and gentlemen , we have to prevent the achievements made so far from being lost through an incoherent reform that would lead us into a chaotic and obsolete situation .
We must not forget the achievement that meant that the Edinburgh European Council adopted the decision to consider structural action in the fisheries sector within the framework of the Structural Funds .
With the proposal that the Commission is presenting we have an alternative that goes against this decision by trying to take part of the structural action out of the Structural Funds to the detriment of the European fisheries sector .
I would like to conclude by briefly referring to the Cohesion Fund , stressing - like Mr Collins - that the only reason for the Cohesion Fund is to contribute to strengthening economic and social cohesion , not to constitute a nominal convergence instrument in order to fulfil the requirements for joining the single currency .
It is always a final instrument , linked solely to the objective of cohesion and regulated in the final cohesion policy title and not by the Economic and Monetary Union title .
For this reason , I fully support Mr Collins ' suggestions and the Commission 's proposals , which we believe are the only ones that fully comply with the spirit of the Treaty .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Commissioners , firstly on behalf of my group , I should like to thank all the rapporteurs for their reports on the Structural Funds , and if I single out Mrs McCarthy and Mr Hatzidakis by name , then it is only because they have done the lion 's share of the work .

If European regional policy is to remain effective we must confine ourselves to the main tasks .
The objective is to help the regions that have economic problems , which is why we would approve the idea proposed by the Commission of concentrating assistance on the regions which lag behind in development , namely the Objective 1 regions . From a geographical point of view also , Objective 1 regions should receive assistance amounting to exactly two thirds of Structural Fund resources .
We urge strongly that the choice of the Objective 1 regions should in future be based on the strict application of the criterion of a regional GDP per capita which is less than 75 % of the Community average .
For us this is a very important yardstick that is significant for the overall evaluation of the report .
I would draw your attention to the fact that those who advocate flexibility on this issue are jeopardising the common consensus and preventing a reform of the Structural Funds as a whole .
At the same time , however , I would urge the Commission to see to it that Objective 1 regions are treated equally when resources are distributed .
In view of the regional slant of Objective 1 , I do not think that we can guarantee equal treatment by considering the national criterion of prosperity in determining the amount of resources to be allocated .
We therefore explicitly reject this on the grounds that it would create a new type of unfairness .
As far as the Cohesion Fund is concerned , the opinion of my group is divided .
Some of the group , mostly Members from southern European countries , are in favour of what the rapporteur and the Commission propose , which is a continuation of the Cohesion Fund in its present form .
Others , including myself , consider that the Cohesion Fund has already achieved its most important goal as far as the countries participating in Economic and Monetary Union are concerned , by significantly helping to bring about nominal convergence .
In our opinion there is therefore no reason for it to continue to exist in its present form .
This kind of European assistance consists of temporary measures and should not be considered a permanent acquisition after its aim has been achieved .
This issue is fundamental for a society based on solidarity . Solidarity is not just a one-way street ; it is not just about taking , but must be based on the understanding that there is both give and take .
Otherwise , this solidarity that we all emphatically support will be a very one-sided burden .
Mr President , Commissioner , the Group of the European Liberal Democrat and Reform Party would like to express its support for the principle of strengthening economic and social cohesion in all the territories , all the states and all the regions of the European Union .
We would like to affirm the need to maintain the level of 0.46 % of gross domestic product for the Structural Funds .
We are in a period when the European Union is enlarging and we will have to bear the costs of this .
In order to do so , we are relying on the economic growth of the Union .
The main objective of the Structural Funds , along with economic and social cohesion , must be to encourage job creation through the promotion of small and medium-sized enterprises .
In the Commission 's document we support the concentration of the Structural Funds with the aim of making them more efficient , and we also agree with the simplification of procedures in order to bring more transparency to the management of the Funds .
We support the principle of subsidiarity and the recognition of the important role played by regional and local authorities , especially the authorities in those Member States where the regions also have legislative powers .
We are in favour of consulting civil society and non-governmental organisations in drawing up the programmes .
We are also in favour of decentralising the management of the Funds and making it more flexible , but we know that this means strengthening the control mechanisms in order to guarantee that the Funds are used appropriately .
We support , too , the reduction in the number of objectives from seven to three and we believe it is necessary to make State aid , as established by Article 92 ( 3 ) ( c ) of the Treaty , compatible with the Structural Funds , especially in Objective 2 regions where the two types of aid need to be compatible .
We must also highlight - and I said this a few times in committee , Commissioner - the problem of rural areas , and in those areas unemployment and population decline must be looked on as important factors .
We support the Commission 's approach with regard to the phasing-out system .
We also support the reduction in Community initiatives and would like to highlight the important role of Interreg in cross-border cooperation , which brings a truly European dimension to the initiative .
In addition , its action involving the candidate countries must be strengthened .
Our group unreservedly supports the establishment of a percentage for performance , and a reserve percentage for each objective and in each Member State in order to encourage greater efficiency in its application .
We believe , Commissioner , that the reserve fund is a good idea that should be supported .
We can discuss the percentage , but we think that it is important that it be implemented .
Finally , we also support the Cohesion Fund for Member States whose gross domestic product is less than 90 % of the Community average .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the McCarthy-Hatzidakis report quite rightly welcomes the Commission 's extremely valid objective of simplifying standards in terms of structural policy .
Parliament has a duty to draw the attention of the Commission and the Council to the need to closely link the aim of economic and social cohesion to that of cohesion in the European area , which is clearly expressed in the Varela report .
As well as the terrestrial aspects of the Union , we must also take the maritime aspects into account and then provide an adequate response to the specific needs of the island , peripheral or landlocked regions .
We should not allow Europe to let its peripheral regions crumble .
This is unfortunately the risk which these regions run , given the socio-economic data which is typical of these areas and the economic trends of the European market , mainly based around the London-Paris-Bonn axes .
As strict as it may be , the definition of the new Objective 1 in the report on general provisions , by tolerating limited exceptions , gives Member States the opportunity to improve the coherence of national zoning as the procedure is transparent and the list of eligible regions is annexed to the regulation .
Therefore , the obstacles which impede the economic and social development of regions suffering permanent structural handicaps would be taken into consideration as a priority objective of the Structural Funds .
I am also pleased to note that the report on general provisions provides for a special Interreg strand , dedicated to regional cooperation with and between the island regions .
This fulfils the Commission 's commitment which , until now , has been without any follow-up .
Finally , I believe it is important to compensate for the absence of Commission proposals on the relations between the Structural Funds and the draft development plan for the Community area .
To this end , I would like to ask that we support the two amendments which we tabled to the McCarthy-Hatzidakis report , so that the framework regulation does not disregard the efforts made to develop a coherent strategy for planning the European area .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the central question in the report on the Structural Funds is whether or not the European Parliament approves of reducing the financial resources earmarked from 0.6 % of Community GNP to 0.34 % in the next Community support framework .
Whoever agrees with that reduction , tantamount to a reduction in the Structural Funds - which would lose my country hundreds of billions of escudos - will be voting for the report .
Whoever thinks that it should not be for the current cohesion countries alone to finance EU enlargement will be voting against it .
That is what we shall be doing unless the European Parliament approves amendments aimed at rejecting that move .
The essence of the report will not be hidden by its somewhat positive aspects . These positive elements include the vehement objections to the creation of a reserve , supposedly for reasons of effectiveness , the point that the Commission 's guidelines for structural actions should only be indicative of the allocation of two thirds of the appropriations to Objective 1 , or the restoration of the URBAN initiative .
The report on the Cohesion Fund , on the other hand , is in keeping with what the Treaty on European Union already provides for legally and what Agenda 2000 only confirms . In other words , all countries with a GNP lower than 90 % of the Community average should benefit from the Cohesion Fund , whether or not they belong to the group of countries participating in the single currency .
On the other hand , in line with what we have always contended , the report opposes the idea that the Cohesion Fund should be conditional , as the Commission proposes , on meeting the requirements of the Stability Pact .
We hope that the content of this report will not be radically altered by the amendments tabled by Mr Walter and Mr Berend , from the Socialist Group and the Group of the European People 's Party .
They reveal a total lack of solidarity with the current cohesion countries and are aimed at preventing countries that form part of EMU , such as Portugal , to mention just one , from continuing to benefit from the Cohesion Fund .
Finally , the continuity of the Cohesion Fund for these countries cannot be used to exert extra pressure , as Mr Berend is now doing , nor should it be used to conceal possible or real losses in the Structural Fund , since that Fund is , in principle , laid down in the Treaty and is even one of the rare positive elements included in Agenda 2000 .
Having said this , we shall go along with the remaining reports as a whole in that they involve essentially operational regulations .
As for the FIFG , we support the strategy of the report aimed at unifying regulations on activities in this sector , but we do not feel it necessary or even appropriate to present such a complete document at this stage as , for that very reason , we have not been able to sufficiently discuss all its implications .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Commissioner , you will be amazed that I of all people am the first and only one here to observe that the Commission proposal is quite balanced , considering the tight financial framework .
It makes sense to concentrate resources on the weakest regions .
The Greens support the Commission proposals , even though we must of course observe that the Commission did not show any internal flexibility concerning the limits on resources in its own sectors , nor was it able to develop coherent structures .
I must simply say that there is no uniform structure for assisting the rural area , and no attempt is made to find a solution to the problems of European regions which share borders with the applicant countries .
In other words , there is no attempt to establish the possibility of cross-border assistance in these regions .
The common fund is the only useful solution and the Commission has still done nothing in that regard .
It is of course undeniable that progress has been made .
Most importantly , in the Structural Fund Regulation , we have finally been able to introduce sustainable development as the central objective .
The economy , ecology and social security need to be re-balanced once again if regions are not to stay connected to the drip forever but instead to undergo stable development .
Of course , for this type of stability , the participation of the local and regional players and social groups is crucial .
The Structural Funds have this democratic approach .
Parliament has put forward some crucial improvements in the Committee on Regional Policy , which could allow the social players a decisive say in drafting the plans .
Unfortunately ' could ' is about as far as we will get , because everyone knows that the new legal basis comes much too late as the plans were ready long ago .
That is why today , Commissioner , I expect you to give us some idea as to how , in view of this dilemma , enough time can be found for the democratic participation stipulated in the Structural Fund Regulation .
In conclusion , it makes no sense for us to push through old claims of entitlement here , as though this were some kind of fair .
The Structural Funds are not akin to a shop that is there to serve Member States .
We are called upon to support the German Government 's plan to conclude the Agenda 2000 package in March .
It really is the last possible opportunity for us to grant regions assistance in January .
Mr President , I wish to begin by congratulating all the rapporteurs on the reports presented to us today .
There is little doubt that Structural Funds have delivered very worthwhile support to peripheral and poor regions in many parts of the European Union for many years .
We are now at a stage where they need to be reformed .
They have been extremely successful and many projects have gone forward which would otherwise never have got off the ground .
European Union support for my own area through difficult and dangerous times gave us hope for a better tomorrow and helped us to maintain our position for almost 30 years .
I understand why there has to be a 75 % benchmark .
I must say to the Commission that we need a degree of flexibility to ensure that special areas will continue to receive support .
For me , coming from Northern Ireland , to remove Objective 1 would send the wrong message at an extremely important and crucial time .
Parliament 's report is balanced , responsible and realistic .
It offers a possibility of a better proposal than exists at present .
I agree with the performance reserve in principle but it is too high : it should be no more than 4 or 5 % .
There are not enough European lead projects .
I would like to see the Urban programme and other European-led initiatives - five , six at the most - remain so that the people can see that this comes from the European Union .
Mr President , I will begin with recital C of the report , which specifies that the Structural Funds and the Cohesion Fund are the principal instruments of economic and social cohesion in Europe .
Of course , it would have been useful to distinguish more clearly between cohesion between the various Member States and cohesion within the states themselves , especially cohesion between rural and urban areas .
On this first point , namely cohesion between Member States , it is difficult not to think along the same lines as the rapporteurs , given that the high number of appropriations allocated to some Member States is necessary for the sake of efficiency .
Nonetheless , we should not forget the need for cross-border cohesion , as there is still a great deal to be done in this field .
Appropriations for such cross-border cohesion should not be used to bear the costs of adjusting to new objectives .
Indeed , in relation to this , there is a most welcome mention of the Interreg programmes on page 14 .
As regards the internal cohesion of Member States , which is perhaps discussed less , I believe this to be extremely important as cohesion between rural and urban areas is vital in the stages of development that we are currently experiencing , and which are generally detrimental to rural areas .
Objective 5b will disappear , which is indeed regrettable and there is a danger that this may lead to disinvestment in rural areas .
Examples of this are north-western Alsace , a region I know well , the Vosges massif and the Sundgau region .
We are also unwittingly promoting the urbanisation of less-favoured regions .
It would be worth knowing what percentage of funds were awarded to urban and rural areas , taking all funds into account .
The Social Fund , for example , or industrial conversion funds , are mainly paid to towns .
I approve wholeheartedly of the rapporteurs ' paragraph 3 which quite rightly suggests that separate treatment is needed for the coherent development of the rural area under Objective 2 .
I hope that this request will later be acknowledged and that rural areas will not bear the costs of restructuring funds , as is currently the case .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , as a Parliament we want single programming for the fisheries sector .
The Commission 's proposal closely resembles the fragmentation theory : in substance it seeks to divide the sector along existing territorial lines and abandons the option of unitary management for the European Regional Development Fund , the European Investment Fund , the European Guarantee Fund and the European Social Fund .
We want single programming because we do not think there should be territorial discrimination in fisheries , and we are convinced this can come about through a regulation capable of achieving single programming of actions in the fisheries sector , covering Objective 1 , Objective 2 and areas outside Objectives 1 and 2 .
Unless there is unitary action , there will be the risk of discrimination .
That is why we are committed to putting forward a serious and rigorous regulation , anticipating the Commission proposal .
That is why we have looked at fisheries not just from an exclusively production and market angle , but taking account of environmental issues , social issues and the revival of sector-linked economic and social activity as well as thinking about the market .
We have also considered the possibility of establishing mixed companies involving third countries , taking maximum advantage of NGOs and small-scale fishing .
In short , ours is a serious , precise and timely proposal , and we would have hoped the Commission would naturally incorporate it .
In fact the Commission is taking its time , but we are pleased that in some respects the Fisheries Council is fairly consistent with Parliament 's position , and we are also aware that the Commission is going to propose a regulation which does take account of Parliament 's own proposals , opportunely backed by the Fisheries Council .
For this reason the possibility of two readings , approving this proposal for a regulation today and then approving the legislative resolution in April , when we assess the Commission 's new proposal , will allow us to give the fisheries sector a single answer and single treatment , avoiding discrimination which would certainly be negative .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , as Mrs Jöns , the rapporteur , has already explained , her report is about the organisation of ESF content .
Important things are to be settled in the framework regulation as it is still unclear whether or not certain points are going to be included in the text of the ESF Regulation .
These delimitation problems should not arise in future .
With regard to organisation , there were at first considerable differences of opinion between my group and the Socialists .
As a result of many constructive discussions and rounds of negotiation continuing through into yesterday afternoon , we managed to reach some compromises .
I should like to express my respect for the rapporteur and thank her for being prepared to enter into discussion with me .
I should particularly like to thank her for the commitment she has shown .
We agree on the basic direction to be taken .
The ESF is the structural policy instrument for fighting unemployment , and this in turn is the best social policy .
Unemployment is the biggest economic problem we have , and the biggest problem for social policy .
ESF resources are in short supply , and we must bear this in mind when considering the compromises that have materialised .
This is the message for the Commission regarding the implementation of the text .
It is also because of this that education is not itself one of the fields of ESF intervention , although of course it is a prerequisite for employability and for a culture of lifelong learning .
Of course Europe should also play its part .
But on the basis of experience garnered from the last few programming periods , we have agreed not to just use the word concentration because it sounds good , but also to implement it rigorously .
This is also true when it comes to the application of the ESF resources , where we want concentration on actively combatting unemployment .
In this process , we should be guided by the employment guidelines at all levels .
( The President cut the speaker off )
I have to be strict , in view of the number of speakers .
So just a few words to finish , please , in 30 seconds .
In conclusion , allow me to cite the rapporteur in this regard : ' In future the ESF is to support the European employment strategy and the multiannual national action plans for employment set up within the framework of this strategy . '
I support this completely .
Mr President , firstly I should like to congratulate the Commissioner on putting together a proposal which is generally uncontentious among the 15 Member States and on all sides of this Parliament .
That is no mean feat .
I want to focus on three specific areas : timetables , the criteria for Objective 2 and access to funds .
Firstly , on timetables , we have just had an informal summit on bringing Europe closer to the citizen .
One of the key issues with structural funding is making sure that we deliver regional and structural funding on time .
This is one of the key areas where the European Union has credibility .
Of course we have to complete the rest of Agenda 2000 as well but we have to be there for the March Summit .
The other thing I would say is that there will be a huge bottleneck at the beginning of year 2000 , making it difficult to get these programmes approved .
I should like to ask the Commissioner how she intends to deal with the almost impossible task for her staff of approving SPDs and CSFs in time to get those programmes rolling .
Secondly , on criteria ; in Objective 1 we have a very good and tight definition of who should qualify for Objective 1 , based primarily on GDP .
Yet in Objective 2 GDP is not one of the criteria for qualifying .
Will the Commission accept GDP as one of the extra qualifying criteria for Objective 2 ?
It is the best poverty index so let us use it .
Thirdly , on access .
One of the things I hear most often from my constituents is how difficult it is to get hold of structural funding , in particular for small voluntary organisations or firms .
I know it is primarily a national problem , but how do we make sure that organisations can easily access European funding without being put off by the bureaucracy ?
Mr President , at the outset I want to compliment Mr Arias Cañete on the presentation of his very fine report .
I pay tribute to all my colleagues on the Committee on Fisheries for presenting a set of very realistic proposals .
The 1994 reform ensured a common approach to all Union areas dependent on fisheries .
There are many such areas throughout the Union where there is no alternative source of employment .
These measures were complemented by the socio-economic measures of 1995 , as I outlined in my report on behalf of the Committee on Fisheries .
The Edinburgh Summit did not endorse Parliament 's proposal for a separate objective to deal with fishing .
However , it accepted the strong case made by Parliament by directing that appropriate funds be allocated to coastal regions dependent on fisheries .
This Commission proposal is a retrograde step and does nothing to improve the lot of the fishing communities .
The proposal is too general .
It leaves a vacuum to be filled not by this Parliament but by the Commission .
The Commission is hoping to obtain our imprimatur .
I suggest that we should not do this until we know the details .
Under the new proposals most of the fishing policy measures are to be finalised under the agricultural guarantees section .
I question the legitimacy of this section being used to fund structural measures .
The agricultural funds are apportioned on an annual basis while the fisheries funds are provided on a multiannual basis .
Even if we accept the principle of the Commission proposal , it must agree to ring-fence funds specifically for the fishing sector ...
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I would firstly like to say that the provisional report on the Structural Funds regulation makes important advances - that we support - in strengthening the principal of cooperation by increasing the number of people who will be involved in preparing , implementing and monitoring the programmes .
The report also makes progress in enhancing transparency and in supporting peripheral , ultra-peripheral and island regions .
However , there are important aspects with which I am bound to disagree , such as the approval of the Commission 's proposal that the resources destined for the Structural Funds should be fixed at 0.46 % of the European Union 's annual gross national product .
There are plenty of reasons to fear that , whatever happens , this allocation will be insufficient to secure economic and social cohesion .
As a result , if this proposal is approved , inter-regional solidarity would be seriously damaged .
In addition , the report even contradicts itself .
It expresses an opinion against the establishment of the performance reserve proposed by the Commission , but it does not prevent those reserves from being set up : it only stipulates that the provision must be less than 10 % .
What is our decision ?
Are we for or against the performance reserve ?
Mr President , I broadly welcome the Commission 's proposals and would like to make some concrete points .
As Mr Collins has pointed out , cohesion funding should not be linked to monetary union .
The cohesion funds could usefully be transformed into a structural instrument not directly linked to the trans-European networks .
Here we have made a global amendment keeping the structural and cohesion funds in line with the agreed budgetary proposals of this House , as Mr Kellett-Bowman has indicated .
We are giving priority to rail infrastructure .
In my own country , Ireland , for instance , the railways are in a state of dangerous decay whilst most of the funding has gone to roads .
Our amendments also stress the importance of cross-border links .
I should like to ask the Commissioner to emphasise in her response the importance of the democratic involvement of local regions , particularly those local regions who are asking for Objective I status .
( The President cut the speaker off )
Mr President , my aim is to try and wring the heartstrings of the Commissioners and Members who are here and , hopefully their groups also , to support Amendment No 49 , tabled in the name of my colleague Mr Escolá Hernando and 60 others , with the pledges of nearly 200 Members already , and Amendment No 85 in the name of Mr Miller with the signatures of nearly all the British Labour Members .

They bring in the concept of remoteness and low population density .
The Highlands and Islands of Scotland are certainly remote and have a low population density of 8.9 , as probably everybody knows by now .
The GDP is 76 % of the average according to my information at the moment .
There are two points I would like to refer to : one was made by one of the government Ministers to me recently , Gus MacDonald , who admits that but for the wages of all the oil rig workers - of whom very few come from my area - we would be well under 75 % , and I think it is a very unfair situation .
We are the land of whisky , but although the British treasury gets billions from that , we do not get very much in the way of financial benefit .
My constituency is often described as the last wilderness of Europe .
It is a man-made wilderness .
It was created by genocide .
We peopled the lands of Canada because we were cleared out in favour of sheep , which were more profitable .
The Commission has done a marvellous job of supporting the Highlands and Islands .
We have taken full advantage of it .
We have spent the money wisely , as the Commission must admit .
But you cannot expect 150 years of neglect and oppression to be cured in five .
It would be ironic if , just when the work of the Commission has enabled us to halt , for the first time , the drain of our brightest and best young people away from the Highlands and Islands , it suddenly came to a stop because of the infrastructure .
There are still single track roads in much of my area , with 50 miles to a petrol pump .
When you get there you find the petrol is the most expensive in the whole of the EU .
A hundred miles to a hospital - one could go on indefinitely .
And the weather - I am sure you all sympathise with that .
We even had a visit from hurricane Mitch - the only bit of Europe to get it - at 240 kilometres an hour over my area .
We have sub-Arctic temperatures in the winter .
For two-thirds of the year all surfaces are damp , houses have to be strong , the cost of distance is enormous .
There are 90 inhabited islands - longer than England , bigger than Belgium or Denmark - and the costs of that peripherality are enormous .
I am trying to wring the heartstrings of everyone .
Make a note now for your coordinators : Amendments Nos 49 and 85 , please .
Mr President , the Arias Cañete report is an excellent step .
Along with Mrs Fraga 's and my own opinions on regional policy and rural development , it displays a great deal of determination and widespread agreement in the views of the three committees on Regional Policy , Agriculture and Rural Development , and Fisheries .
There is widespread agreement on the need to maintain a substantial CFP , based on significant structural measures which apply to Community territory as a whole and which affect fisheries , marine cultivations , aquaculture - including inland aquaculture - and activities further on in the chain such as processing and marketing .
The unanimous position of the Committee on Fisheries , adopted after consultation with fisheries representatives in the Member States , should have attracted the attention of the Commission , and especially that of Commissioner Bonino .
In the opinion I drafted on the ' Agenda 2000 ' communication , also adopted unanimously by the Committee on Fisheries , we had already warned the European Commission that the whole fisheries sector was in danger of experiencing intra-Community relocation . Such relocation would take place if the Commission 's original intentions - which would have created distortions - were not modified by implementing a regulation which accepts that the whole of the Union 's territory is eligible for structural measures .
In the field of agriculture , a specific regulation on rural development has been drawn up .
We have scrupulously monitored it to ensure that it applies to all of the Union 's territory in order to preserve equity when applying the CAP .
Why has the same thing not happened in the fisheries sector since it , like agriculture , has its own common policy ?
So what will remain of the CFP , as there is no overall horizontal regulation bringing together all structural measures which apply to the fisheries sector throughout Union 's territory and there is no regulation which is financed by an single instrument adapted to the needs of this sector ?
All that will be left is a bundle of different restrictions , fleet reduction measures and some stopgap measures , remnants that are certainly not worthy of being called a common policy .
We do not expect the policy to be abandoned , but we expect a far-reaching and forward-thinking policy to be developed which will take into account the maritime dimension of the Union , one of its most essential characteristics .
Mr President , the amendments tabled by our group reflect this aim .
Mr President , the Alleanza Nazionale delegation does not believe the objective of strengthening economic and social cohesion can ignore special situations involving structural handicaps , as in the case of island regions .
Islands suffer from structural disadvantages which have long-term negative effects on their economic and social development , and there are many islands among the territories to be excluded from Objective 1 programmes .
This means island territories will be dealt with on a par with regions which do not need special structural aid .
That is a contradiction in terms .
The new regulation cannot ignore the precepts of the new Treaty of Amsterdam which recognises and emphasises special features in Article 130a and the statement on the islands .
So there ought to be a category for islands in Objective 1 , applying greater flexibility to the GDP parameters .
This is because careful and conscientious examination of the situation should make it clear that macro-economic issues are not the only ones ; above all there are geo-economic issues involved .
On Objective 2 , we note that the Commission 's proposal to apply a certain population ceiling to the various Member States may penalise some regions in comparison with others .
In Italy the Commission 's proposal to include regions leaving Objective 1 in Objective 2 would penalise the centre-north regions .
Instead the concentration of the Structural Funds by reducing the population assisted ought to be balanced and equitably distributed between all the Member States .
As regards transitional support , we think the period should be seven years for regions leaving Objectives 1 , 2 and 5b .
We are not asking for greater allocation of resources to regions in this group , only Structural Fund intervention for the whole of the programming period .
I should specify that one Italian region , Abruzzo , ought to be able to benefit from transitional support despite the fact that it came out of Objective 1 in 1996 , otherwise its inclusion in Objective 2 must be regarded as further penalisation of the centre-north .
Finally , we agree on the reduction in the number of Community initiatives from thirteen to three , but we think it is essential to maintain the URBAN initiative in order to implement a homogeneous policy throughout the territory .
Mr President , the Interreg , URBAN and Leader initiatives are breeding grounds for social and economic innovation which we must preserve at all costs .
Interreg will encourage cross-border development of European territory .
This affects not only the peripheral regions but also the very heart of Europe .
Whilst we are on the subject of the heart of Europe , have you ever travelled by train between Brussels , Luxembourg and Strasbourg ?
The trains are slow , uncomfortable , often late , and so on .
However , the train is the ideal way to travel such distances and also the most ecological way to do so .
What should be a symbolic journey - travelling on the train of the future to the heart of Europe - happens on a rickety and wheezing machine from a bygone era .
And that brings me to Interreg .
Something that should feed and open up regions - such as the Walloon , Lorraine and Luxembourg regions - across borders is a train that has not progressed in the past hundred years .
Something that should contribute to developing cross-border regions is out of date .
Mr President , we must make a serious effort to look after cross-border regions such as those I have mentioned , regions which ask nothing more than to be integrated and to develop .
Mr President , I hope that you will not need to watch the clock while I am speaking .
This morning we have already heard a great deal on the subject of enlargement .
We have also talked about how this has to do with more than just making use of a historical opportunity , as we have to do a great deal before we can actually use this chance .
We have discussed pre-accession strategies in the applicant countries , which involve driving forward as intensively as possible the process of economic and political accession to a common Europe .
But although we have a great deal to do in the candidate countries , there is also homework to be done here .
We often talk for instance about the need for institutional reforms .
This is an important issue but it is not the only one .
For example , there is much potential here for economic restructuring in order to safeguard our own chances for the future .
In this regard , I think that there is one important key idea .
Austria , the country which probably shares one of the longest external borders with the candidate countries , is justifiably interested in ensuring that the crossing and opening of the common border is organised in such a way as to bring advantage to both sides and harm to neither .
The long discussions in the Committee on Regional Policy have achieved a great deal .
I would particularly like to thank the Regional Affairs Commissioner , Mrs Wulf-Mathies .
Yesterday evening during Question Time , we touched on this subject briefly , and today all sides of the House have rightly emphasised this willingness to cooperate .
It has led to some fine results , but a little bit more could still be achieved .
More could and should be achieved , given that the money is guaranteed and there are many good ideas from the regions .
We should not always be waiting for Europe to lead the way ; we must take things in hand ourselves .
On this subject , although in essence we fully approve and support the content of the Commission proposals , we would perhaps have liked to have seen one or two things treated differently .
Perhaps also a separate Objective for rural areas would have been good , although we are satisfied knowing that the rural area can be suitably safeguarded by specifying percentages of the population .
For the next few years and for the transition period the phasing-out rules are particularly important , as is a long phasing-out period for areas which will no longer be eligible for assistance under the future criteria because they no longer need it .
Mr President , I wholeheartedly agree with the key aims of the Structural Fund reforms on improving the focussing and effectiveness of aid , pruning bureaucracy and simplifying administration .
I also believe it is now essential to ensure that this more transparent policy is put into practice .
In applying the principle of partnership a clear division of responsibility must be established and the decision-making process must not be allowed to be hampered , but we have to approach the question of listening and commitment on the part of the various parties flexibly .
I support the Commission 's proposal on eligibility criteria and funding contributions for Objective 1 .
The poorest regions must be included in the group receiving the highest amounts of aid , that is to say the under-75 % -GNP regions , as well as the current northern and sparsely populated Objective 6 regions , as already agreed in the accession negotiations .
Regarding the Objective 2 criteria and the issue of population density I would hope for some flexibility according to circumstances .
For example , in Finland , Europe 's most rural country , the hardships of farming in a northern climate and the long distances that people have to travel underline the need for an effective agricultural policy .
Unemployment and mass migration from the countryside demonstrate the need for development aid measures .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the first report on cohesion reveals to what extent the structural policies have had a strong levelling off effect .
In particular , the Cohesion Fund has played a fundamental role in achieving convergence among the Member States , although some of them still have not reached the level of 90 % of the average GNP in the EU .
It is a fact that , in some cohesion countries , there is still a considerable deficit in terms of infrastructure .
The conflict between the need to invest in these infrastructures and the need to make budgetary cuts , for countries taking part and not taking part in the euro , justifies the maintenance of the Fund .
On the other hand , the Cohesion Fund is fundamental for sustainable development in environmental terms , as was stipulated in the Amsterdam Treaty .
Therefore , we welcome the Commission 's decision to maintain the fund , despite the fact that these countries are joining the euro .
It would be unfair for the poorest countries , which have made the greatest efforts to meet the convergence criteria , sacrificing expenditure in fundamental sectors , to be now deprived of this instrument for cohesion .
We should not confuse nominal and real convergence .
But the Cohesion Fund is not just an act of generosity .
We must not forget that it also enables money to be returned to the more developed states in the form of the acquisition of know-how and capital - in some cases , such as Portugal , as much as 50 % .
Therefore , not only is the Commission 's decision in keeping with the treaties , but it is also in keeping with the spirit of Edinburgh : that of a cohesive Europe embracing solidarity .
Mr President , in spite of their growing share of the Community budget , the Structural Funds have not allowed us to get to the root of regional imbalances .
They have barely compensated for the negative consequences of implementing the single market and preparing for the single currency .
The efficiency of the Structural Funds must be strengthened .
To achieve this , we must concentrate the funds on least-favoured regions and channel them towards job-creating objectives .
The participation of elected representatives , of organisations and of citizens - democracy , in other words - is vital for the effectiveness of the Structural Funds .
And moving beyond the Structural Funds , the question of future financing of the European Union is also being raised .
I am more than slightly hesitant about the guidelines from the recent Commission document which aims at redistributing national contributions , under pressure from Germany who wants to pay less whilst still benefitting from the markets that will open up in Eastern Europe .
On this issue , I should like to say that I believe the theory of fair returns is the very antithesis of European integration as it goes against solidarity , and without this solidarity Europe cannot exist . There is solidarity with the poorer regions , with sectors in difficulty , solidarity amongst the peoples of Europe , with applicant countries , with the Mediterranean countries of the south as part of the move towards development cooperation .
Rather than bickering over national contributions , would it not be a better idea to think of a more fitting use of Community appropriations , to seek new resources - from the financial markets , for example - by introducing a tax on financial transactions which , in this case , would be a fair return based on justice and not on ...
( The President cut the speaker off )
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Commissioners , firstly I would like to thank Mrs Jöns for constructively including our group 's ideas in her report as well .
A point she made very clear in her statement , which I would endorse , was that we cannot lose ground .
The 15 % figure reflects the level of European experience .
Targeted assistance for women simply reflects our stage in the process of civilisation .
Do our colleagues from the People 's Party really want us to drop behind that ?
I think that the Christian Socialists in the House are in future going to have to decide whether they really want to risk a red-green majority in Parliament by opposing proposals which make sense .
( Heckling from Mr Schiedermeier ) That is certainly something we shall see .
Mrs Glase , concentration is not about cutting back on the given aims .
It has to do with labour market policy , the process agreed upon in Luxembourg and above all employment policy in the third sector .
But it is also about social reintegration , complemented of course by a fight against poverty that is worthy of the name .
I shall have to stop there .
But let me just add that we based the synergies with other Funds on ...
( The President cut the speaker off )
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , perhaps you will remember that at the time of the Oostlander report , Mr Hänsch commented that many people would change their tune when it actually came to giving things up .
We have reached that point now .
Those who are familiar with the situation of the Structural and Cohesion Funds will know that Mr Hänsch hit the nail on the head .
As is so often the case , everyone is basically of the same opinion , but when it comes to the crunch - the details of the sacrifices that need to be made - many change their tune .
Let me turn now to the individual points , and firstly to the Cohesion Fund .
I also think that the countries participating in Economic and Monetary Union should lose their right to these resources .
Secondly , the Commission suggests that we maintain the present criterion for Objective 2 .
I am in favour of strict compliance with this , and not ...
( The President cut the speaker off )
Mr President , with the inclusion of an Employment Chapter in the new Treaty , a process began which led to the adoption of the employment guidelines in Luxembourg last November .
One of the pillars of these guidelines is employability , based on a preventive and proactive labour supply policy in which training plays a fundamental role .
The proposal for a Social Fund regulation we are debating today is part of this new approach .
The Commission has undoubtedly put a major effort into making the Fund as flexible an instrument as possible , without losing sight of the need for it to serve the achievement of European objectives .
Those objectives can be summarised as the development of proactive labour market policies , the promotion of social inclusion , the development of educational and vocational training systems to promote lifelong learning , the development of systems and models for the organisation of labour geared to producing a qualified labour force capable of facing up to the challenges of change , support for entrepreneurship and for the world of scientific and technological research , and the development of actions geared to promoting equal opportunities in the labour market .
Now I would like to comment on certain points contained in the Commission 's proposal and strengthened by the excellent report from Mrs Jöns .
The range of measures that can be financed allows the training stage to be encapsulated in a package of integrated actions , geared to facilitating entry into or return to work .
It is important to emphasise that a whole series of pre-training measures is included , intended to reach the categories of people who would otherwise be irredeemably lost .
This means there can be a response to problems which go well beyond the work dimension and , instead , involve the whole person , which is something worth highlighting .
An important part of this is the proposal to devote 1 % of the Social Fund 's resources to funding small projects run by non-governmental organisations , entrusting them to intermediate bodies on the basis of simplified procedures .
The Commission has already begun an important experiment in this area .
Equally important is the promotion of new sources of employment by exploiting the third sector and the social economy , in particular by promoting and supporting local development .
Fundamental here is the proposal to extend partnership , which should become an obligatory procedure at national level , for both governments and regions .
Finally , women must be guaranteed equal rights to participate in the measures promoted by the Social Fund not only by including mainstreaming in the regulation but also through specific measures .
For this reason , the Jöns report proposes setting a minimum of 15 % of the Social Fund resources to guarantee that equal opportunities for women and men also remain a priority when the regulation is applied by the national and regional services .
Mr President , Commissioner , I come from Brittany , a region where fishing is a vital and dynamic economic activity , a keystone in development and employment and a balancing factor in land management .
Where I come from , the fishing tradition has been handed down from father to son for hundreds of years .
Fishing permeates every aspect of our way of life and our traditions and , in spite of the difficult nature of the job , it plays such a large part in our lives that it is a fundamental element of our identity .
This is why , Commissioner , we cannot accept the proposals for regulations on structural measures in the fisheries sector .
As our rapporteur pointed out , these proposals in their current state would threaten the unity of the fisheries sector by scattering the structural measures in the different regulations , they would destroy the current coherency in the maritime sector and , to the detriment of the final beneficiary , they would make it more difficult to gain access to aid . Above all , they would inevitably cause activity to be transferred from certain regions to others that will have greater advantages in the future .
In Brittany , as in all regions dependent on fishing , we must preserve the means for building newer and safer boats , we must continue to modernise our ports and the fisheries industry , to upgrade our production and to train young people for a noble profession which , despite what is sometimes said , is a profession of the future .
Mr President , I intend to speak on Mr Arias Cañete 's report on the fisheries sector .
The Greens agree with many of the rapporteur 's criticisms of the Commission 's proposal , which is decidedly inadequate .
Mrs McKenna has already been able to express our point of view during discussion in the Committee on Fisheries , and the various amendments proposed by the Greens have been accepted by the committee .

But we do not agree with all the proposals made by Mr Arias Cañete : I refer in particular to the new annex 3 , which lays down measures for the construction of new fishing vessels .
The Greens believe Community financing under the CFP should be limited to vessels no longer than 24 metres .
Our proposal takes account of the environmental aspects - sustainable fishing is incompatible with a fleet of large fishing vessels - and the employment aspects , because large vessels certainly employ fewer fishermen .
We hope the House can accept our amendment .
Mr President , this proposal for the reform of the Structural Funds is broadly positive in intention .
The present seven objectives will be cut to three , which will certainly make it easier for both the Commission and the regions to manage the funds .
Better practical implementation also demands greater decision-making powers and greater autonomy on the part of the provincial authorities , which cover bodies with more detailed knowledge of the situation locally .
As regards Objective 2 , I think a great deal of attention needs to be paid to the admissibility criteria .
This objective groups together four separate and distinct actions , namely one for urban areas , one for industrial areas , one for rural and mountain areas and one for fisheries .
If the admissibility criteria are neglected this grouping threatens to be detrimental to regions where there are great disparities between the various sectors in terms of development .
Take Lombardy , for instance .
It has a highly productive industrial fabric , which often means the poor and backward rural and mountain areas are forgotten .
The depopulation and abandonment of pastures in progress are grave symptoms of an irreversible decline caused by our insensitivity to the mountains .
The elimination of the Leader Community initiative in favour of the rural areas is a clear example of the lack of interest in mountain areas and people .
I wonder how the Commission intends to manage this situation equitably .
Still on the Leader programme , we are told that , with the reformed financing , the actions under it will be funded through Objective 2 .
I am curious to see how the funds will actually be managed .
I am convinced - and I am not too far off the truth - that some of the local action groups always financed and provided by the Leader programme will be refinanced by the new Objective 2 , but I rather fear that many of them will be destined to disappear together with much of the aid , support and incentives to rural development .
We are once again faced with a good reform of the ...
( The President cut the speaker off )
Mr President , Commissioner , representatives of the Council , the Commission and the European Parliament have all appealed to one another to keep to the timetable agreed at Cardiff , and we have been assured that at least the institution that this speaker represents is keeping to this timetable .
We have thus shown ourselves to be unanimous in our wishes here .
Now we should also be able to agree unanimously that once the Council has finalised its decisions by the Brussels summit in March , Parliament will then be able to take part fully in the decision-making process .
We know that there are deadlines to meet here , so we need to agree on how this is to happen .
The Commission communication on the Agenda 2000 document has provided a very good and solid basis for regional and structural policy reform .
It is particularly important to simplify the administration of the Structural Funds , to place more reliance on regional and local authorities , and to concentrate resources in regions that have the greatest development problems .
It is vital to keep to the priority of tackling the employment problem .
The Commission 's proposal is founded on the principles of the Treaty of Amsterdam , which took account of the fact that important environmental matters have gained greater prominence in the eyes of our citizens .
The question of integrating environmental issues with regional , structural and cohesive funding does not , however , go far enough in the Commission 's proposal .
This aspect of the issue has been dealt with more effectively by Parliament .
What is of most importance is that the environmental authorities play a full role in the selection and implementation of regional projects .
Furthermore , the role of NGOs has to be acknowledged as part of a real effort to bring about greater transparency and better publicity .
By making the role of partnership between the environmental authorities and NGOs more visible and genuine we can make it much easier for citizens to become involved in regional and structural policy projects .
Mr President , Commissioner , I would like to look briefly at the main points .
The ceilings of 1.27 % of the gross national product on the revenue side and 0.46 % on the expenditure side for the Structural Funds should not in future be exceeded .
For Objective 1 the threshold should be a strict 75 % !
Objective 6 regions - peripheral and island areas - are in the Treaty , but that is all . Phasing out should just be six years , not seven under any circumstances , otherwise you will be dealing with them forever .
With regard to Objective 2 , I do not agree with you .
I do not like this catch-all category of yours , as the rural area will probably get a raw deal .
I am afraid that unemployment as a sole criterion may be too harsh and I think that the soft criteria are important so that national authorities can have a say in the arrangements .
For reasons of fairness , I want the ' phasing out ' to be not four years but six , as you know is the case with Objective 1 .
I would say yes to the safety net .
With Objective 3 , I would say yes to the horizontal assistance .
I fully agree with you on the three Community initiatives .
If you permit others , then you will quickly find that you end up with 13 again , and that is also something that I do not want .
No reserves , Commissioner , I cannot grant you that playground .
National assistance is better and I would support it .
Above all else , within the context of subsidiarity it should still be possible for us at least to use own resources without the Commission constantly stepping in .
So please increase the ' de minimis ' rule as you have already promised to do .
My preference would be ECU 1 million , as we could easily accept that and arrange everything quite successfully .
Commissioner , although you are already hearing about the red-green majority , I do hope that you accept sensible proposals from the other side . As I am a trade unionist , I hope that this is at least one level on which we can agree .
Mr President , I should like to welcome both Commissioners to the House and thank them for their time and assistance .
I should like to speak in particular about the social fund regulations and thank Mrs Jöns for her very visionary and forward-looking report .
We must remember that when the Treaty of Amsterdam is ratified and comes into force it will have an employment chapter .
Because of the problems of unemployment , in particular long-term unemployment across Europe , we must have preventative as well as curative measures for the long-term unemployed .
Therefore I would hope that we maintain our emphasis on life-long learning .
It is essential that in an ever-changing world , in technological and financial terms , we upgrade people 's skills .
We must also ensure that in our schools and colleges more emphasis is given to looking forward to seeing where the new skills are going to be required in 10 years ' time so that we can put in place the training programmes for that as well .
Most important of all is local development , where we can provide more and more assistance and more and more long-term employment , but for far smaller amounts of money than the present state aids and interventions .
I am delighted to see that under the local social capital programme 1 % of the proposed new regulations under the ESF would be given towards that .
Finally , we must never forget that there is nothing rigid ; it must be flexible ; we must adapt .
Mr President , it is quite right that we should recognize here the efficient actions of the Member States that have received Structural Funds during their short but already ample history .
Therefore , the obligation for all the European institutions should be to try to improve and strengthen them , without forgetting the fact that there is also inevitably a flow of capital into the more industrialised Member States .
Will the regulations be improved ?
We have our doubts .
Making the conditions for being declared Objective 1 more flexible would lead to a distortion of its essence , which is fundamentally social and involves solidarity and redressing imbalances .
We should also recall that the ruling from the Council 's Legal Service was very convincing .
The Maastricht Treaty states that it is legitimate to continue to include in the Cohesion Fund countries , such as Spain , that passed - indeed , with flying colours - the test to join the third stage of monetary union .
If it is established , the performance reserve - at least as it is in the Commission 's current proposal , with a figure of 10 % - will in practice be a political instrument that is unnecessary and even counterproductive .
Other complementary indicators should have been taken into account , such as inequalities in health resources , the decline in working population or environmental problems .
However , we welcome the fact that the criterion of unemployment will play an essential part .
Finally , Mr President , I must point out the scarce amount of attention that has been paid to sustainable development in terms of the availability of energy resources and regional investment .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , no-one challenges the principle of or the need for the reform which has been proposed , but it is practical details of the reform which give us cause for concern and raise questions .
I am thinking of my region in particular - the Nord / Pas-de-Calais region - which currently comes under Objectives 1 , 2 and 5b and which stands to lose much of the aid it has received until now .
This region suffers from high unemployment , as high as 25 % in certain areas .
The recession here is serious and the conversion of coal fields , amongst other things , is far from complete .
Thanks to European aid , we were able to initiate a significant development process but this would be jeopardised by any sudden cut-off in aid .
Of course , a transitional support mechanism has been set up but , as in other cases , people are still worried and need to be reassured .
Therefore , I would like to stress the absolute necessity of this transitional support .
We welcome the fact that it is provided for but we would like it to be extended to all regions no longer eligible for Objective 1 , 2 and 5b status . We would also like it to cover the whole programming period , in other words from 2000 to 2006 .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , this is Parliament 's first opportunity to comment on the Commission proposals for the reform of the Structural Funds , and give some clear indications on them .
As we do this , we German Social Democrats will be anxious to discover whether or not Parliament has the strength to display some truly common , clear principles .
The consultations have shown that , in principle , all of us want greater accuracy and a concentration of resources on what is important . This means priority should still be given to assisting regions whose development is lagging furthest behind , but it also means continuing to give an appropriate level of assistance to regions in the richer Member States which are experiencing problems with restructuring .
We agree that we should concentrate the Structural Funds on creating employment and on simplifying structural policy , as well as helping the regions that are no longer eligible with transitional rules so that they are not just excluded all of a sudden .
But the discussions of the last few weeks have shown that there is reason for us to fear that the representation of national interests and the horse-trading that accompanies it - something which we have so far only seen in Council - have spread to Parliament too .
Parliament is running the risk of needlessly ruining its reputation .
There are amendments which we will table and present tomorrow so that a decision can be taken on them , but two points should allow me to clarify the exact direction that we are heading in .
If at first reading we are already opening the door to exceptions to the 75 % rule for Objective 1 , then we are giving the Council the unequivocal signal to start horse-trading .
The price we will pay is a long list of exceptions , and less money for the regions that really need it .
We cannot suspend basic arithmetic , after all !
If we do not make the cake we are distributing any bigger but more people want a slice , then there is less for those who urgently need it .
The cake that we are distributing is not going to become any bigger because there are more hungry people .
On the other hand , we should not , via the back door , turn the Cohesion Fund into an unlimited instrument for redistributing income to all those Member States which are beneath a certain level of prosperity .
European integration has not quite reached that stage yet .
The Structural Funds are an expression of European solidarity .
The Cohesion Fund must be concentrated on the Member States that are having difficulty in complying with the hard criteria .
I would ask that flexibility ...
( The President cut the speaker off )
Mr President , I shall confine myself to commenting on the Community initiatives , on which Parliament is now to deliver its opinion .
I myself am in favour of reducing the number of initiatives , but I would urge that they be reduced from thirteen to five , which still simplifies matters very considerably .
These would be Interreg , which has a very clear European added value , Leader , which guarantees rural development , and the Community initiatives on combating discrimination in access to the labour market , all of which are excellent .
However , I also regard URBAN as extremely important .
Focusing attention on Objective 2 cities is a good idea , but it is not enough .
Medium-sized cities outside the objective areas should also be given a chance , and this is what URBAN , which has already proved its effectiveness , does .
We all know that urban development and the accumulation of problems in cities has now almost become a global problem .
It is a good idea to focus equal attention on their problems in tandem with the development of rural areas .
Together with Mrs McCarthy , the PPE Group has tabled a compromise amendment on behalf of the Socialist and PPE Groups , which I would urge Parliament to support .
In the amendment , we call for the possibility of creating an instrument at EU level that can be applied flexibly in regions feeling the effects of the rapid changes that industrial processes are currently undergoing .
There are at least three reasons for these changes : firstly , increasing globalisation ; secondly , the dramatic upheaval caused by the information and communication technologies ; and thirdly , enlargement towards Central and Eastern Europe .
We felt we had to table this amendment in order to ensure that we ourselves have the possibility of reacting flexibly .
Moreover , we will shortly be living in euroland , and if there were to be a real crisis , there is currently nothing in the Structural Funds that could help the EU countries to deal with it .
As a consequence of the amendment , I would also , as is only logical , urge that the contribution be raised to 7 % to ensure that funding is not taken away from the other initiatives .
Mr President , I should like to begin by making the point that I believe that in the current phase of the European Union 's development regional policy is perhaps more important than ever before .
One of the encouraging things we have seen over the last few years is the reduction of the gap in wealth between the rich and the poor Member States .
On the other hand we have seen the prosperity gap between Europe 's regions increasing .
That demonstrates very clearly that more than ever before we need a proactive regional policy which ensures that all regions of the European Union benefit from firstly , the single market and , secondly , the establishment of the euro zone .
There are two things I should like to emphasise with regard to the report .
Firstly , there is a consensus between the Commission and Parliament and , I believe , the Council of Ministers , that we need a simplification of the regulations governing the structural funds .
But also there is a crying need for more partnership between everyone who is involved in the process of economic development : the social partners , local authorities or regional government as well as the Commission and central governments .
We need to work much more closely together on identifiable objectives .
The second point concerns the principle of concentration .
There is a strong case to be made for concentration .
We want to make sure that the structural funds have the greatest possible economic impact and therefore we must target the areas of greatest need very carefully .
I would like to refer to one area of identifiable need , my own country , Wales .
There is a reasonable chance now that much of Wales would qualify for Objective I funding .
Certainly the resources would be put to very good use there , based on the principle of concentration and partnership .
Mr President , there have been few times when the various rapporteurs and draftsmen in a committee have worked so much in unison as we have done in the Committee on Fisheries on the reform of the Structural Funds . We were trying to prevent structural actions in the fisheries sector from being left practically to the Commission 's discretion and to neutralise the contradictions and the enormous programming problems that the current proposal presents .
Therefore , as draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Fisheries on the framework regulation , I have proposed the creation of a single legal instrument that would enable us to draw up a regulation on fisheries Structural Funds - the FIFG - which , being horizontal in nature , might bring together all the structural actions involving the fisheries sector , as the Commission itself has already done for the agricultural sector .
This need for a single sectorial legal instrument was easily understood by the various parliamentary committees and the change proposed will - I hope - be incorporated at this first reading .
The fisheries sector does , in fact , need to have access to a series of structural measures that must be the same for the entire sector , regardless of the region in which a particular fisheries enterprise is established .
That is why the legal instrument that embraces them needs to be of a horizontal nature .
This essential horizontal nature is destroyed by the regional planning that the Commission 's proposal establishes for Objective 2 regions .
The result of this will be enormous programming difficulties in the fisheries sector and serious risks of relocation of enterprises , as they will establish themselves in those regions where there are regional programmes or where the regional programmes are more favourable to them .
It was therefore necessary to correct this tendency so that the Member States might have the flexibility needed to establish the most appropriate level of programming for the fisheries sector , regardless of the region concerned .
Commissioner , you have seen that many Members have spoken on the subject of fisheries .
The structural side of the fisheries sector is greatly affected ...
( The President cut the speaker off )
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Commissioners , I think it is now quite clear to both Parliament and the Commission that the Structural Funds must be focused much more than before on the priorities of Community policy , and one of the main priorities for us is equal opportunities between men and women in employment , social policy and regional policy .
The Structural Funds could be quite a trump card in improving equal opportunities , if only this were spelled out in the regulations governing them .
Previously , these regulations referred to equal opportunities , but in such a half-hearted way that often nothing much was actually done in practice .
Women were given attention in training and employment initiatives , but the Member States were far less enthusiastic when it came to infrastructure and regional policy .
I would love to know , in figures , just how much has been spent on female entrepreneurship , social infrastructure , reconciling job and family , and support for women in rural areas .
The Commission has done its best .
It has organised two conferences and supplied information on good practice .
The Council even passed a resolution on the subject in December 1996 , but none of this was enough .
We are therefore particularly pleased that the Commission is making an effort to strengthen the principle of equal opportunities in legislation , and we welcome the twin-track approach it proposes of incorporating equal opportunities right across all the Structural Funds while also devoting special attention to equal opportunities between men and women .
Yet we still think , Commissioners , that greater attention can and must seriously be given to this subject .
I am particularly grateful to the rapporteurs and especially to Karin Jöns for looking very carefully at the questions raised by the Committee on Women 's Rights here .
We want to see improvements in two areas .
Firstly , mainstreaming must have a much higher profile and must be much more quantifiable , in other words equal opportunities must be translated into clear objectives , clear statistics broken down by gender , accurate indicators and detailed evaluations .
Organisations must be able to prove whether and how they have spent money on equal opportunities for women .
Making structural policy work also means involving women more .
This means that women must be included in the monitoring committees , and those responsible for equal opportunities must be involved in all stages of the implementation of the Structural Funds .
Secondly , alongside mainstreaming we also want to see accompanying measures specifically designed to eliminate inequality .
We therefore think that the excellent measures that have only just been launched under the Community initiative should be retained in the new Community initiatives in the future .
Finally , as Karin Jöns said , we insist that 15 % of the Social Fund should be used for equal opportunities .
I have to say that I cannot understand why the PPE Members are opposed to this .
The Commission itself has proposed it , and we all know that special measures are needed .
Mr President , the structural funds have been a great success for Europe in Ireland .
On the whole , the bulk of the funds have been used very well though there have been some instances when European funds were used for projects which threaten to undermine our environment .
However , what a difference a few short months make .
Our government has put together a package which must fail the Eurostat test for structural funds which requires eligible regions to have less than 75 % of average European GDP .
The structural funds for Ireland are in danger of becoming a victim of this particular plan .
We should have put aside party political divisions and established priorities based on need in targeted rural and urban unemployment blackspots .
The plan could have faced the need to integrate immigrants and refugees also .
Instead , its only contribution to future regional planning has been to produce a plan so bizarre that it can only be designed to fail .
We should have put aside party political wrangling .
The Irish Government 's strategy is , at best , a party political deal based on expediency .
At worst it is a cruel attempt to deceive the Irish people .
Proposing at the last moment a plan that must be rejected by Brussels has only one aim : to blame Brussels for its rejection .
I would like to thank both Commissioners present for their own contributions to the success in Ireland .
We have , however , substantial and real underprivileged and underdevelopment , in particular in the west and in parts of Dublin and other urban blackspots .
We have a serious literacy problem .
We need a revised structural fund to tackle these and other problems and a greater political consensus to solve them effectively .
I can only hope that there is sufficient goodwill in the Commission and in this House to ignore the dithering and mismanagement of our government .
( The President cut the speaker off )
Ladies and gentlemen , I have to interrupt the debate at this point .
You must forgive me for being strict , but we had an hour ahead of us and 50 speakers on the list .
The debate is therefore adjourned .
It will be resumed this evening at 9 p.m.
Situation in Central America and EU action
The next item is the statements by the Council and the Commission on the situation in Central America and European Union action .
I give the floor first to Mrs Ferrero-Waldner , President-in-Office of the Council .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , some of the disasters of our times are predictable .
Then we can at least take measures to prevent them or reduce their impact .
But the scale of some other disasters is unpredictable and there is no human means of preventing them .
Hurricane Mitch was that kind of disaster in Central America .
Hurricane Mitch was a Category 5 hurricane .
It was the most violent whirlwind to hit the Caribbean this century .
You all know the consequences , insofar as we can estimate them at all at this stage .
I am grateful to Parliament for proposing that we should discuss this question in the plenary today .
Once again we are facing a situation that is so serious that all the international players must cooperate intensively , coordinate their efforts and mobilise all the available resources .
The effects of Hurricane Mitch call for measures at two levels : firstly at the level of humanitarian emergency aid and , secondly , at the level of long-term reconstruction aid for the countries concerned .
The fact is that the hurricane caused damage that none of the countries concerned , and probably very few countries anyway , could repair by their own efforts alone .
Economic development in these countries appears to have been set back years , perhaps decades .
They cannot tackle the short , medium and long-term effects of this disaster unless the international community provides generous and effective aid .
We are referring to them as the countries concerned , but that is not all they are : they are our direct partners , these countries are our friends and partners in the framework of San José .
We regard the European Union as representing above all a community of values and of solidarity , a Community whose members must show solidarity not only among themselves , but also and in particular with all other states and their inhabitants .
These are not just so many empty words , as shown also by the rapid response of the Member States and Commission departments to the news of this natural disaster .
Following a request by Spain , which the Austrian Presidency was only too happy to endorse , the General Affairs Council began to consider the question of humanitarian aid for the countries concerned at its meeting of 9 and 10 November .
All the delegations welcomed this initiative and the proposal for emergency aid .
An inquiry carried out during that Council meeting showed that the Union as a whole is making ECU 100 million available , of which ECU 70 million comes directly from the Member States and ECU 30 million from Community resources .
I am in constant contact with Commissioner Emma Bonino , who is currently visiting that same crisis-hit region , where she has had contacts with the governments , the international organisations and the non-governmental humanitarian organisations and has also been able to see for herself the scale of the damage and of course of the necessary aid measures .
ECHO will be submitting a further global humanitarian plan so that we can determine the additional funding that is required .
But the amount of resources is not the only important factor ; another is the way in which they are used .
We must prevent hunger , disease and epidemics in the worst-hit areas and guarantee minimum supplies of food , drinking water , medicines and emergency shelter .
The use of the financial aid must be monitored strictly .
The material aid must be distributed as quickly and directly as possible to the suffering people of the region , and for three reasons in my opinion .
Firstly , it is because the humanitarian aid must have as rapid and direct an effect as possible . Secondly , it is because we have an obligation to our taxpayers and contributors , who are entitled to see their contributions used for the right purposes .
Moreover , the best means of preventing aid fatigue is by utilising the aid in an absolutely exact and correct way .
In this context , we must not forget that other regions of world , such as Kosovo but also Bangladesh , are also in great need of humanitarian aid .
The third and last reason is the need to maintain social peace and political stability in the recipient countries .
The poverty and despair among the suffering people , the governments ' failure to manage the crisis , and inadequate , slow and poorly organised aid measures can , as we all know , produce a social powder keg that could easily explode .
The appropriate lessons should therefore be learned from comparable experiences in the recent past .
Misappropriations of financial aid and the resulting social unrest following this kind of natural disaster are , unfortunately , the rule rather than the exception .
At the same time , we must begin even at this stage to think seriously about reconstruction and a development plan .
Here special attention will also have to be given to reafforestation , for instance , since deforestation evidently made the effects of the hurricane even worse .
In Nicaragua , despite the tradition of political polarisation , the disaster appears to have led to a new approach , towards a more pragmatic and consensual policy with regard to the current problems .
It seems inadequate and also illogical to provide humanitarian aid without at the same time cancelling at least a major portion of the debts of the hardest-hit countries , Honduras and Nicaragua , which are also the most heavily indebted countries in the region - the foreign debt of Honduras is 92 % of its GDP , and that of Nicaragua 300 % .
That is why we attach special importance to the trust funds to be set up by the Inter-American Development Bank and the International Monetary Fund with a view to cancelling the multilateral debts of the countries concerned , and we should all support this .
Austria is currently drafting a law to that effect at my initiative .
The aid measures by the international community are now under way .
The share provided by the European Union - the Member States and the Community together - is substantial , and is a reflection in humanitarian terms of the Union 's importance and weight .
Above all , we should show that we have learned from past experience in the conduct of humanitarian actions .
But we will also cooperate closely with the governments concerned , for they now have an opportunity , through reconstruction , to improve their economic and technical structures and also their social , environmental and political structures .
We shall also call on the governments to make the appropriate contributions here .
I have therefore asked for this subject to be placed on the agenda of the next Development Cooperation Council , which I myself will be chairing on 30 November , and expect practical proposals on long-term aid measures to be discussed there .
Thank you for your attention ; I am of course available at any time to answer further questions during the debate .
As you heard from the President-in-Office , Mrs Bonino is currently visiting the disaster area in order to see for herself , and on behalf of the Commission , what the situation is like there .
Clearly , alongside the measures that the presidency has already taken , the Commission felt that priority had to be given to providing emergency aid for the most vulnerable people in the region .
A preliminary detailed assessment indicates that things like food , blankets , medicines and chlorine are urgently needed , as well as cooking utensils and the like .
Pending a more complete analysis , the Commission approved an aid programme of almost ECU 7 million under the emergency procedure provided for in Article 13 of the regulation on humanitarian aid .
We were thus able to make a very timely and substantial contribution to the international aid effort as early as 4 November .
The first aid programme is being carried out by the German and Spanish Red Cross , in cooperation with their sister organisations in the countries affected and 11 European NGOs already working on ECHO projects in the region .
The first phase , in more detail , is as follows : first of all , direct support is being provided via the various national disaster programmes , and major efforts are being made on the ground to coordinate the work of national and international organisations , United Nations bodies , the International Development Bank , the World Bank , USAid and the European Commission , because coordination is the key to ensuring that all the human and financial resources deployed in the region are used as effectively as possible .
There are a number of measures which form part of this and which focus on a regional or sectoral approach , such as the Red Cross 's work to save victims and organise evacuations , help in providing a water supply , measures to protect public health , water purification tablets to prevent epidemics , and so on .
Médecins sans Frontières has been extremely active and is receiving our support .
The international Red Cross federation is being supported in its attempts to restore the very fragile and damaged communication network , which is vital for the distribution of the first emergency aid supplies .
Existing humanitarian aid projects being run by NGOs in the region have been reorganised to provide the most urgently needed aid .
The NGOs were already on the spot and have been able to provide help straight away , and they have reorganised or adapted ECU 3 million worth of projects to deal with the current situation .
The emergency aid under ECHO has come to ECU 10 million up to now , and the total including food aid is some ECU 30 million .
The ECHO workers are now asking for extra funding in order to organise another aid programme , which is likely to be finalised in the next few weeks and which will probably be on the same scale as the previous one .
However , this second phase of emergency aid will also need to include a recovery element in order to prepare for the transition to more structured recovery work and aid for economic reconstruction .
There is just one point I would like to make about the prospects for recovery and reconstruction programmes in the short and medium terms .
Of course , we are still waiting for a detailed analysis of the effects of this terrible natural disaster on the economies of Central America , but there is no doubt that each of the countries involved has suffered enormous structural damage .
The first assessments mainly talk about damage to key sectors like agriculture , roads and supply systems .
The Commission is examining what potential funding could be provided to make an early and substantial contribution to the international reconstruction effort .
Our approach from this point onwards will be as follows . In the short term , in other words in December this year , the Commission will put a funding proposal to the Member States using an urgent procedure , setting out a framework for future action .
The proposal will be based on whatever funding for reconstruction and technical financial cooperation is still left in the 1998 budget .
As soon as access is possible to the areas affected , a multidisciplinary technical evaluation team will be sent there in close coordination with the Member States and with the national authorities and other donors .
The development programmes planned for 1999 will be reviewed and adapted case by case , in close consultation with the beneficiary countries .
Current projects may be strengthened or restructured to help with recovery or reconstruction .
In addition , a strategic approach may require the setting-up of a regional reconstruction fund in the medium term , say , and the Commission could put forward proposals on this subject to the Council after consultations with all the parties involved , including other donors and the governments of the countries affected .
The main problem with this strategy is the rather low level of funding currently provided under the budget line for recovery and reconstruction in Latin America , B7-313 , which at present amounts to only ECU 4.25 million .
Of course , the budgetary authority could take a decision to allocate extra funding to this budget line .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , first I wish to thank the Council and the Commission for the emergency aid .
It is perhaps not always a matter of course in this House for us to thank one another , but I do want to express my open praise for them here .
I am also glad that Mrs Bonino has made the European Union visible in Central America through her presence there .
I have little time and will therefore be brief .
Unfortunately , this will not be the last natural disaster to occur , so I would advise that we consider building up a kind of disaster aid system .
A number of countries in the world actually have a special ministry for disasters , with its own transport capacity , aircraft and perhaps even satellites for predicting natural disasters .
My second point is that longer-term reconstruction aid should be given not only to the states of this region , but also towards the integration of the region .
Now that so much has been destroyed , infrastructure measures , roads , telecommunications , energy networks and so forth can in fact also help to turn this region , inhabited by something over 30 million people , into a common region .
The European Parliament , with the support of the Council and the Commission , has always expressed strong political support for the integration of this region .
My third comment is that we keep saying the aid must be unbureaucratic .
On the other hand , it must be carefully thought through , planned for the long term and as transparent as possible .
That is squaring the circle , I know .
Perhaps we could discuss one day how we really can square the circle , since otherwise we shall be in trouble with the Court of Auditors again .
Mr President , there are of course misfortunes that do not need describing at length and I think that this is true of the tragic case of hurricane Mitch .
It is time to act .
Until now , the Commission has acted promptly and efficiently and such action needs to be acknowledged and considered in a positive light .
Efforts are now needed to set up an ambitious and strategic reconstruction plan .
It is not simply a matter of hoping these things will happen , but of making sure they become a reality .
Mr President , in my opinion , such a plan has to contain several components .
The first component relates to the budgetary dimension , and the response given by the European Union to this situation has to be in line with that of the Member States .
I have to say that I feel particularly proud of how my country , Spain , the Spanish Government and the whole of Spanish society have responded to this situation .
I think that , as an arm of the budgetary authority , the European Parliament must set an example of generosity and flexibility in this budgetary dimension and mobilise as many resources as possible .
The Commission 's representative , Mr van den Broek referred to this a moment ago .
Such a plan also needs to contain a substantial trade component .
For two years , this House has been calling for Central American countries to be included in the Generalised System of Preferences , like the Andean countries , including for industrial products .
This , Madam President-in-Office , needs to be done unconditionally and without delay , because I have to say that the double condition contained in the Commission 's proposal is inadmissable - given the circumstances - as well as being discriminating . What is more , it completely contradicts the philosophy that has inspired such measures .
This plan also needs a credit component and , in my opinion , as part of the plan 's strategy , the Commission should endeavour to propose a whole series of measures that , taking advantage of the scale of this tragedy , are aimed at increasing the European Investment Bank 's credits to this region .
In addition , there obviously needs to be a debt component . It must not be said here that the European Union does not have any competence in this area because , Mr President , it is clear that there is nothing to prevent either the Commission or Parliament from asking the Member States to make clear concessions on the issue of debt .
I would ask , Commissioner , that in addition to the components I have just outlined , the Commission make use of its imagination .
In the fight against misfortune and tragedy , and very often against reality - however hard it may be - , the best weapons , although they may not seem like it , are not the resources that have to be used in an efficient and coordinated manner , as Mrs Ferrero-Waldner pointed out .
Often , the imagination also has an important part to play in such situations .
And , Mr President , I would call on the Presidency of the Council to act by setting in motion the wheels of political dialogue as well as calling an extraordinary meeting of the San José Conference at ministerial level .
I think that this ministerial conference could , to a certain extent , give incentive to the possible conference of donors to which the representative of the Commission , Mr van den Broek , referred in his speech .
I think that it is time to look to the future and view this tragedy as an opportunity to further unite the inhabitants of Central America and encourage them to double their efforts in pursuit of regional integration and greater solidarity .
To sum up , Mr President , I call on the Commission to spare no resources and to mobilise all its efforts .
And you can rest assured , Commissioner , that the Commission - and I would ask you to pass this on to the Commissioner responsible for this policy , Mr Marín - will have the support of this House , because we shall never say of those who are doing all they can , that they are not doing what they should .
Mr President , I just wanted to add a few words to what my colleagues in the Socialist Group and the Group of the European People 's Party have been saying in relation to the urgent action - and subsequent action - that needs to be carried out by the European Union , at both Council and Commission level , in the areas affected by the disaster .
In July , I had the opportunity to visit the countries involved and saw that they had begun a very positive recovery process following the internal wrangles and serious conflicts they had experienced , and I could see that they were genuinely on the road to recovery with a real desire to cooperate .
In a matter of hours , nature , in a most brutal and unfortunate way , destroyed the work of recent years .
I think that from our privileged position in Europe , we must show as much solidarity as possible with the societies and people affected . We must also bear in mind those urgent aspects where , logically , public authorities at all levels - starting with the administration of the European Union , the governments of the Member States , and the other levels of administration within Europe - should be directly involved , together with non-governmental organisations .
I would like to stress that it is essential to review these countries ' debt so that it does not impede their possible recovery . Moreover , as we propose in our joint motion for a resolution , it is also vital to build the foundations for a medium and long-term recovery that will consolidate and restore the process that , as I said , I had the opportunity to see at first hand in July .
Mr President , Hurricane Mitch has devastated Central America , destroying everything in its path .
This would be just another news story if there were not such an immeasurable human drama behind it all which , sadly , will remain a gaping wound for a long time to come .
Throughout history , nature has made its presence felt through extremes , creating natural disasters which unfortunately take place all too often in areas that are already poor .
These disasters add inhumane conditions , grief , desolation , separation , illness and the anguish of the aftermath to economic instability .
As a member of the interparliamentary Delegation for relations with the countries of Central America and Mexico , last May I had the opportunity to visit Honduras with a few colleagues and we were able to see how , even in the capital , Tegucigalpa , the hand held out by the Union was already a lifeline for these populations before the hurricane struck .
Now , we not only have a duty towards them , but a real moral debt , which must take the form of a long-term commitment .
The international community as a whole has immediately lent a hand , and its spontaneity is not all as it has also provided supplies , clothing , means of transport , water filters , medicines and mobile hospitals . Like my colleague , I am proud to be French .
And although , of course , I fully support the value of the emergency aid provided to these countries and pay tribute to the men and women in the field who are making every effort to reconstruct basic infrastructures to support a population which has absolutely nothing , I believe that the worst we could do would be to forget them after this emergency aid .
After this united effort , the world 's rich nations , together with the governments of these countries , must draw up a plan for rebuilding this area and go beyond cancelling debts .
However , we must not make the mistake of making decisions for them , as I believe that the chance to support the development of democracy in these countries has been presented to us on a plate .
Alongside these plans we should introduce close dialogue with these governments , but also with the populations and organisations of these countries , to whom we must give the means to play a role in their own reconstruction .
Mr President , I completely agree with the President-in-Office of the Council , Mrs Ferrero-Waldner , when she said that the hurricane had been very strong and devastating because it was classed as a level 5 hurricane .
However , we must also bear in mind - and I think that many non-governmental organisations are highlighting this fact - that if there had been housing in this area that was not substandard , a civic network that could have predicted what could happen and , in short , if there had been greater consolidation of human rights in that area , the hurricane would not have been as devastating .
And I agree with many of the issues raised here by Mr Salafranca and Mr Linkhor in relation to generalised preferences for these countries .
However , in the short time I have left , I shall inform you of what was said to us by some Members and certain Central American organisations at a seminar held last week in Brussels .
Their main concerns are the following .
First , they believe that in this case we need to review the cooperation agreements and , as other Members have said , adapt them to the medium and long term to help recovery in the area .
Second , there needs to be a way to ensure that aid reaches those affected .
Unfortunately , this has not always been the case in the past .
Third , the distribution of aid has to take the town councils into consideration .
There are small councils that are facing many difficulties but lack resources to deal effectively with these problems .
Fourth , a call must be made to have these countries ' debt written off . We are all aware that it amounts to 300 % of gross domestic product in Nicaragua , but it is equally high in other countries .
Fifth , it is essential that a debt write-off does not serve to alleviate the governments ' concerns , but those of the people .
This is why the total amount of debt should be earmarked for specific recovery projects in the area .
I also feel proud , as Mr Salafranca said , not only of the response of the Spanish Government but , more particularly , that of the Spanish nation .
It has shown a great sense of solidarity .
But that is for now .
We shall see what happens in January and February . We all need to continue acting beyond this emotional period surrounding the events in Central America .
Mr President , a disaster on this scale calls for reactions going far beyond those of the past .
Thousands of people have died or lost everything , in part also because no precautions were taken as the hurricane roared towards them , because the poorest people have to live in the unsafest areas , because whole swathes of land were deforested for industrial agriculture .
Central America has been devastated ; it will take decades to reconstruct .
But if this reconstruction is to work , these countries do not just need effective handouts of aid packages .
They need a far-sighted reconstruction plan to be drawn up , not a patchwork of gift packages which , as we have seen in the past , seep away into dubious or government-chosen channels .
Well-coordinated reconstruction must be aimed primarily at improving the condition of the population .
Top priority must be given to health , education and housing , as well as far-reaching agricultural reform .
The people concerned must have a say and a right of control here .
Central America needs total , bilateral debt cancellation . France is setting a good example here .
The other EU countries should follow suit as quickly as possible .
But it is not just a question of writing off debts that can in any case no longer be recovered .
The multilateral debts must also be cancelled .
The IMF and the World Bank will help out with loans , but these must not be tied to structural adjustment measures .
The European governments should therefore make real use of their influence at the IMF and the World Bank to make sure the loans are not conditional .
According to today 's ' Guardian ' , the prospects for Chiquita are rosy .
The banana multinationals will make the insurance companies pay for the reconstruction of their plant , while their workers are left on the streets .
The multinationals , for instance those in Honduras that have not paid taxes for years , are trying to evade their responsibility .
The devastation caused by a hurricane is not just the result of a force of nature descending on mankind .
The destruction of the ozone layer , the thoughtless wastage of natural resources and the reckless poisoning of the environment play their part in the disaster .
And this will not be the last one , unless the industrialised countries engage in a process of radical rethinking .
Mr President , with each day that passes and as people begin to assess the human toll and material damage caused by hurricane Mitch , the true scale of the disaster is gradually emerging .
On this occasion , nature has not been kind to the countries of Central America , but we should remember - as Parliament has - that it was the hand of man and his negligence that has caused climate change to unleash natural disasters such as this .
We must all be aware - particularly industrialised countries - that if we do not radically change our behaviour , other hurricanes will follow hurricane Mitch with similar and devastating effects .
In Central America , ladies and gentlemen , as is almost always the case , the weakest have lost the most .
It is therefore our unavoidable duty to ensure that aid is distributed in the most efficient , effective and coordinated way possible so that it reaches , above all , those who need it most and so that it does not become a source of corruption as has unfortunately been the case in other similar situations .
Lastly , we would like to publicly welcome the excellent displays of solidarity that have been made by the citizens of Europe individually and by the institutions that represent them , particularly the European institutions .
We must welcome the rapid response that has been given to a situation that required immediate solutions .
On many occasions , we have complained about the bureaucratic red tape that has delayed Europe 's response to such situations , but today we can thank it for responding so promptly .
Now all that is needed is for this action to be supplemented by totally writing off the debts of the countries concerned .
Mr President , we have been shocked to see the devastation in Central America .
When the forces of nature wreak havoc in this way , leaving behind a trail of destruction , death and injury , we cannot help but feel completely powerless .
Even in today 's modern society with all its technical expertise , nature can still take us by surprise , though in this case it was not a total surprise in that we knew Hurricane Mitch was on its way shortly before it arrived .
The impact of the hurricane was bound to be hard , but the scale of the disaster was increased by the type of region affected .
Poor farmers had been driven out by large landowners to farm on higher mountain slopes , with disastrous consequences .
The hurricane was unleashed on the deforested slopes and washed everything away in a destructive river of mud .
However , the most important thing at the moment is to ensure that adequate help is provided .
A great deal has already been done by countries all over the world , including in Europe .
The example set by France and the Netherlands in writing off debts should be followed by the other EU countries , and the same applies to the rescheduling of debt repayments by the financial institutions and the international financial organisations .
In the longer term , a socially and ecologically responsible programme needs to be set up to help farmers and to restore the environment .
The major landowners must cooperate in genuinely sustainable development , including appropriate measures to combat erosion , and it would be advisable to involve the NGOs here .
Mr President , I want to speak on debt rescheduling to revive the economies of the countries struck by the catastrophe .
The countries cannot all be measured by the same yardstick : Guatemala and El Salvador seem to be richer countries than Nicaragua and Honduras , or at least less poor .
When the criterion for debt remission is established , the actual difference between national incomes might favour differential treatment depending on the economic and financial situation of the country involved .
In this way , the clauses agreed at Naples on the fringe of the 1993 G7 meeting , which provided for 66 % debt remission , could be applied to the less disadvantaged countries , while the G7 Lyons Agreement of 1996 could be applied to the most disadvantaged : remission of up to 80 % of debt .
In Nicaragua , as in Honduras , the already difficult economic situation is now expected to get worse , with damaging repercussions on a poverty threshold calculated today at 60 % of the population , and increases in rates of unemployment which currently stand at 53 % in Nicaragua and 30 % in Honduras .
Mr President , the rapid reaction from the Community institutions and civil society is a sign that we have got off on the right foot .
But it is only a start ; everything else is still to be done and Parliament eagerly awaits Commissioner Bonino 's report and the proposals she is going to suggest to us .
In fact , the catastrophe in Central America is not just a natural and a human catastrophe , it is also , and above all , a political catastrophe .
All these years we have been thinking in terms of political unity for Central America in the hope of bringing peace to the region in the face of the wars which have torn it apart , and now there is the possibility of a new social breakdown .
We have supported Parlacen , the parliament of Central America .
We have always thought in terms of regional interdependence .
Well , now we must try to reproduce that interdependence in the proposed second stage of our intervention .
We must think in terms of interdependence in relation to the plan to combat the mass unemployment which has immediately resulted , the infrastructure plan , the financial plan - where the problem of bilateral and multilateral debt remission arises both for the countries affected and for the international organisations - and above all in relation to multilateral cooperation between the donor countries .
This must of course operate , as Mr Salafranca just said , in association with the San José Conference , but must definitely involve the continuous presence of the Union and not just at this emergency stage .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would also like to convey my sincere sympathy and dismay to those who live in the countries of Central America .
I shall continue in German .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , we have heard it many times .
The scale of the disaster is enormous and there has been nothing like it ever before , at least not in this region .
So we really must all try to make our support as good and comprehensive as possible .
There must be no taboos here .
I have already said this at a meeting of our delegation .
Parliament and the Council must jointly and rapidly consider how to release the necessary budget funds .
The funds allocated so far can only be a first step , since we shall be needing a great deal of money for reconstruction for many years to come .
Nicaragua and Honduras were in any case two of the poorest countries in the world , and now they are even poorer .
So we need a great deal of money and we will have to take a very unconventional approach here .
That is why I would like to repeat the proposal I made during the delegation meeting : we must seriously consider whether European Development Fund money could not be made available for this disaster because of their particularly difficult situation .
Of course Honduras and Nicaragua are not ACP states , but we have to take an unconventional approach here .
If some of the ACP states do not utilise the funds earmarked for them , perhaps these funds should be made available for disaster and reconstruction aid .
In the long term , I believe these countries will have to become members of the Lomé Convention , because how can we in fact justify withholding the Lomé preferences and financial resources from these countries , which are the poorest in the world and now becoming even poorer ?
We cannot justify it at all .
If we want to be really honest , we really will have to do everything in our power .
That is part of it .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the situation in Central America is devastating : 12 000 people are dead , 18 000 missing .
In Honduras , 90 % of the banana harvest has been ruined and 70 % of the roads are destroyed .
A majority of Central American states have seen their development set back by years .
The European Union aid is vital , not least as a means of preventing the threat of an escalation of the political situation in Nicaragua .
The call for resources to be used to maximum effect in the motion for a resolution is of course welcome .
Besides the humanitarian aspects , which we all support in this House and where we strongly encourage the Commission to continue its activities , let me address a further aspect , following on from what Mr Kreissl-Dörfler said .
Many experts believe that the high level of greenhouse gas emissions is one of the main causes of this environmental disaster .
In these circumstances , I cannot understand why the adoption of rules on reducing greenhouse gases was postponed for another two years at the climate conference in Buenos Aires .
I believe that it is essential , precisely in view of this kind of natural disaster , for the Union to give firm support to a rapid , worldwide reduction of CO2 emissions .
Mr President , I would like to thank the Commission and the Council for their presence .
In Central America , more than one generation will go by before the consequences of hurricane Mitch are fully overcome . This infernal hurricane has left a fateful mark that is far greater than was originally imagined .
The area affected has been set back several decades and its efforts to heal the deep wounds of its most recent past have been undone .
The countries affected are aware of the reality of their situation : they have only a minimum response capability and State structures that are too weak to cope with the damage .
We are seeing societies that , resigned to their fate , refuse , in spite of everything that has happened , to lose even hope in the face of these tragedies that affect them from time to time , as though they were some sort of collective Sisyphus watching his work being undone , just as he was about to complete it .
My sincere congratulations go to the Commission for responding immediately - mainly in the form of humanitarian aid - and also to the Member States for acting with equal speed .
Our societies - and I know this has been the case in Spain - have shown solidarity and generosity , and in some cases have even surpassed government responses . However , the measures taken until now , though quite substantial , will not be enough .
Governments need to solve the problem of these countries ' debt through an act of strict justice , as a useful tool to cooperate in kick-starting their economies .
I would like my government , the Spanish Government , to write off the debt of these countries and for all the Member States to follow suit so that it can be used for physical , medical , educational or environmental infrastructures .
As has been said , a regional aid and reconstruction plan will be necessary and should be launched in January or February . The institutions of the European Union will undoubtedly have to make their financial and budgetary mechanisms more flexible in order to support this plan .
The tragedy of pain and death was caused by the hurricane and it is up to all of us to alleviate its consequences and help build a future for the people .
Mr President , as a vice-chairman of the PPE Group , with responsibility for relations with Latin America , I would briefly like to express the feelings of solidarity our group shares with the victims of the tragedy , as well as our delight at seeing that this popular and official sentiment of solidarity has been so strong .
I would also like to say how pleased we are at the speed with which Parliament 's Delegation for relations with Central America and Mexico met , at the request of Mr Salafranca , and with the large number of Members that attended this extraordinary meeting along with the Vice-President of the Commission , Mr Marín , and Commissioner Bonino .
Finally , we must welcome the huge amount of aid generated in Europe , not by each state on its own , but by all of them together .
Perhaps this aid may be symbolised by the visits to the area by the Prince of Spain , Don Felipe de Borbón , President Chirac and Commissioner Bonino .
These three names perhaps best reflect the European aid given , aid that will certainly not be lacking in the future .
Mr President , the countries of Central America which were devastated by hurricane Mitch were already seriously afflicted by the aftermath of years of civil war .
In all of them high rates of illiteracy , grinding poverty and the crushing burden of international debt were endemic , as those of us who have visited the area have seen .
Now hit by the most deadly storm of the century , innumerable villages , shanty towns , bridges and roads have been swept away , crops destroyed , farm stock decimated , supplies of water eliminated , and many thousands are dead .
The European Union and all who have sent emergency aid are worthy of the highest praise .
The steps taken to relieve the burden of debt are also of vital importance .
It will , however , take years to rebuild the economies of these countries which were , in any case , desperately poor .
We need to face the fact that there is a pressing need not merely for a moratorium on debt servicing but also for debt cancellation .
Honduras and Nicaragua will never be able to repay the interest on what they owe and postponing their liabilities is not enough .
Furthermore , medium- and long-term development aid must not be allowed to be cut back , particularly for social needs .
In land ownership there are all sorts of problems over tenure .
The need for land reform is more pressing than ever .
The European Union has long been deeply concerned with Central America , for instance through the San José process .
We must redouble our efforts to help .
The Council , the Commission and Parliament should facilitate the use of unspent funds in our budget for relief .
The disaster also reminds us of the need for far-reaching international action to limit environmental damage from climatic change , which will otherwise cause ever more frequent catastrophes , some even worse than the one we are talking about this evening .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , may I briefly respond ?
Firstly , I am very grateful for the support expressed in the various statements made , and also for the many suggestions and ideas put forward by Parliament , which will certainly prompt me to review these matters again at the Development Cooperation Council on 30 November .
In summary , let me say the following : the main issue is the coordination of the humanitarian aid - and also of the reconstruction and development aid - and here we will first have to achieve coordination between the partners , a task which the presidency intends to tackle mainly on the ground .
Secondly , it is of course very important to consider the debt clearance question .
This too has already been discussed in the General Affairs Council .
We shall be devoting great attention to this issue at the Development Cooperation Council , but of course preparations are also under way for a donor conference .
A donor conference is to be held in Washington on 10 and 11 December .
There it will also be determined , under the aegis of the Inter-American Development Bank , what amounts can still be demanded .
Another conference has now been scheduled for March , in Stockholm , which will focus on long-term reconstruction .
As regards the debts , we must of course distinguish very clearly between bilateral debts - development loans on the one hand and export credits on the other - and multilateral debts , in particular the HIPC initiative which is indeed seeking either the creation of a new fund , which the presidency will of course support and encourage , or drawing on existing World Bank funds , which we will also support .
For the rest , everything I said earlier has been discussed during the debate .
Perhaps just a word on the climate convention : we all know that the European Union is , of course , making headway here , but that it is not easy to bring all the other major players on board too .
Speaking for myself and also on behalf of the Commission and Emma Bonino and Manolo Marín , who could not be here but who would certainly have been delighted to take part in this debate , I would like to thank you for the tremendous unanimity of feeling and solidarity that you have all shown towards this terrible natural disaster that has befallen so many people and countries in Central America .
I would just like to look briefly at a few of the points that were made , including the speech by Mr Salafranca .
It is true that the Commission has no powers when it comes to the debt problem , but listening to what the presidency had to say , I think that it must be clear to everyone that our efforts cannot stop at humanitarian aid , and that the international community must also do something in the present circumstances to ease the terrible debt burden or even , if possible , to write it off .

Secondly , Mr Salafranca referred earlier to the San José dialogue , which I still remember from much further back with the Contadora process and so on .
I imagine , and I am sure that this goes for Mr Marín and probably also the presidency too , that once the situation in Central America has become a little clearer and financial decisions have been taken and a reconstruction programme has started , we will certainly begin talks between the European Union and the countries of Central America within the San José framework .
This would seem to me to be an extremely constructive approach .
Thank you , Mr van den Broek .
I have received a motion for a resolution to wind up the debate .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow .
Developments in Middle East peace process
The next item is the statements by the Council and the Commission on developments in the Middle East peace process .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the European Union has always underlined the need for a comprehensive , just and lasting peace settlement in the Middle East .
The foundations for this are contained in the relevant United Nations Security Council resolutions and elsewhere .
In this context , we should note that all the states of the Middle East region have a right to live within secure , internationally recognised borders , but also that the Palestinian people have the right to self-determination , and that here no option should be excluded .
The Union has therefore fully endorsed the content of the Madrid and Oslo accords which set the current Middle East peace process in motion .
Since early 1997 , however , we have been witnessing the dangerous standstill of this development with growing concern .
The United States and the European Union reacted to this difficult situation by making even greater mediation efforts , during which the EU special envoy in the Middle East , Miguel Moratinos , repeatedly put proposals to the conflicting parties on ways of bridging their differences .
On 23 October this year , after difficult negotiations between Prime Minister Netanyahu and President Arafat , an agreement was finally reached at Wye Plantation near Washington , largely thanks to the efforts of the United States and President Clinton , but in which King Hussein also played a crucial role .
This agreement was meant to signal the long-awaited breakthrough and set the peace process in motion again , after it had been at a standstill for more than a year and a half .
In signing it , the parties to the conflict revived the Oslo process by withdrawing further Israeli troops from the West Bank in return for comprehensive Palestinian security guarantees .
Both sides agreed that they would rapidly begin negotiations on the final status and refrain from unilateral measures .
With its commitment to achieving an agreement , the USA has assumed the role of arbitrator and also of guarantor .
Given the present lack of trust between the contracting parties , the Wye Memorandum may , however , very easily be at risk .
So under these circumstances , we consider it most important for both sides to refrain from any unilateral action that could prejudice the outcome of the final status negotiations .
At the same time , it is a remarkable and positive sign that the current Israeli Government has for the first time openly accepted the ' land for peace ' principle by signing that agreement .
The European Union has firmly endorsed the breakthrough achieved at Wye Plantation , while also pointing out that its success or failure will depend on the speed at which the accord is implemented .
So yesterday 's ratification of the agreement by the Israeli Parliament is a very important step in that direction .
The European Union will support the implementation of the Wye Memorandum in all areas where it can make a constructive and further contribution .
This relates in particular to aspects of the Israeli-Palestinian interim agreement , such as opening the airport and building the Gaza port and safe road links between the West Bank and the Gaza Strip .
The European Union is currently conducting an anti-terrorism support programme for the Palestinians , and is preparing another small programme of the same nature within the EU-Palestinian security committee .
Independently of the progress made in implementing the Wye Memorandum , the first five-year tranche of EU aid for the Palestinians will expire at the end of this year .
The USA has convened another donor conference at ministerial level in Washington on 30 November 1998 , in order to assure continued support for the Palestinians .
The EU has already taken a decision of principle to maintain its high-level support for the Palestinian people for a further five-year period .
The Austrian Foreign Minister , Dr Wolfgang Schüssel , visited the Middle East region from 12 to 15 November in his capacity of EU President-in-Office of the Council , accompanied by Miguel Moratinos , the special envoy , and a European Commission representative .
He visited Jordan , Israel , the Palestinian areas , Syria , Lebanon and Egypt , where he held political talks .
The purpose of the mission was to seek means of actively involving the European Union in the implementation of the Wye Plantation agreement .
The period immediately after the signature of that agreement was a propitious moment for this visit .
The talks with all the regional parties were very open and substantive . It was found that all the parties concerned valued the role played by the European Union in the peace process , and that many people hoped Europe would show even greater commitment towards it , not least of course through the intermediary of the EU special envoy , Mr Moratinos .
Israel , however , wished for this commitment to apply only to practical areas of cooperation and not , as it made quite plain , to political questions .
There remains considerable domestic policy resistance among both the Israelis and the Palestinians to the implementation of the Wye Memorandum .
Israel seems to be as inflexible as ever on the question of Jerusalem , the security zones around Jerusalem and in the Jordan Valley , and the expansion of existing settlements .
Israel did , however , signal its willingness to cooperate with the Arab side on the questions of water and infrastructure - for instance railway construction .
Many of the interlocutors in Egypt , Syria and Lebanon expressed scepticism about the Wye Memorandum and the willingness of Israel to implement it .
There was clear evidence of a certain pessimism among the Palestinians .
Israel was particularly keen to see the rapid resumption of the multilateral components of the peace process , while the Arab representatives were against this so long as the Wye agreement has not been implemented and the peace talks at Syrian-Lebanese level have not been resumed .
In the light of the new developments initiated by the Wye Plantation agreement and the impressions gained from the Middle East mission of the President-in-Office of the Council , we have now identified a number of urgent tasks that need to be addressed and opportunities that need to be taken in order to support peace and enhance the European presence in this region , in terms of the Middle East peace process .
For example , it seems urgently necessary for the EU to establish a common position for the forthcoming donor conference in Washington on 30 November to which I have referred , so that the Union can take a firm stance there .
Since Europe provides some 60 % of the economic aid to the Palestinians , the Europeans must have a very substantial say at this meeting , which we must use to assert our position .
It would seem a very good idea to hold a quadrilateral meeting between the European Union , the USA , Israel and the Palestinians , since that would give strong impetus to raising the question of support measures during the talks on final status .
Support measures relating to water , refugees and infrastructure could then be discussed .
It would also be valuable to set up a bilateral European Union-Israel working party to consider regional questions and projects relating to water .
The Union should also make greater efforts now to reactivate the Syrian-Lebanese negotiating route , and the EU special envoy Mr Moratinos will continue his efforts in that respect .
On 7 December , the Austrian Foreign Minister and President-in-Office of the Council , Mr Schüssel , will report to the General Affairs Council on his mission to the Middle East and use that occasion to submit further , concrete proposals on how the EU can play a more effective role in the Middle East peace process .
During this unusually difficult and complex process , it is particularly important that we do not allow ourselves to be deterred by the constant setbacks .
We must initiate , coordinate and support extremely comprehensive and concrete cooperation measures at political level and in all other areas .
In that way , we can contribute to building confidence , to defusing existing and potential conflicts and preventing the entire process from coming to a standstill , because such a standstill could herald the beginning of a new spiral of violence and confrontation in the Middle East , which it is also in our own , immediate interest to prevent .
Mr President , Madam President-in-Office , thank you for your report .
There are indeed few promising signs .
Those that do exist should however be recognised , such as the ratification by the Knesset yesterday .
We must admit that steps were taken in this case , despite the bomb attack , whereas in the past the Israeli Government and Parliament always used such events as a reason not to take any steps towards peace .
On the other hand , however , Israel has tied that decision to certain conditions , and then there is the government action regarding Jerusalem , in particular Har Homa .
Let me state here even more clearly and plainly than the President-in-Office can perhaps put it : for us in Europe , for my group at least , it is quite unacceptable for the Israeli Government to keep trying to incorporate the whole of Jerusalem into Israeli national territory .
Israel must show more respect here , towards the Palestinians and of course also towards the religions practised on an international basis there .
My second point is that I believe it is most important - and I have some information to the effect that the Arabs and Palestinians take the same view - for the European Union also to carry out some form of monitoring of the implementation of the Wye Plantation agreement .
We must strive towards that , and we need exact information about what is happening .
In the same way as settlement is being monitored , we now need to monitor effective withdrawal ; that is what my group is calling for .
I fully endorse what the President-in-Office said about investment , which we wish to support and indeed have to support .
Parliament is also prepared to do so .
Even if we are only talking about small sums , I would now call on the Commissioner to carry this forward , so that we can also give adequate and prompt support to the Israeli and Palestinian NGOs which are doing good work , across the borders and in particular through people-to-people initiatives .
I would ask the Commissioner and the Commission representatives to please consider how long the various organisations have to wait between the authorising of funds and the actual financing !
That is quite unacceptable !
My final and very important point is this . As we can see from the calendar , it is not long till 4 May 1999 .
However much my group fully recognises the right of the Palestinians to unilaterally declare independence if the appropriate agreements cannot be reached with Israel , we should nevertheless strive all the more to ensure that agreements are reached , either agreements on independence or agreements on postponing that deadline , if Israel accepts the principle that there will be a Palestinian state .
The European Union must endeavour in the immediate future to ensure that this date , 4 May 1999 , does not signal the beginning of a new crisis , but that we have a joint declaration on independence by that date or , in the event that the deadline is postponed , that interim agreements are reached and the Israeli Government fully recognises the principle of a Palestinian state .
Mr President , I would like to thank the Commissioner and the President- in-Office of the Council for their statements .
I rise today with a certain diffidence because I was hoping , as I am sure many colleagues were hoping , that we would be much further down the track of reaching peace in the Middle East .
Whilst one welcomes the statements of Yassir Arafat that he has no intention of using violence to achieve his ends , one does see a continuation of violence .
We must also recognise that there has been a certain courage shown by Yassir Arafat in arresting some of the leaders of Hamas .
That is to be greatly welcomed by this House and a great step forward .
I am also glad that the Knesset has approved the Wye Accord and that we can move forward hopefully to see some greater security within that agreement .
But the final status talks are really the most important we have to face .
It is of the utmost importance - and I agree with Mr Swoboda - that the beginning of May is going to be a turning point .
If UDI were the result of the lack of a peace process and a peace agreement in the final status talks , that would be a disaster for everybody involved .
We have to strive very hard to ensure that does not happen .
Unfortunately we are still seeing a certain amount of confrontation on both sides .
I hope we can involve Syria , Jordan , Egypt and Lebanon to make sure that we begin to see a stop to this horrible confrontation .
That is where we must try to achieve our results .
Implementation of the existing agreements is vital .
The resolution which Parliament is going to adopt tomorrow emphasises this .
We must go back to the Oslo Agreements and hopefully , as we can now see movement as a result of Wye , we can get back to these agreements without delay .
Fresh impetus should therefore come as a result of the Wye Accord and that is what we must all try and achieve .
I believe Israel always intends to discuss more with the United States than with the European Union .
That is a tragedy .
We get the reputation of only looking after the interests of the Palestinians .
We must try to overcome that perception with the Israeli Government and point out that we are dealing evenly with both sides of this argument and not taking sides at all .
Mr President , the Liberal Group is delighted with the Wye Accord , and the Clinton administration deserves great praise for its efforts .
At long last we once again have some good news about the Middle East , though if we are honest it is still a rare event .
Since Mr Netanyahu became prime minister the peace process has , honestly speaking , been in terminal decline , and it was only thanks to considerable American pressure that an agreement was reached .
I agree with Mr Provan that America tends to play a pro-Israeli role and we a pro-Palestinian , yet it was America that talked the Israelis round , or so it appears .
We also welcome the fact that the Israeli Government has finally reluctantly agreed to hand back an extra 13 % and that the Palestinians have agreed to cooperate with the Americans on security guarantees .
The terrible attacks that took place afterwards show that Israel 's security demands are perfectly legitimate .
If we fail to accommodate them , there will never be peace .
Human rights organisations have rightly pointed out that maintaining law and order must not be allowed to lead to large-scale human rights violations which would have negative consequences for both sides .
Since the developments on 23 October , it is clear that constant external pressure is needed to keep the peace process on track .
The statements made by President Arafat and Mr Sharon have merely poured oil on the flames , and the extra conditions demanded out of the blue by Mr Netanyahu were , even for us Liberals , unacceptable and unpalatable .
The decision to give the go-ahead for the construction of more houses in Har Homa and Hebron was another wrong signal , and undermines the mutual trust that is essential for lasting peace .
I would like to ask the Commission what is happening about the Palestinian airport and seaport ?
Can he also tell us what the situation is with the hospital in Gaza that was built with European funding ?
And is there any truth in the rumours that Brussels bureaucracy is delaying the opening of the hospital ?
I must apologise for asking these two questions so abruptly , but we want to see peace and we want to see justice .
Mr President , there has been a war of words in the Middle East over the last few days , a war of words between the Israelis and the Palestinians that was supposed to lead to peace .
In my opinion , this is one area of the world where deeds are what count , and looking beyond all the words and rules , I think that we really are coming closer to compliance with the Wye Accord .
I welcome the fact that the European Parliament is making another critical but supportive contribution here today in a special debate on the subject .
I congratulate the Members of the Israeli Knesset for voting by a majority to support the Wye Accord .
The Palestinians too have shown great commitment , as we have all seen , and this must eventually be rewarded .
I hope that in December , when the Palestinian national assembly meets in Gaza , they will finally remove the paragraph on the destruction of Israel from their charter once and for all .
Plans for a port and an airport in Gaza are back on the cards , but I gather that the airport has come up against certain technical problems .
I was there recently and I saw that the buildings were finished , but there were no technical installations .
Can the President-in-Office or the Commissioner tell us what the problems are ?
The EU plays a vital economic and financial role in the Middle East which is likely to grow in importance .
The resolutions mention specific areas where we can provide support , and I entirely agree with these .
As vice-chairman of the Subcommittee on Human Rights , I would draw your particular attention to peace education and to the citizens ' programmes which are designed to foster mutual understanding between the Israelis and the Palestinians .
Our enormous financial and psychological commitment to the Middle East is certain to increase our influence in the region .
My group has no problem with the proposal put forward in paragraph 12 of the resolution that the EU should take on the role of monitor and , if necessary , arbitrator , but the resolution then goes further and starts to concern itself with the final status of the peace agreements , which I think is particularly confusing , because this is something that the United States partly dealt with in the Wye Accord .
The President-in-Office indicated that Israel would prefer us not to interfere here , but would be glad to see us play a stronger economic role .
This is perfectly understandable , since a country whose existence has always been under threat would obviously prefer not to let it depend on a partner that does not have a uniform foreign policy .
It cannot afford to do so , particularly while it still does not have peace agreements with Lebanon and Syria .
Mr President , the peace process may be moving slowly , but progress is being made .
Mr President , it is to the credit of the Wye Plantation accords that they have reignited a peace process which we may have feared dead and buried .
Of course , the accords are limited as the majority of Palestinian territories are still occupied .
They also contain negative aspects , such as the role bestowed upon the CIA .
Yet in spite of this , the agreements constitute a step forward .
Of course , provided that they are implemented , they will be able to bring positive changes to the lives of thousands of Palestinians and allow hundreds of prisoners to be freed .
The Knesset 's agreement is a positive sign .
Unfortunately , many extremists are fast constructing obstacles .
The Israeli Government itself is relaunching a provocative strategy for fresh colonisation .
This is not in the interests of peace , nor is it in the interests of the Israeli people .
Once again , this peace process is in danger of being compromised .
The European Union must show proof of a firm stance and use the means available to take effective action to implement these agreements and to work on stopping anything that may go against them .
The Wye Plantation agreement cannot be seen as a finishing line but rather as a starting block leading to a peaceful and lasting settlement which respects the right of the Palestinians to their own land , in the spirit of the Oslo accords .
Mr President , Madam President-in-Office , it gives me great personal pleasure to congratulate the members of the Knesset , on behalf of my group , on their successful adoption of the Wye Mills Memorandum between Prime Minister Netanyahu and President Arafat of the Palestinian Autonomous Authority .
That agreement makes it clear that the Oslo accord , which has constantly been violated , and the process it initiated are irreversible .
At the same time , I must of course express to the people of Israel , its parliament and its government our deep concern and sympathy following the recent terrorist attacks .
I do so in the awareness that the peace process in the Middle East is not just a question of foreign policy and the European Union 's association agreements , however important both aspects are , especially in the context of the Barcelona programme .
The peace process in the Middle East is a key question of our political and religious culture .
We must decide how long we are to allow terrorists and fundamentalists on both sides to succeed in imposing their agenda on the civilised world , by reversing a fundamental tenet of Jewish , Christian and Islamic tradition , namely the commandment : thou shalt not kill !
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , this is another fresh start for a new stage in the race for peace in the Middle East .
Hope , like the phoenix , has risen from the ashes , and yet the truth is that the main characters involved are hardly enthusiastic .
We cannot say that they are welcoming each other with open arms .
Urged by the President of the United States and already rejected by more than half its parliamentary majority , the Israeli Government is moving forward but dragging its feet .
For its part , the Palestinian delegation , tired of having been deceived too many times and of being taken for a ride , no longer believes in the merits of dialogue .
Nevertheless , the commitments made will actually have to be respected .
The attacks and murders on all sides must stop , extremist settlers must no longer be urged to take provocative actions , deaths must cease and people must be prepared to look at , listen to and respect one another .
We in Parliament must launch an appeal to our counterparts in the Knesset and the Legislative Council , above and beyond the Israeli Government and the authorities .
Through our counterparts we must launch an appeal to the Israeli people , heirs of those who brought unprecedented and unequalled messages of knowledge and spirituality to the whole world . We must launch an appeal to the Palestinian people , where Christians and Muslims come together in the melting pot of a nation that is being born and whose birth is particularly painful .
We must tell them not to be afraid , not to fear their neighbours or the world that is following their progress .
Europe , although unfortunately still not involved in the diplomatic progress , is nonetheless very active and very much part of the construction of this country ; this Europe is their brother and wants them as its new-born partners .
Mr President , Madam President-in-Office , Commissioner , in the Book of Psalms , King David says in the 122nd psalm ' Pray for the peace of Jerusalem ' .
Even though he wrote that thousands of years ago , his appeal is still extremely topical .
Time and time again , peace accords seem to break down because of mutual suspicion and the breaking of agreements by both sides .
Even after the Wye Accord recently concluded between Mr Netanyahu and Mr Arafat , peace in Israel seems further away than ever .
This week violent conflict broke out again , with both parties perhaps rightly accusing each other of breaking agreements .
Fortunately the Knesset approved the accord yesterday evening , but sadly this does not yet bring peace within reach .
On the contrary , once it has been approved by the Israeli Parliament , the accord still has to be implemented in practice , and this is only part of the problem , because first and foremost confidence needs to be restored between the two peoples , and no agreement can achieve that .
The basic conditions for lasting peace in the Middle East are , in my view , the establishment of secure and recognised borders for Israel and recognition for the Palestinian nation 's right to self-determination .
Only when the Arab countries enter into full diplomatic relations with Israel can a lasting peace settlement be reached .
The European Union must show political restraint here and coordinate any action it takes with the United States .
There is always a risk of terrorist attack with any peace negotiations , as we saw last week at a market in Jerusalem .
Terrorism is the greatest threat to a lasting peace settlement and must be countered by international agreements , strict border controls and measures to combat poverty .
European Union aid should be targeted on this , and it should also be an important consideration in any trade agreements that are concluded .
Support from the European Union must foster strong economic cooperation in areas such as water supply , infrastructure , tourism and security .
Finally , the countries of the Middle East must take the agreements seriously , as this is the only way that progress will be made .
Outsiders must show restraint , including the European Council and the European Parliament .
If the peace talks are to go smoothly , the European Parliament should not interfere .
It can no longer act as a neutral mediator , since it has openly sided with the Palestinians in the past .
It is counter-productive to blame one of the two parties when both have clearly made mistakes .
At the start of my speech , I quoted the Bible 's call to pray for the peace of Jerusalem .
The original text says ' shalom ' , which has many connotations including the good or well-being of the city .
Let us make this well-being our objective in our policy on the Middle East .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Wye Plantation agreement can be seen as a glass that is either half full or half empty .
It could be seen as progress or one may feel rather uneasy , as I myself do , and think that the actors involved are only hoping to prolong a situation which has already been going on too long .
The Wye Plantation agreement represents an enclave policy and will turn the situation into another Bosnia ; it is a pathetic agreement not worth the paper it is written on .
I am well aware that this is not an easy situation .
It is not easy because the situation in Israel must be confronted head-on .
Yesterday , I criticised a report which appeared in an important left-wing newspaper from my region , La Dépêche du Midi , taken from the Sunday Times , which I hope was wrong and which stated that Israeli laboratories are working , and I quote , ' on the production of ethnic biological weapons , containing genetically modified micro-organisms that would harm Arabs but not Jews .
The Hebrew State scientists are apparently attempting to identify the distinctive genes carried by some Arabs , then create a virus or bacterium which would affect that specific population ' .
I hope that this will be denied and that the Sunday Times , given the information by the Israeli Embassy , will tell us that this is not true .
But , in addition , the domestic situation in Israel is tragic and I acknowledge that Benjamin Netanyahu 's role is not , of course , an easy one .
This is why , in Tel Aviv 's main daily paper , Yediot Ahronot , the great writer Seffei Rachlevsky criticises the cabbala-Messianic revolution which seems to be making progress towards ' relentlessly taking absolute control of the Holy Land ' , to use the words of Yediot Ahronot .
Furthermore , in Tribune Juive , Jean Kahn , president of many organisations and rapporteur for the Committee of Inquiry on Racism and Xenophobia , describes the meetings held in Israel by the Sephardim where speakers claim that Hitler , alas , did not complete his work with the Ashkenazim .
Finally , again in the Israeli press I read that the Falashim are demonstrating in the streets shouting ' death to the whites ' .
So , the reality in Israel is not simple : it is one of real hatred and the climate of a civil war .
It is not any simpler in Palestine , where Yasser Arafat is struggling to control the situation and where , at times , his days appear to be numbered .
I think that the only way out of such a situation is by working objectively and with very clear ideas .
We could believe in the greatness of Israel , which would lead to a situation similar to that of the Milosevic regime and to civil war .
Or we could promote - and why not ? - a secular republic of Israel and Palestine , based on the South Africa of today , as there are both Muslims and Christians in Israel .
Or we can even advocate a sovereign and viable free Palestine , with the right to self determination as recommended by the UN .
This is the position of our group and we believe that , in the long term and if people behave wisely , it could lead to an Israeli-Palestinian confederation .
But I do not think that squabbling yet again over tiny portions of territory will lead to a definitive peace agreement .
Madam President-in-Office , Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , without any hesitation or beating about the bush , I should like to say that , as far as I am concerned as chairman of the Delegation for relations with Israel , I am extremely pleased about the signing of the Wye Plantation agreement .
After months and months of wrangling and of difficulties , this agreement , ratified today by the Israeli Government and by a large majority in the Knesset in spite of the two attacks that have taken place , is a major step forward .
Of course , all has not been resolved but a new step has been taken on the road to peace .
We must not forget that this agreement was signed by a right-wing Israeli Government , elected on a political platform hostile to the Oslo accords . Therefore , this peace process has today been given an electoral basis which has never been reached before in Israel .
I would therefore like to congratulate Mr Netanyahu and his government on their courage .
I would also like to congratulate Mr Arafat and his secular team of Palestinian leaders , who have shown proof of their maturity , their composure and their ability to carry out the duties which weigh heavily upon them .
We must now implement this agreement completely and swiftly , and on both sides .
The next phase must now begin as soon as possible in order to discuss the final frontiers of the future Palestinian State as well as all the different links with the State of Israel , with Jordan and with Egypt , and we must not forget about the Syrian issue .
Between now and then , we must avoid further obstacles being thrown in the path of this process . We must avoid threats of unilateral declarations , on the one hand , and of continuing to establish settlements , on the other .
Such settlements are true time bombs , for Israelis as well as Palestinians .
Last week , in Brussels , the Group of the Party of European Socialists organised Israeli-Palestinian meetings .
We were able to gauge the good-will on both sides and almost completed discussions for the basis of an agreement on the long-term objectives to be achieved .
We were also able to gauge the ground that remains to be covered and the many obstacles to be overcome .
But who would have imagined , in May 1943 - a bloody year if ever there was one in Europe - , that five years later The Hague would launch an appeal for a united Europe and that then , eight years later , the Treaty of Rome creating the EEC and the Common Market would be signed .
So , ladies and gentlemen , in the name of our still-recent history , let us be tolerant and attentive , in particular when a new problem arises in the Middle East . Rather than always asking whose fault it is , let us ask ourselves what we can and should do to help the Israelis and the Palestinians overcome this obstacle , and then go one step further down the road to peace and cooperation .
Mr President , Madam President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , it is to be regretted that just a few weeks after the Wye Plantation Agreement we have seen a series of damaging remarks and threats made on both sides that , although they have been withdrawn very recently , can only be described as very dangerous and unproductive .
We do , however , welcome the fact that the Israeli Parliament has ratified this Agreement .
It is evident that the main opponents of the peace process at the present time are the most radical factions on each side that continually attempt to thwart the small advances that are so difficult to achieve for both the Palestinians and the Israelis .
This can be seen in the fact that Netanyahu needed the support of the Labour opposition to guarantee the ratification of the Wye Plantation agreements , as well as in the increasing difficulties experienced by Arafat in his attempt to win over the more fundamental and radical sectors .
In spite of this , we must bear in mind that the majority of the people - both Palestinian and Israeli - openly support the peace process . This amounts to the best guarantee the process has of reaching a satisfactory conclusion and I hope that that conclusion will include the issue of Gaza .
In this respect , and as stated in the resolution we are discussing here today , the European Parliament fully supports the agreements of 23 October . It reiterates the need for the European Union to exert a political influence in line with its current role in the area of providing economic and financial assistance , particularly in relation to the implementation of these agreements and the proposals for new formulas that might help the peace process move forward .
Having said all this , I do not want to overlook how important it is for both parties to avoid an increase in verbal attacks , such as those we have seen recently . Such attacks incite violence and do nothing to reconcile their positions and search for compromises , merely serving to add confusion and desperation in the area and in the rest of the world .
The Israeli Government should review its policy on the resettlement of colonists , as has been mentioned , as well as making the necessary efforts to implement the Oslo and Wye Plantation Agreements . In so doing , it must not give in to the pressure exerted by the ultra-orthodox sectors whose only aim is to destroy the peace process .
On the other hand , the Palestinian Authority must focus its attention on monitoring the extremist factions that are also opposed to the peace process , especially in relation to the control and prevention of terrorism , which , sadly , has been so prominent in recent years . It should also offer Israel the guarantees of security it has been calling for .
The European Union must play a more prominent role in this process and , in this respect , I was very pleased to hear the comments and proposals put forward by Madam President-in-Office of the Council .
However , it must not limit itself to merely donating funds . The 15 Member States are currently involved in an in-depth debate on how to reach the desired objective of acting with one voice on the international scene and ensuring that this voice is strong and listened to by the rest of the world .
Madam President-in-Office , Mr President , I think that we now have a unique opportunity to make the voice of the European Union heard in the peace process .
Mr President , I agree with my fellow group member Mr Ullmann when he calls for an end to violence .
I therefore feel very strongly about the total lack of balance in the reactions of the world community to last week 's violation of the Middle East peace agreement .
In the case of Iraq , we had to prepare ourselves for a major military offensive , which according to the ' Washington Post ' could have cost the lives of 10 000 Iraqi citizens .
But when , only a few days after the Wye Plantation meeting , the Foreign Minister , Ariel Sharon , in breach of the recent agreement , openly encouraged Israeli settlers to occupy Palestinian territory , what happened then ?
Not very much - at most a resolution here in Parliament .
I am not asking for Israel to be treated in the same way as Iraq .
I do not want tens of thousands of Israeli children to pay with their lives for their leaders ' transgressions .
But some form of economic and political pressure should be exerted - and very soon - if our resolutions on the right of Palestinians to their own state are to be taken seriously .
Mr President , Madam President-in-Office of the Council , ladies and gentlemen , I would also like to add my voice to those who have agreed to support the Knesset 's ratification of the Wye Plantation Agreement , with one exception , however : they have added a number of conditions that , to a certain extent , almost amount to a denunciation of the Agreement .
But the fact that there has been such widespread support is a sign of hope for the future , and the same applies even for the reactions to the Agreement reached .
In other words , everyone has had to confront their extremists , and that is usually what happens when agreements that are equally unsatisfactory for both parties are able to work .
In this respect , there is an issue that needs to be highlighted that forms part of my personal experience : terrorists - whatever their colour - cannot be given the chance to hold the key to a process .
I wanted to focus on one point that was highlighted by the President-in-Office of the Council , that is , the role of Europe .
We are faced with an immediate challenge .
I think we must try and explain to our Israeli friends , with all the patience of a saint , that it is not normal for us to simply donate money and do nothing else . We have been reminded of this on several occasions , although there now appears to be more discretion .
I believe that Europe 's wish , as shown in the process that has gone from Venice via Madrid to Oslo and continued until now , is to participate , because we feel politically and morally responsible and because we have a great deal to offer , not only in the financial sense but also in terms of our own experience .
This is why I think that we should not only support the action of our mediator , Mr Moratinos , but that it is also vital for us to strengthen the role the European Union plays .
Mr President , I would like to thank the President-in-Office for her statement .
It is always a delight to listen to her .
I hope she will take particular inspiration from what Mr Caudron said .
I think our commitment in this situation should not be to one side or to the other but to success .
We should be offering solidarity to both sides in the face of the inevitable terrorist extremist outrages .
We should be putting pressure on both sides to observe commitments which they have undertaken and , above all , we should be offering encouragement to both sides to think , if not the unthinkable , at least to think those things which are politically difficult .
Yes , we must play our role in those matters such as water , trade and infrastructure , where our experience and money are important and are urgently needed .
But I suggest that there is a much more difficult area where we might also make a uniquely European contribution and that is Jerusalem .
For 50 years we in Europe have struggled with the nature of co-existence in a crowded land .
We have learned to be creative with the heritage of sovereignty and symbols .
This European fascination with Jerusalem is not a new or a passing fad .
Next year marks the anniversary of the conquest of Jerusalem in 1099 by Christian armies , in moments of medieval glory mired in murder .
This city of Jerusalem has been central and sacred and important to all the peoples of the Book and we should honour that interest by a legal and a constitutional creativity , the kind which we have shown here in Europe in our own domestic arrangements in the Union .
I would say to all who choose to be involved in these negotiations positively that we will need two great virtues .
The first is an eye for the devil in the detail .
I learnt on a trip to Ramallah that our diplomats are going to have to eat and sleep and negotiate with a street map of greater Jerusalem in their pockets .
They are going to need to watch each and every word .
For instance a capital in Jerusalem is different from Jerusalem as a capital or the capital .
Secondly , and most importantly , they are going to need the absolute determination to secure success , of the kind which President Clinton showed in Wye Plantation .
I think the European Union owes the Holy Land not just an economic investment but an intellectual investment in the final status of issues .
This is not something which we should leave just to our overworked presidency .
It is a challenge to the creativity of the Commission and indeed of this Parliament and of all of us as individuals .
I hope it is not too much to believe that by May 4 next year we could perhaps echo the prayer of the ages , ' next year in Jerusalem , and mean by that a peace for the millennium in the navel of the world .
Mr President , Madam President-in-Office , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the signing of the Wye Plantation accords have given rise to a fresh wave of optimism that the current deadlock will be broken and substantial progress made towards peace in this part of the world .
By pulling out all the diplomatic stops , the European Union should put all its strength behind these beginnings of a peace process , no matter how fragile they may be .
We must once again remember that the civilian populations of Israel and of the Palestinian territories are the victims of blind violence , whose aim is to obliterate any progress towards a negotiated solution .
The Near and Middle East encompasses different conflicts and the specific interests that fuel them .
Each conflict in this region has its own origins , its own particular aspects , and needs its own specific solutions .
Yet these will only see the light of day after a widespread dialogue , based on a detailed analysis of the situation and leading to a balanced agreement for the whole region .
To attempt to solve each conflict separately would be to erase all historical , ethnic , religious and cultural characteristics which fuel nationalist or fundamentalist attitudes , and would be to forget the international strategies that aim to control raw materials and maintain spheres of influence by means of military alliances .
The real problems to be solved in this region involve abolition of the occupied territories , freeing prisoners and allowing refugees to return freely , recognising the rights of national minorities , lifting embargoes , ceasing military operations , organising cooperation between the countries in this region , normalising trade and exports , and strict control of the production and trading of arms .
I dreamed that this was an ambition which the EU was capable of achieving and that we were willing to see through such a process which would establish mutually beneficial security and cooperation amongst all countries in the Near and Middle East .
I dreamed that we would be willing to support any joint efforts to find regional solutions , which are at the heart of the Euro-Mediterranean partnerships .
Mr President , Madam President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , I think the new Wye Plantation agreement is important , as also are the results of yesterday 's vote in the Knesset on the implementation of that agreement .
Also important and serious , and I congratulate you on that , are the Austrian Presidency 's activities to assist the peace process .
At the same time , however , it is sad that the agreement was reached in the United States , under the aegis of the United States and not in Salzburg or Vienna under the aegis of the European Union .
There is no doubt that the peace process will progress more correctly and completely if the European Union becomes politically involved .
In parallel with the huge economic and technical aid it provides , the European Union should also maintain a permanent political presence in the area which , - and I am sorry to have to disagree with you , Madam President-in-Office - does not now exist .
It does not exist because the European Union cannot express its position through just a single ambassador , Mr Moradinos , who in any event is not doing much .
I would propose two measures here . First , upgrade the presence of the European Union by selecting a prominent figure , as happened for example with the choice of Felipe González for Bosnia , supported by a team of experts .
And secondly , establish the presence of the European Union in all procedures involved in the implementation of and compliance with the content of the Wye Plantation agreement .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I have followed this most interesting debate with the greatest attention and believe we all agree on one important point or important aspect , namely the role the European Union must play in the peace process .
We know it will be enormously difficult to implement the Wye Plantation accord , but let me emphasise again that it did represent another new start and a new hope .
I believe one very important factor is that the European Union should now continue , as has been said here , to work firmly , patiently , courageously and creatively towards its implementation and continue to do so at the various conferences .
I referred a moment ago to the donor conference now scheduled for 30 November in Washington .
Of course we would have liked to see it held in Vienna .
And we made every effort to achieve that .
We negotiated with the Americans , we negotiated with the Norwegians , because we had hoped at least to co-chair the conference .
We made all these efforts , but unfortunately we did not succeed .
Of course one could now say that we are rather sad and a little offended about this .
Yet I believe that is not the right approach to take .
The right approach is for us to become an important factor , an important element in the peace process . And what could be more important for both sides at present than for the Union to be present at , for example , the donor conference in Washington and to play its own important part there ?
We are not in competition with the USA - one could almost liken this to a beauty contest .
What is important is to make progress towards peace .
If there is no other option , if one side listens more to the Americans and the other side more to the European Union , then we will simply have to act together .
I think that is precisely what we must all do .
We must try to discover what specific contribution we can make , and on that basis I have tried to identify a whole range of necessary follow-up measures we must take .
We cannot entirely separate the political and economic aspects , since the opening of the airport is in fact a very political matter , because it is the next step .
How long is it since the airport has been completed but not opened ?
In principle the airport is scheduled to open very soon , on 20 November , on an emergency basis . True , the airport is not quite ready .
It should be completed as soon as possible ; but at least this sends out a political signal that things are finally progressing here .
Secondly , the port . Foreign Minister Sharon said himself in talks with the President-in-Office , Mr Schüssel , that we could count on further steps towards agreement , if not agreement itself , in about two months ' time .
Even I tend to think it is perhaps going a little too far to use the word agreement .
We have to be careful here .
Another point that was unfortunately raised - and quite rightly so - was of course the question of the possible consequences of the 4 May 1999 deadline .
It could indeed spark off a serious crisis and a new outbreak of violence , unless it is preceded by negotiations that can avert such a crisis , avert a unilateral declaration and the ensuing reactions .
The Council has begun internal consultations and has also had contacts with the United States on this matter .
But what I regard as most important of all is that we jointly take concrete steps forward .
As I said earlier , after the donor conference we shall be organising a quadrilateral meeting at which the four main partners , the EU and the USA , together with Israel and Palestine , will be discussing these important political and economic questions further .
On the whole , I believe this is an important new step on the long and difficult road to peace in the Middle East .
Mr President , the Commission has an important role to play in this matter .
I find it inconceivable that a man of the legendary eloquence of Commissioner Flynn does not feel moved to contribute at the end of this debate .
Would you please repeat your invitation to him to take the microphone .
Mr President , I support Mr Spencer 's proposal .
I listened to the President-in-Office of the Council and I am afraid there has been some misunderstanding .
I did not criticise the Austrian Presidency for the fact that the Wye Plantation agreement was not concluded in Vienna or Salzburg , I simply said that I would have felt much better if it had been reached in Vienna or Salzburg , and I repeat as much .
With this opportunity , I wish to say again that the Austrian Presidency 's contribution towards helping the Middle East peace process has been and is important .
I wanted to make that clear .
I will speak very briefly , as I would hate to disappoint Mr Spencer .
I appreciate his kind words about my eloquence .
I have been listening very carefully to this debate .
It seems to me that the Wye River Israeli-Palestinian interim Accord really gives the peace process a much needed chance .
We have to appreciate that it was at a very delicate point of near collapse , so I see this as a very major improvement .
In fact it is the only tool available to support peace in the Middle East that the international community has available to it at this time .
For that reason , since it is the best chance that the ailing Middle East process has , it has to have our great support .
We greatly applaud the fact the Knesset has taken the necessary steps in the recent past .
There may be many hurdles to cross insofar as the Accord is concerned but both political and economic support should be provided to all of the parties to maintain the momentum .
That is a key point that has come out of this debate .
But when all is said and done , implementation is the key .
I quite clearly support what Mr Spencer so eloquently said .
He said it is going to require a delicate touch from those who are on the ground to recognise all the vagaries of the situation that exists in that very sensitive part of the world .
Having visited myself I have a full appreciation of how a wrong word , used at the wrong time , can jeopardise the whole thing .
That must certainly be taken on board .
We have a contribution to make .
We should focus our action on a limited number of high-impact areas .
There were a few mentioned .
It is quite interesting to mention the one about the hospital .
The hospital is there ; it is empty .
The Palestinians would appear not to have the capacity to run it just now .
But the Commission has sent a management team to get it up and running .
So that is a positive development that we can support .
As far as the airport is concerned , Israel said that it should be up and running this particular week .
We have to wait now to see what is going to happen over the next couple of weeks , if that commitment can be honoured .
Insofar as the port is concerned there are the continuing problems of access .
They have yet to be resolved .
One has to understand that there will be a three or four year delay in the actual construction anyway .
So there are impediments there .
But what we have heard here is a consensus view that we want to give this a chance and we want to give our total support to the Austrian presidency and Mrs Ferrero-Waldner for all that has been done to enable it to happen .
Certainly the Commission will be pursuing that objective too .
The debate is closed .
I have received seven motions for resolutions tabled pursuant to Rule 37 ( 2 ) .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 9.30 a.m.
( The sitting was suspended at 7.40 p.m. and resumed at 9 p.m. )

Structural Funds ( continuation )
The next item is the continuation of the joint debate on the Structural Funds .
Madam President , the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs made a significant contribution to the report by Mr Hatzidakis and Mrs McCarthy .
We have an important opportunity to plan the future of the European Social Fund since the new Objective 3 that is proposed in the regulation will be exclusively applied in respect of the European Social Fund and its activities are closely linked to the development of the national employment plans .
We see as positive the simplification and concentration that has resulted in combining the current Objectives 3 and 4 into Objective 3 for the next seven years .
The Committee on Employment and Social Affairs and the Committee on Regional Policy support the horizontal nature of the regulation because it is in keeping with the aims of the new Objective 3 to promote the policy of developing human resources in the management of the rest of the objectives . In addition , it is linked to the national employment plans and this guarantees that active policies will be applied in the entire Union , and not only in the regions that are not included in Objectives 1 and 2 , as proposed by the Commission , since that would discriminate against the richest areas of the least developed regions , which would not come under the umbrella of Objective 3 .
In committee we also expressed the need to guarantee the planning and implementation of the Structural Funds in all its objectives and to promote the principle of equal opportunities , but in a balanced way .
It is true that there are serious distortions in the labour market that are detrimental to women and to the disabled .
I would also like to emphasize that we agree that resources should be used efficiently , but in the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs - and the Committee on Regional Policy feels the same - we feel that the formula proposed by the Commission to free funds automatically is too rigid and that the exceptional nature of the Structural Funds appropriations should be retained .
That is , these appropriations should be spending objectives and not ceilings for spending .
In addition , if there are funds that are not used , they should be distributed among other regions of the Member State , and the Committee on Regional Policy has also approved this .
Finally , with regard to Community initiatives , it is important that the interventions and objectives of Community initiatives should be clearly separate . In addition , the Commission should announce the criteria it will propose for the new generation of initiatives , as is stated in the report .
Madam President , I think today 's debate has demonstrated substantial agreement between the approach of the Commission and the position of Parliament , agreement on concentration , simplification , efficiency and partnership .
But I think the Commission will need to take account of some of Parliament 's views if there is to be a meeting of minds in the spirit Mr Hänsch spoke of this morning , rather than a dialogue between someone maintaining one position and someone pursuing another route .
I think we have reached some important agreements on principles ; now there are a few points to be finalised .
The Commission is already willing - it seems to me - to review the reserve proposal .
One approach to the Community initiative programmes is that Interreg should immediately become the main programme , but we are insisting both on the maintenance of the URBAN programme and on a greater role for the city within the regulations , both in Objective 1 and in the other Community initiatives , like the Interreg programme .
For Objective 2 , coherence with state aid can be achieved in two ways : either through greater flexibility , or by asking the state aid to bear in mind that a problem has to be identified for there to be Structural Fund intervention , and that , possibly , the two maps should coincide .
However it is the Structural Fund intervention which signals that there are certain problems to be dealt with here .
Madam President , I would like to have talked in general terms but , given recent developments in my own country , I will confine my remarks to our future strategy .
I am sure the Commissioner is well aware of the Irish Government 's decision to divide Ireland into two regions : a grouping of 15 counties from the west , the border and the midlands , including two counties in my own constituency , Kerry and Clare , to be designated as a new Objective 1 region .
It is intended that the remaining 11 counties will be designated as Objective 1 in transition .
I understand , Commissioner , that you have already made it clear to the Irish Government , that this strategy will not result in any extra funding for Ireland .
In any case you are leaving it to Eurostat to decide on the admissibility or otherwise of the new regions , based on the statistics available .
Could you confirm whether it is true that Eurostat will be producing new figures in the next couple of days providing the economic indicators for 1996-1997 ?
If , as I fear , they show a dramatic improvement in Ireland 's economic performance , is there not a real danger that a major part of the newly designated Objective 1 region will no longer qualify ?
It will be above the threshold and that would leave our current strategy in tatters .
The use of the GDP criterion overestimates Ireland 's true position .
It includes multinational profits which do not stay within our economy and I ask the Commission to bear this in mind when considering the Irish case .
GNP would be a much fairer criterion .
Finally , I seek clarification from the Commission in relation to the proposed Objective 1 in transition status .
Will the change in co-financing from 75 % to 50 % apply equally to EAGGF projects and those under ESF and ERDF ?
What will be the situation in relation to headage payments .
Will the level of headage payments under Objective 1 be continued under Objective 1 in transition areas ?
Madam President , I commend the Commissioners on their attendance at this marathon debate and the attention they are paying to it , but I am afraid I have to use my limited time to talk about where I believe the Commission has got it wrong : first in the proper pursuit of concentration and simplification .
The cuts in the Community initiative go just too far .
The Commission must not tell us that the amounts are too small to justify the administration .
Tell that to the people in my region , which has used ECU 30m - £ 25m - in the last five years .
Smaller programmes which are targeted , can actually work better .
In supporting the Urban initiative , let us not hear about duplication .
What about the 60 % of people who live in small and medium-sized towns , innovation , transnational links ?
A new Community initiative can be tailored to these needs .
In Objective II , let us be clear that giving help to the poorest regions is not the same as giving help to the poorest people .
Let us help the pockets of poverty ; one programme , one region , yes , but targeted help from Objective II within the region at below NUTS III level .
On the question of services , a redundant bank teller or hotel receptionist is just as unemployed as a redundant factory worker .
I welcome the fact that the Commission has supported our representations on this , but the regulation still needs clarification .
It was wrong of the Commission to exclude environmental authorities from participating in decision-making .
And regional funding , just as much as social funding , should respect principles of non-discrimination .
Finally , on the issue for which I have been rapporteur , the guidelines : let us have an unequivocal assurance from the Commissioner that they will be published by the end of the year and they will not be used to impose late changes on local projects .
This is a test of the Commission 's real commitment to simplification .
Let us accept a duty to negotiate this package on time .
Anything less will mean funding delays , short deadlines , rushed projects for the next seven years .
The opportunity to prevent that exists once and once only .
We must act now .
Madam President , the cohesion policy is an element of solidarity for the most disadvantaged regions .
The regions that are a priority for aid , as defined by the Commission , are the Objective 1 regions , which are those with an income that is less than 75 % of the European average .
For this definition the autonomous community or region is used as a point of reference .
This procedure may seem fair , but one change needs to be made .
There are areas that , although they are not as large as a region , have objective needs , and their income is unfortunately below the level required .
For this reason there must be exceptions , which are , of course , limited , so that those areas can be Objective 1 and can take priority in receiving aid .
There are various areas of this type in the European Union .
One example is the area made up of the left bank of the Nervión and Ayala in the Basque Country .
It has 350 000 inhabitants , with an income that is below 75 % of the European average , a level of unemployment above 20 % , a socio-economic fabric that urgently needs revitalising and , what is more , is an area adjoining two autonomous communities that are currently Objective 1 : Castilla-León and Cantabria .
Therefore , including the left bank of the Nervión and Ayala in Objective 1 would leave no island in the European aid map .
It would be an act of solidarity towards its inhabitants and a essential element in revitalising investment and economic activity in the area and in creating jobs .
It is therefore necessary to consider the possibility of taking account of exceptions in the Objective 1 map , so that specific and objective needs for support will have their share of the Structural Funds , above and beyond political and administrative limits .
There is another aspect of the Commission 's proposal that we must modify .
Aid for training and employment for the new Objective 3 could be lost for Objective 2 areas : industrial areas .
This would be a complete contradiction in terms .
Where are training and human resources more needed than in areas that are undergoing industrial change ?
It is only through this concept and through this modification that the Basque Country , as well as other industrial areas of Europe , will be able to continue to receive around 8 billion pesetas every year .
I hope that Parliament will tomorrow be in favour of using that Fund for training in Objective 2 areas that are undergoing industrial change , because if training is needed for employment anywhere in Europe , it is undoubtedly needed in areas like these that have a high level of unemployment and where a considerable amount of effort is being made in industrial and technological change .
Madam President , I would like to speak about the proposal for a regulation on structural actions in the fisheries sector .
It is impossible to take , in principle , anything but a critical position with regard to this regulation .
This critical position is justified by the current situation of the fisheries sector , and by the proposals that are being made to us in this regulation , even though they are not very specific .
It is important to emphasise - and you are all perfectly aware of this - that the common fisheries policy currently relies almost exclusively on the Structural Funds .
On this issue , both from a quantitative as well as a qualitative point of view , it is impossible to take anything other than a critical position .
The Community fisheries sector is currently undergoing a profound change in order to survive and be competitive in a globalised economy .
The action that is taking place requires the provision of sufficient funds to finance the various aspects that make up the common fisheries policy in its various facets : conservation and protection of resources , international agreements , markets , structural measures , social aspects , etcetera .
The lack of sufficient funding would lead to the collapse of a sector that is vital in coastal areas and that is labour-intensive , both in the actual fishing sector and in the processing industry , and the loss of this would result in a considerable outlay of public resources .
From a quantitative point of view , there are a series of uncertainties that are making its future difficult .
And from a qualitative point of view - and I am coming to an end here - there is an observation that has been made many times in the Committee on Fisheries : it involves the plan for the new structural policy , in which the horizontal nature of the fisheries objective is lost .
The fisheries sector needs a regulation , or at least a specific objective , that is of a horizontal nature , as well as a single legal instrument , a basis like the current FIFG , which should be strengthened on the basis of the criteria put forward by the Commission in the proposal to create a rural development fund .
This is what we are calling for , Madam President , in our amendments .
Madam President , in the discussion on the Cohesion Fund overriding importance should be attached to the proposals for amendments removing entitlement to the funds from countries that have joined the euro . In other words , we should focus our attention on this element .
These are proposals without any substantial justification since it is a structural fund aimed at bringing about real convergence among the countries with per capita GDPs less than 90 % of the Community average .
Given that this convergence would be jeopardised by the restrictive policy dictated by nominal convergence , it is understandable that , in everyone 's interest , further support should have been granted to bring about real convergence .
The need to bring the less developed countries closer to the more developed did not come to an end when they joined the euro .
This is indeed a temporary mechanism - as was said yesterday afternoon -in that it no longer applies once they reach 90 % - as a transitional measure - , and due to the fact that these less developed countries are obliged to pursue austerity policies under the terms of the stability and growth pacts .
The proposal to exclude these countries from the Fund would have the paradoxical consequence of punishing those countries that met the conditions for joining the euro while rewarding those that failed to do so because they applied a less rigorous policy .
Apart from these substantial reasons , what is at stake is our credibility vis-à-vis a Treaty where the conditions of access to the Fund are made perfectly clear : a per capita GDP of less than 90 % of the average Community GDP and the definition of a programme of nominal convergence .
It is a Treaty that , without any reservations , rightly won the support of the European Parliament and has been ratified by all the Member States .
What image would we be giving of politicians in general , and Members of the European Parliament in particular , if , for no reason - and in this case against the Commission - the Treaty were disregarded through our initiative ?
Both the treaties and our word must be honoured , not only by the southern countries but also by the northern countries , which naturally played a decisive role in drafting those treaties .
Madam President , Commissioners , we are debating a section of Agenda 2000 that has a special bearing on the nature of Europe , as it is directly concerned with cohesion .
I have listened to many speakers in this debate and , possibly because they have been rushed due to the short amount of time we have , they seem to have given an impression with which I do not agree , because they have tried to say to the Commission that its proposals are not sound .
I wish to say the opposite - using the short amount of time that I have - by stating that the documents we have received from the Commission are truly positive , genuinely encompass the meaning of cohesion , have enabled us to work , and we are amending them .
However , I am not so pretentious as to assume that our amendments improve the Commission 's texts .
I think that society is complex and that our amendments possibly complicate the Commission 's text .
And this is necessary because we are Members of this Parliament and representatives of the people , but are acting at the cost of lowering the technical level and the appropriate tactical level of the Commission 's document .
However , I know that in the Commission you have been positive and courageous .
You have been courageous in designing the structure of cohesion , courageous in proposing the Cohesion Fund and succeeding in the legal ruling , and courageous in proposing a balanced and sound amount to be set aside for this Cohesion Fund .
Madam Commissioner , I ask you in particular to try to send us a new document on this framework regulation that precisely encompasses this very rich debate that you have had with Parliament and that I know you are having with the Council .
It would be good if this regulation , which has already been discussed at great length in a certain way , could be replaced by another that would then be the final draft in this very fruitful debate we have had .
Madam President , the funding for trans-European networks proposed by the Commission from 2000 to 2006 is almost double that from 1995 to 1999 .
I welcome this increase in funding , but it should be noted that the period from 2000 to 2006 is longer than the previous period , that figures must be compared in real terms and not in current terms , and that investments in the Union 's infrastructures have fallen from 1.5 % to 0.9 % of the GDP in recent years .
I therefore think that the figure is as relatively poor as that put forward in the Council regulation that we are now amending and for which I was rapporteur .
At that time , I said in this House that the funding anticipated for trans-European networks only represented 0.6 % of the funds needed in order to build the infrastructures planned for the 1994-1999 period .
We are in a similar situation despite the fact that the funds have been doubled in current terms , and there is therefore still a clear contradiction between the needs in terms of a real Community policy on infrastructures and the funds that are available from the Union .
In addition , as I was also draftsman of the opinion on the Cohesion Fund , I must make the following observation .
According to what has been determined , if a Member State that is receiving money from the Cohesion Fund does not fulfill the convergence criteria , such as public debt and public deficit , it will stop receiving funds .
That is what has been determined .
However , some people say - and today we have heard speeches to this effect - that if a Member State that is receiving money from the Cohesion Fund has fulfilled the convergence criteria , it should stop receiving that money .
That means that every Member State , whether it fulfills the convergence criteria or whether it does not , will be punished by not receiving its share of the Cohesion Fund .
When faced with such a contradiction , there is nothing more that can be said .
I will only add that this was not the spirit of the temporary committee that was set up in order to implement the Cohesion Fund .
I know what I am talking about , as I had the honour of being one of the members of that temporary committee .
Madam President , the document presented to us today is the result of many hours of discussion and compromise .
It was drawn up by our two co-rapporteurs , Mrs McCarthy and Mr Hatzidakis , whom I should like to thank for their efforts .
Although we can approve the general content of the report , which adopts the Commission 's suggested principles of concentration , simplification and decentralisation , we cannot vote in favour of the final version .
In effect , we will still vote against the report , in spite of its positive points , such as the horizontal application of Objective 3 , maintaining the ' URBAN ' initiative and taking small and medium-sized towns into account for the first time , the need for a new initiative to deal with the economic and social crises that lead to job losses , and the restructuring of the performance reserve provided for by the Commission .
As regards Objective 1 , we too believe that , first and foremost , aid should be given to the regions that need it most .
We believe that the 75 % criterion should be adhered to strictly .
We cannot , under any circumstances , accept that appropriations from the Guarantee section of the EAGGF , used within Objective 2 , be considered as non-compulsory expenditure .
Also , we consider that our democracy will be tarnished if the House does not vote in favour of our Amendment No 46 which , in the interests of greater transparency , stresses that the non-discriminatory use of Structural Funds appropriations must be ensured in the different regions concerned .
It is for this reason , Madam President , that the French Socialists in the European Parliament will not vote in favour of this at first reading .
Madam President , Commissioners , quite an important objective in the Council Regulation is that the ERDF resources should mainly be used for measures which are favourable to employment .
I would consider that point , which was also the subject of our discussion in the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs , to be particularly significant .
I should like to pick out a few essential points which we in the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs unanimously thought should be implemented .
Firstly , we know that , in general , flexible models and new forms of organising work also lead to more jobs .
However , we also know that these flexible models are very often not applied , and this is often because small and medium-sized companies are not in a position to transpose them .
That is why we would request that you promote examples which can show how these new flexible models are to be implemented in smaller companies .
Secondly , many small and medium-sized companies cannot afford to transfer to their companies all the technology that has been developed .
I would propose that we set up innovation centres where innovative young entrepreneurs can obtain the appropriate knowledge and guidance to create new jobs in young companies .
Thirdly , we think that from the very beginning of each project attention should be given to ways of best developing human resources in this context .
Fourthly , we were all very concerned that the needs of the disabled should receive special attention during the planning stage of the infrastructure measures being supported .
There are a great many other points , but I think that these are the main ones that can help to create a higher level of employment . We have reached unanimous agreement on these points and I call for them to be implemented .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen of the Commission , just a week ago I organised a conference in my hometown of Cuxhaven , an important fishing location in Germany , to look at the reform of the structural measures in the fisheries sector .
The criticisms made by the regional fisheries sector reflected the great anxiety that prevails in that sector at present .
In December 1992 , the European Council in Edinburgh agreed upon the principle that areas dependent upon fisheries should receive privileged assistance within the context of the structural policy .
However , in the new Regulation on the Structural Funds , the Commission no longer respects this principle .
The partial restructuring in the agriculture fund threatens to bring the fisheries sector once again into direct competition with agriculture , an aspect which caused the greatest disquiet during the conference .
According to the Commission plans , the very same measures in the different Objective regions are to be financed from different sources in future , with Objective 1 areas clearly coming off better .
Does the Commission realise that companies in Objective 2 areas are going to consider relocating to an Objective 1 area purely and simply because the conditions there are better ?
We must drop our original request for a separate Objective 4 for rural areas and separate consideration of the areas dependent on fisheries . However , we do need a horizontal , harmonised structural policy to safeguard the objectives of the common fisheries policy .
That is the only correct approach .
We cannot simply proceed as normal , because making the wrong decision in such a sensitive area as this would further undermine confidence in the European Union .
That should not be the outcome of this new European Structural Funds policy .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , today Parliament is dealing with the first step in the reform of the Structural Funds which will govern the cohesion policy of the Fifteen up to 2006 .
From this date onwards I think everything will change substantially , both the CAP and the conception and management of the Structural Funds and the Cohesion Fund .
To manage the period up to the enlargement of the Union , the financial perspectives propose the maintenance on paper of 0.46 % of GDP for Category 2 of the budget , while the Commission is in fact promising a concentration and a simplification which , in real terms , will significantly reduce the map of the regions and the percentages of the European population which will be covered by Objectives 1 and 2 .
Now , if the level really were 0.46 % , this concentration could be understandable .
But it is not so , since the cohesion policy funds will also be used to finance the pre-accession , thus reducing by half a point the percentage of expenditure laid down at Edinburgh and confirmed in Agenda 2000 for the cohesion policy of the Fifteen .
On the subject of the Community initiatives , the reduction from thirteen to three is acceptable if the surviving Community initiatives really have the added value compared with the existing funds and the trans-European regional character that must be at the basis of this type of initiative .
I welcome the reference in the general regulation on the Structural Funds to the fact that it is not appropriate to link this regulation with competition policy .
Of particular importance , in the reports on the general regulation and on the European Regional Development Fund , is the reference to the requirement to incorporate the island criterion both for Objective 1 and for the Community initiatives , providing a new area clearly dedicated to inter-island cooperation under the new Interreg especially .
By adopting these proposals at first reading , the European Parliament shows consistency with its own position - in view of the vote in May on my report - and with the Treaty signed in Amsterdam , which provides , in the basic article on cohesion policy , for the inclusion of all the European island regions amongst the less favoured regions .
In conclusion , I hope that the Commission can adopt the same consistent line that the Council and Parliament have been following since Amsterdam .
Madam President , I would like to begin by thanking Mrs Jöns for her splendid work .
I intend to speak here about the social funds .
I would like to raise three points in particular relating to the proposal by the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs .
Firstly , it is inevitable that the social funds should form part of the process of implementing common guidelines for employment .
On this we are in full agreement with the Commission .
Secondly , we need action to promote the status of women , and thirdly , we need to address the possible role of the social funds in implementing Article 13 of the Treaty of Amsterdam on non-discrimination .
The committee proposes that Article 13 should be amended and that a statement should be added to the effect that the funds should promote action to prevent discrimination based on gender , race , ethnic origin , religion or beliefs , disability , and age .
I do hope the Commission will take the committee 's proposal seriously .
It is vitally important , as without resources the article on non-discrimination might not have any real impact .
I hope the Commission will take the views of the committee on board .
Madam President , Commissioners , one of the most important aims of this reform is concentration .
If we are to achieve this objective , the funds available must be concentrated on - that is , allocated to - the really needy areas .
The more regions are classified in the highest category of assistance - Objective 1 - either because people do not wish to accept the 75 % threshold or because they find ways to avoid complying with it , the harder it becomes for us to achieve this important Community objective satisfactorily .
That is acceptable neither in the present Community of 15 Member States , nor in the light of the coming enlargement .
In my view the ' phasing out ' suggested by the Commission is in itself a fair way of dealing with the regions that have reached the 75 % mark .
But let me give you an example by way of clarification : a region that has reached 74 % in 1999 would evidently remain at the top level of assistance for another six years and then ultimately enter the ' phasing out ' stage by 2011 .
If I may express it thus : those who have benefited cannot with a clear conscience claim that there is a lack of solidarity in the EU ; quite the contrary .
I should like to remind you that we had a very distinguished guest here today , the President of one of the countries on our doorstep .
I hope that if we ever reach the situation where the Republic of Poland fulfils the 75 % criterion during membership - and of course neither I nor any one of us knows when that might be - then our Polish friends will not insist upon staying in the top level of European assistance for more than 12 years from that date .
To summarise , we in Parliament should really think once more about establishing a clear , exact definition of the criterion for membership of Objective 1 . I hope that tomorrow 's decision will reflect this .
Thank you , Commissioner .
That was certainly required , even if it means that we have gone well beyond the speaking times .
Nevertheless , only 20 minutes were set aside for both speakers .
I did not interrupt you because I felt that your detailed statement was entirely appropriate .
Mrs McCarthy would like to put another question .
Madam President , it is very simple .
The Commission indicated that it will be modifying its proposal on the performance reserve .
Does that mean that we are to expect a modified regulation or simply a modified proposal on the performance reserve ?
I should like to remind the Commission that while we are very willing to have discussions with you on the perfomance reserve , we do not have the right of initiative .
We would like to have codecision , we would like to propose our own performance reserve , but that is not our job .
It is up to the Commission to come forward with a proposal that is water-tight and workable .
Madam President , Mrs McCarthy , we are not going to draw up an actual legislative proposal yet , but a paper which we would like to discuss with the Council and Parliament .
I think that before we work on a new legislative proposal , it would make sense for us to discuss it together and see if we can reach agreement as far as possible .
We also want to include many of the valuable ideas from Parliament , as I see that you are prepared to support the basic idea of the performance reserve .
Madam President , first let me thank Mrs Jöns for her extremely thorough report on our proposal for a Council regulation on the European Social Fund .
We agree on nearly all the major points of substance in the Commission 's proposal for the future operation of the Social Fund , the importance of preventing and combating unemployment and the vital link between the Social Fund and the European Employment Strategy .
In this spirit I am happy to take on board your Amendments Nos. 4 , 8 , 11 and part of 14 which reinforce these points .
I also know that Parliament has concerns about the Commission 's proposal , that Objective 3 - the main focus of the Social Fund activity - should apply only outside Objective 1 and Objective 2 areas .
This is a concern which is shared by many of the Member States .
We accept therefore , on reflection , that Objective 3 will have to intervene within Objective 2 areas in the future .
We will still have to establish how we will operate that .
Our original proposal in this area was framed with the objectives of simplification and flexibility .
We must ensure that any alternative arrangements do not depart from this .
We also agree on the need for a strong partnership in the Structural Funds .
It is all the more important for the European Social Fund with its focus on inclusiveness , developing human resources and on involving local organisations .
I welcome the recognition that the report gives to the importance of local development and the involvement of non-governmental organisations .
I am happy to accept the first part of Amendment No 12 , the first part of Amendment 38 and Amendment 63 , which clarify the importance of partnerships particularly involving NGOs in the distribution of small grants by intermediary bodies .
I want to take the opportunity to thank you all for your continued support for our proposal in Article 4 ( 3 ) of the draft regulation , that at least one per cent of the Social Fund appropriations should be available for such an approach .
We are running into some resistance in the Member States in the Council who want to water it down to a point where it would be just meaningless .
Parliament clearly has a better grasp of the job creation potential of local development and local social capital .
We will all do our utmost to keep these provisions in the Social Fund regulation and I hope that you will continue to support us on this essential point .
An interesting fact here is that we have had more than 600 applications for a pilot project action that we have undertaken .
It gives you some idea and I hope that the sceptics will take note .
In keeping with our emphasis on equal opportunity I accept Amendment No 6 clarifying the aims of the fund in relation to equality between women and men .
I also accept the principles behind Amendments Nos 19 and 60 for specific additional measures to encourage women 's participation but we need a clear wording here .
The general regulation sets out very clearly that the principle of mainstream equality of opportunity should apply at all stages of programming in all of the Fund 's interventions .
Accordingly , Amendment No 47 dealing with equal opportunities at the evaluation stage is therefore already covered in the general regulation and is not therefore necessary .
I am pleased that you broadly support the five Social Fund policies that we have proposed in Article 2 of the regulation .
Amendment No 15 - the first part - Amendments Nos 17 , 18 and 19 are in line with the Commission 's intentions and I am happy to support them .
Similarly , the clarifications that you bring to Article No 3 - the eligible activities - to Amendments Nos 21 and 24 and in principle Amendments 23 , 27 and 31 , these are very welcome too .
However , there are three main groups of amendments which the Commission could not accept .
I will explain why very quickly .
The first is the return to the target group approach of the current Objective 3 , which for us of course would be a retrograde step .
The key principles behind our proposals for the new Social Fund are simplification and flexibility .
Specifying certain target groups at the start of a seven-year period would act to the exclusion of other groups and would deny the Social Fund the flexibility to intervene in support of any further vulnerable groups which might emerge during the programming period .
It is in fact the exact opposite of the mainstreaming approach that we have been trying to promote .
For this reason I am unable to accept the new Article 1 ( 2 ) proposed in Amendments Nos 14 and 58 , the second part of Amendment No 15 or Amendment No 39 .
However , let me be clear . Support will still be available for these groups .
The Social Fund must support a more all-embracing approach to combating inequalities in access to the labour market .
I accept Amendment No 3 ( first part ) which makes this very clear , and Amendment No 7 , subject to some rewording .
The second major amendment which the Commission has difficulty with is Amendment No 20 .
This seeks that a minimum of 15 % of interventions be devoted to adaptability and equal opportunities .
This does not mean that we are not committed to these two issues .
Indeed , we suggest this 15 % in the explanatory memorandum as an indicative figure and stipulate in the regulation that particular emphasis must be given to these two fields .
However , specifying a figure in Article 4 would not allow Member States the necessary flexibility to respond to the needs identified by their ex ante evaluations and in their national action plans for employment within the annual employment guidelines .
Finally , the third group of amendments concerns technical assistance .
It is a simple fact that the availability of technical assistance is a matter defined within the regulation and not by the budgetary authority .
So , in conclusion , I have no difficulty in accepting 19 of the proposed amendments .
These are Nos 1 , 2 , 3 ( first part ) 4 , 6 , 8 , 11 and 12 ( first part ) 14 ( second part ) 15 ( first part ) 17 , 18 , 21 , 24 and 34 ( first part ) 38 ( first part ) 45 , 52 and 63 .
Further to this , I can accept in principle a further six amendments , subject to some clarification of the wording .
These are Amendments Nos 7 , 19 , 23 , 27 , 31 and 60 .
I hope that I have adequately explained why the Commission cannot accept the remaining amendments .
The Social Fund is above all concerned with people - their jobs , their skills , their prospects in the labour market .
I therefore believe that it is absolutely right for the European Parliament to have a strong input into this regulation .
I have greatly appreciated Mrs Jöns ' partnership and that of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs and I look forward to continuing close cooperation in the future .
Thank you , Mr Flynn .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 9.30 a.m.
CAP , EAGGF
The next item is the joint debate on the following oral questions :
B4-0702 / 98 by Mr Colino Salamanca , on behalf of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , to the Council , on Agenda 2000 - reform of the CAP ; -B4-0703 / 98 by Mr Colino Salamanca , on behalf of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , to the Commission , on Agenda 2000 - reform of the CAP ; and the report ( A4-0405 / 98 ) by Mr Görlach , on behalf of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , on the proposal for a Council Regulation on support for rural development from the European Agricultural Guidance and Guarantee Fund ( EAGGF ) ( COM ( 98 ) 0158 - C4-0297 / 98-98 / 0102 ( CNS ) ) .
Madam President , I would first like to welcome the President-in-Office of the Council .
Thank you for attending this evening .
I think that this sets a good example for future Councils .
With regard to the Council , I would like to express our concern about the way in which Agenda 2000 is being handled .
The Presidency 's programme stated that you intended to actively continue the negotiation process .
The truth is that , if we believe the most recent Council report from the 19th and 20th , we may have some doubts as to whether the Council is really continuing this active negotiation .
I am saying this mainly because I have had the opportunity to read the report of the last Council of Ministers in which you listed the key issues in each of the sectors being reformed . That list does not give us much optimism that we are soon going to reach a solution .
For example , I read the Council 's thoughts on the horizontal regulation where you specify that the main issues are the need to include ' environmental conditionality ' , the need to regulate aid , the need to fix a ceiling for direct aid and the need to determine how budgetary resources are redistributed .
In order to produce that , all that you really needed to do was to read the regulation involved .
This gives the impression that , so far , four or five months have gone by and all the Council has really done is to read the regulations .
In truth , we had thought that something more would have been done during the last four or five months .
We are even surprised to find that the Council of Ministers is still discussing whether the wine regulation is included in the Agenda 2000 reform or not .
I thought that this had already been resolved , that we had come to an agreement on this issue and that we were now working on Agenda 2000 with wine included .
In any case , you concluded at your last Council meeting that you can now start to look at the solutions .
This is all well and good .
Above all , I would like to know when you intend to conclude your discussions , because I think that after five months things should have progressed a little more , especially if we want to meet our deadline of the Vienna European Council in December and , in particular , so that by March , which is the date we have fixed , we will be in a position to give our opinion on the issues involved in Agenda 2000 .
With regard to the Commission - and I would also like to take this opportunity to thank Mr Fischler for attending - I would like to say that there is an issue that is somewhat disrupting the debate : the famous issue of co-financing .
It did not come up initially , but halfway through the debate , and it has complicated the matter somewhat .
I think that more information is needed .
For example , when reference is made to 25 % of the aid , what aid is being referred to ?
There are many types of aid .
Does it refer to aid for tobacco or hops , to the premiums for sheep or those that are in the 1992 reform ?
It would be good if these issues were clarified so that the debate could move on .
We should also have clarification on whether or not this co-financing has to be the same for everyone when there are - as you know very well from the study carried out by the Commission - countries affected that are undergoing what we call ' cohesion ' and that , according to your presentation , it does not seem that they are the ones who end up paying when this situation arises elsewhere , as occurs with budget balances .
The other issue that I feel needs to be highlighted with regard to the Commission is that it recently endorsed the studies carried out in Bonn and Amsterdam on the possible consequences of the 1999 reform .
I think they are a good thing - I am not going to start judging them as I do not have a detailed knowledge of them - but there is one piece of information that catches my attention : the possible job losses that could occur while farmers ' incomes are being maintained .
I feel that this is serious , because there were already significant job losses in 1992 .
In this respect , it would be appropriate to consider what measures we are prepared to take in order to prevent this .
Moreover , according to my information , the calculations and forecasts are pure futurology .
Sometimes the results show that they are right , and sometimes not .
However , what does seem to be correct is the information that unemployment may rise - according to the studies - by between 2.2 % and 3.7 % .
If this were the case , it would be important to know whether or not you plan to strengthen the area of rural development .
I think that if this forecast might be right , we should be able to implement the second pillar of agricultural policy - that is , rural development - with even more vigour .
We should have a set of measures planned that will enable us to deal with a situation that will otherwise overwhelm us .
In this respect , I think that it would be appropriate for us to consider the possibility of promoting rural development - not only that linked to agricultural issues , but also to non-agricultural issues - so that we can approve the reforms that are currently on the table .
Madam President , now that Commissioner Wulf-Mathies ' comprehensive discourse has given us the opportunity to discuss one or two points outside the Chamber , perhaps we can now catch up with some lost time to ensure that everyone on the list has the chance to speak this evening .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , we have all entertained high hopes for the Commission 's proposed reforms .
There is no doubt that the overall package , including the merging of several directives into a single directive for rural areas and their development , contains genuinely far-reaching proposals and new ideas .
Having said that , I must add that , if the headings are compared with the descriptions , it emerges that not every heading matches the small print underneath .
We must be careful not to raise hopes that cannot be fulfilled when the ideas are implemented .
Let me now focus on the new proposals on rural development .
For several years , of course , we have all been under the influence of the proposition , which the Commission has reiterated , that the development of rural areas is effectively a second pillar of the agricultural production system that has to be erected alongside the traditional , albeit reformed , agricultural policy .
I recall the excellent conference that the Commission organised in Cork , but we are all well aware that , although we may sit together in a relaxed atmosphere and speak a little about our dreams for the future , those dreams cannot always be fulfilled in the way we would wish .
Our hopes were higher , but they could not all be converted into concrete proposals .
I also know this is difficult , but I believe that many of the Commission 's proposals were too strongly influenced by the thought of the editing scissors that the Council would inevitably wield , given the wide diversity of the Member States ' interests .
Of course it is essential to seek a majority but , as every trade union knows , to secure a 3 % pay rise you must start by asking for 6 % .
Anyone who opens negotiations by offering a compromise solution need hardly be surprised when that offer is beaten down , particularly in the agricultural debate , where so many different interests are involved .
Allow me to highlight Article 31 , for therein lies the key to the question of the extent to which we can take account of the potential of rural areas in the support we give them .
As far as the agricultural economy is concerned - and I refer expressly to the agricultural economy , and not just to farming - the wording is unclear .
We are not quite sure where it is supposed to be leading .
We have heard many explanations from you , Commissioner , and from others .
That puts our minds at rest .
But I believe this has to be more clearly worded .
It must say more clearly what we intend to do , and it must also give a clearer indication of the resources that will be available to us in the future .
Parliament cannot accept being fobbed off with the promise of more specific provisions in the implementing regulations .
I am well aware that it is not possible to formulate everything in detail in a legislative text .
I have even criticised a considerable number of my parliamentary colleagues ' amendments for trying to do just that .
A piece of legislation cannot be crammed with helpful details , but there should certainly be a little more clarity .
If the implementing provisions subsequently spell out everything that can be done , we should then find a way , if possible , in which Parliament can participate in a Commission measure as a goodwill gesture , even beyond the scope of written agreements .
The two pillars are not yet pillars .
Or at least the second pillar , namely rural development , is not so much a pillar as a spindly little tree .
We shall have to tend and fertilise it very well until its trunk attains the same girth as the first pillar .
That will be exceptionally hard work .
Parliament knows that the Commission is on the right road , but that road is not yet very clearly signposted .
Let us try to work with you to mark out this route and perhaps also to find a means of bringing home to the Member States , in all their diversity , that rural development is not simply a matter of financing non-agricultural activities but that , by bringing stability to rural areas , it ultimately benefits agriculture and the agricultural economy .
Madam President , I am pleased that this oral question on the agricultural part of Agenda 2000 affords me the opportunity to continue our dialogue with the European Parliament which has started very promisingly , in my opinion , in the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development .
In view of the situation with regard to speaking time , I should like to give a very condensed report on the progress made by the Agriculture Council in examining the Commission proposals with a view to transposing them into statutory instruments .
I should like to concentrate on the main political issues that will be at the heart of future discussions .
I need hardly tell you that some of my comments will be made without prejudice to next week 's Agriculture Council discussions , the aim of which will be to formulate a clear political position as a contribution to the Vienna meeting of the European Council .
As you are also aware , it is the intention of the presidency to engage in further talks with the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development as soon as we have the results of the forthcoming Council meeting .
We are all conscious of the challenge posed by Agenda 2000 in general and particularly by the special status attaching to the common agricultural policy in that context .
It is now generally recognised by the body of Agriculture Ministers that the reform process initiated in 1992 must be continued , intensified , adapted and supplemented .
This necessity derives from both the inherent constraints within the farming world and the new extraneous challenges , such as the forthcoming round of WTO negotiations and enlargement of the EU .
It is therefore our duty in the context of our political responsibility for agriculture to take swift and concerted action to structure the CAP in a way that will determine the course to be followed in the global negotiations .
In my opinion , at any rate , this approach is preferable to a wait-and-see strategy , which would result in our having to take decisions that were forced on us by a deteriorating market situation on the one hand or by our non-EU partners on the other .
In this respect , we are proceeding from a number of basic principles which most Members of the House have approved and are able to endorse and which ought to enable us to complete the ambitious project of CAP reform on satisfactory terms , in the true interests of the farming community and to the advantage of consumers .
I am thinking here particularly of the European agricultural model , which ought to be further developed .
This model agricultural system must be multifunctional on the one hand and sustainable and competitive on the other ; in other words , it must cover the entire territory of the EU , including regions with specific problems .
This European model should not be unfamiliar to us , since the initial inspiration came from this House .
The model was endorsed in the conclusions of the Luxembourg European Council .
We also largely agree that the reform of the common agricultural policy has to result in arrangements that are economically prudent and reliable as well as socially acceptable , in appropriate earnings and in a balanced relationship between production sectors , producers and regions , and that it must prevent distortions of competition .
After all , we are firmly resolved to preserve budgetary discipline and are virtually unanimous in the view that the agricultural guideline should , as a matter of principle , be maintained as a ceiling and be calculated in accordance with the present formula , irrespective of what the guideline covers .
With regard to this point , however , I must point out that there has been a change in the position of some delegations on the agricultural guideline , as well as on the question of shifting some fiscal burdens from the CAP purse back to the Member States .
The European Council itself , moreover , has expressed the view that the Commission proposals offer a basis for further reform of the common agricultural policy .
This means that the completion of the reform process will depend on adjustments being made to these proposals .
In this context , it is imperative that the Vienna European Council should make considerable progress , in accordance with the Cardiff timetable , on the main components of Agenda 2000 , so that political agreement can be reached on the whole Agenda 2000 package by March 1999 at the latest .
The Austrian Presidency expects to engage in highly constructive cooperation with the European Parliament in this matter .
As far as the Agriculture Council is concerned , may I tell the honourable Member that tangible progress has been made since the meeting of the European Council in Cardiff .
For one thing , the Council has completed the process of identifying and clarifying the issues that will form the core of future negotiations .
This means that it can now move on to the next and more substantive stage of seeking ways and means of resolving these issues , possibly in the form of a range of options .
To this end , as I explained at the start of my remarks , the Agriculture Council is to adopt a report at its meeting this week for the Vienna European Council .
The aim of the report is to identify the general guidelines that have emerged from the papers produced to date , to outline the main progress made since the Cardiff meeting and to shed light on the issues on which the Member States still hold sharply differing views .
From my point of view , there is also a need to emphasise that the negotiations have to proceed at a very brisk pace after the Vienna European Council .
Since I assume that the timetable for dealing with Agenda 2000 which was set by the European Council in Cardiff will be adhered to , I believe it is desirable that agreement be reached as quickly as possible on the unresolved issues , so that the Agriculture Council is left with a limited number of key political issues to discuss at its March meeting . As you can imagine , the solution of these problems may depend to some extent on developments in the negotiations on other aspects of Agenda 2000 , particularly on the financial conditions .
For that reason , it would be very useful if the European Parliament 's preliminary reports were available on time .
I am gratified to note that the report on rural development , one of the most important areas where reforms are needed , will shortly be completed .
As far as the reform of the common organisation of the cereals , beef and milk markets is concerned , may I remind you that the Agriculture Council , at its November meeting , expressed the view that the approach adopted back in 1992 , the main element of which was a reduction of the price-support measures , combined with direct compensatory aid and accompanying measures , remains valid .
The Council also took the view that the suitability of this approach in specific situations and the weighting of the various measures should be assessed on a case-by-case basis , with all available internal and external factual information being taken into account .
The work that has been done on this subject , however , indicates that the Member States have different concepts of suitability .
There is actually quite wide-ranging agreement that this approach should be pursued in the domain of crop farming , irrespective of the size of the reduction in the intervention price and the amount of compensatory aid .
With regard to beef too , the great majority of the delegations consider this approach useful , again notwithstanding the amount of the reduction in the intervention price or of the compensatory aid .
Some delegations , however , doubt that this approach alone can control the supply situation and recommend provision for measures specifically designed to control supply , which would mean a smaller reduction in the intervention price .
As far as dairy products are concerned , the positions of the delegations differ widely .
Some Member States believe that this approach , and especially the lowering of prices , is unnecessary in the present market situation .
Others , however , believe that radical changes to the system are indispensable .
These differences derive partly from the opposing positions adopted by the delegations on the future of milk quotas .
While most of the delegations wish this quota to be retained , some Member States are calling for it to be abolished by 2006 .
There are numerous questions concerning details of the individual market regulations which we can certainly include in the discussion if so desired .
With regard to the proposed reform of the common organisation of the wine market , which was submitted in July , a technical examination is now being undertaken so that the key questions can then be identified quickly at the political level .
For that reason , I cannot provide you with a résumé of the Member States ' positions at the present time .
However , I should like to make two comments , because I believe they are important .
First of all , the discussions to date and the exploratory talks held by the Council in September have shown that the Member States generally regard the present Commission proposal as a decidedly better discussion basis than the proposal of 1993 / 94 .
The more flexible approach and the general objectives are considered on the whole to represent substantial progress .
In addition , let me say to the honourable Member , since it was he who asked the question , that this proposal should be regarded as part of the general package of CAP reforms under Agenda 2000 .
So in order to achieve this goal , it is essential that we progress as quickly as possible .
It would be very , very helpful - and I address this appeal to all of you in this House - if the opinion on this proposal could be delivered as soon as possible , so that we in the Council can make the progress that needs to be made .
Some very definite progress has been achieved in the realm of rural development .
This is an issue with extremely important implications for the future of our farmers and the entire countryside .
That is precisely why the presidency devoted its informal meeting in St Wolfgang to this topic .
There is unanimous agreement in the Council that vital importance attaches to rural development policy as the second pillar of the common agricultural policy .
The delegations also largely accept the recommended integrated policy framework .
There is also very wide-ranging agreement on the objectives that should underlie the granting of assistance for the development of rural areas .
Moreover , the idea of developing forestry and giving it a more prominent role in the package of rural development measures has also been welcomed , although I cannot deny that the Member States still differ on the scope of individual measures in the package , because most of this domain , of course , falls within the jurisdiction of the Member States .
Various important questions will have to be dealt with in greater detail so that they can be definitively resolved .
In my view , the main questions are these : firstly , the type of specific measures that can be implemented - in other words , whether these measures should only relate to activities connected with agriculture in all its multifunctional aspects , or whether multisectoral contributions to rural development of a non-agricultural nature can be considered .
Secondly , the link proposed by the Commission between the compensatory allowance for less-favoured areas , subject to compliance with certain environmental requirements , has elicited comments from many delegations to the effect that the compensatory allowance is primarily a socioeconomic instrument designed to compensate for natural disadvantages .
The third and last question relates to sources of funding and especially to the Commission proposal that rural development be switched from the Guidance to the Guarantee Section of the EAGGF .
As far as the financial regulations are concerned , it is logically obvious that the discussions on those can only be concluded at a later stage , particularly in the light of the negotiations on other elements of the Commission proposals , the results of which will have to be reflected in the provisions of the financial regulations .
My own point of view on the question of horizontal regulations is that these proposals include innovations which must be examined extremely thoroughly before they can actually become common political guidelines .
As for compliance with environmental requirements , there is general agreement on the need to promote the attainment of environmental targets ; this , incidentally , is wholly in line with the European agricultural model that all the relevant bodies want to see developed .
But there is still a need to examine how these targets are to be achieved , and particularly whether they should be incorporated into the common organisation of the markets or whether they should be prescribed elsewhere , for example in specific regulatory frameworks .
Moving on to the criteria governing the employment of workers , there are divisions among the Member States on basic principles as well as on procedural details .
This is evidently a highly sensitive subject which requires more study .
Lastly , with regard to the sliding scale of total grants paid to farms on the basis of farm size , the delegations evidently differ on this point too . Several delegations agree with the principle or are keeping an open mind on the maximum amount , whereas some delegations still disagree with the Commission 's approach .
I hope that I have managed to provide you in this brief summary with all the most important information on the work that has been taking place in the Agriculture Council and on the prospects for future progress in connection with the agricultural element of Agenda 2000 .
I am confident that this dialogue will help to foster the deliberations that are taking place in Parliament and in the other institutions .
You may rest assured that the Austrian Presidency is willing to do whatever is necessary to ensure that the targets laid down in the Cardiff timetable are met and that the process is therefore duly completed in March 1999 in the interests of the agricultural sector , which needs a clear vision of the future .
Thank you .
Madam President , first I would like to compliment Mr Görlach on his report .
His argument is very convincing , and reflects our group 's constant attention to agricultural and rural policy .
We are disappointed that , in fact , despite all the declarations and grand statements at Cork , this second pillar of the CAP still looks like a shaky crutch .
Yes , simpler procedures for rural development programmes are an excellent step forward , and the new role of the regions and strengthened partnership are important , but the paramount problem is still funding , which is pretty limited at 10 % of all CAP expenditure .
This suggests that planning for the countryside , that vast physical and human European resource , will be largely driven by traditional market policy with its powerful funding and instruments , which makes our poor little rural policy look like a lady-in-waiting
In this context , I fear that the entirely legitimate attempt to extend rural policies to cover more than just agriculture - mentioned by the Commissioner - runs the risk of generating eagerness and expectations everywhere which are bound to be disappointed .
We will not be able to satisfy all the rural communities wanting to take advantage of them .
I think that is a sign of the difficulty and uncertainty surrounding this endlessly awaited reform of the CAP .
And our motion for a resolution on the Agenda 2000 agricultural reform is geared to that very point .
We are driven by two concerns : the first is that the crisis situation on the international markets may hold up reform while waiting for better times .
Instead , we think it is necessary to press on rapidly and stick to the planned timetable for decisions next spring .
And there is no need to water this reform down excessively and have a kind of artificial reform - as the Commissioner said - especially on those innovative aspects of the horizontal regulation which are supposed to be an opportunity to reconcile people to the CAP and justify the aid it covers , and which , in my opinion , threaten to disappear altogether .
Mr Görlach is right - if the Commission 's proposal , here too , had been a bit more courageous and a bit less wedded to a rather too convenient subsidiarity , we might not have reached this point .
But now we must move forward , and there is absolutely no need to curl up like a hedgehog to defend the status quo .
I believe a fortress Europe would be the worst signal to send to the CEECs who even now see their accession date fading sadly into the distance .
The second concern is the one this debate on the cofinancing of income support raises in me .
Commissioner , I appreciated your extreme prudence at the last meeting with the Committee on Agriculture because , in fact , this logic of net budget balances , which has got absolutely nothing to do with the real issues of reforming the CAP , threatens to introduce a dangerous virus into the whole construction of Europe , and I do not want all of this to lead to another reform deadlock .
Our message - at least the one we have tried to get across in this resolution - is that it is right to have the cards on the table and let the farming world have its say too , because it cannot be made just a passive witness of decisions taken over its head .
If we want to grasp the opportunity of the debate on budgetary resources to talk about expenditure , and hence about the CAP , fine , but what drives us are the real problems of the CAP - the unfair distribution of its benefits - which the President of the Court of Auditors also described to us in this House yesterday .
I think it would be wrong to erect an ideological wall against the renationalisation which the cofinancing would provoke , and see it as a demon .
But it would be equally wrong to allow purely accounting logic to prevail over aspects of balance , cohesion and solidarity which are even more necessary in the new CAP than they were in the old one .
So debate and negotiation should come together in this context .
I think it will be best for everyone .
Madam President , I wish to greet the President-in-Office and the Commissioner .
I should also like to congratulate Mr Görlach on his excellent report .
What are the main issues of concern for the European Parliament that led to the tabling of this oral question ?
You only have to consider the report on the general aspects of the reform approved by the European Parliament in July , a report that I myself drafted , the declarations made at the 1997 Agriculture Council or the Cardiff European Council , or the statement made recently by the Austrian Presidency to find the answer .
But I should like to reiterate the main concerns .
First of all , we must show caution and moderation in the reduction of prices , especially in the milk and beef sectors .
Secondly , we need to maintain the intervention regimes , albeit in a more flexible and operational form .
Thirdly , we must ensure greater equality between different crops , farmers and types of farm so that the CAP can finally contribute to the economic and social cohesion of the European countryside .
Fourthly , we should strike more of an internal balance within the CAP by strengthening the so-called second pillar of rural development .
It is incomprehensible that there should be virtually no change in the appropriations earmarked for this extremely important pillar when around 10 % of the guideline resources have not been used .
Fifthly , we need to preserve an adequate number of farmers working the land . This is a major concern in the less-favoured , peripheral and ultra-peripheral areas , which are already running a great risk of abandonment and desertification .
If , as is proposed , the reform of the CAP is limited to a reduction in prices and their compensation by means of aids indexed to productivity rates , then we shall be carrying out a reform only for the more efficient farmers .
That would be a shocking contradiction with the political aims of defending the European farming model and keeping the countryside alive .
Those aims have always been pursued and reiterated by the Commission and the Council .
Let us leave aside such political hypocrisy .
It is now 13 months since Agenda 2000 was first presented and 7 months since the proposals became more practical . But we have yet to see any signs of progress despite the efforts made by the Commissioner and Jacques Santer .
As if that were not enough , there is now the proposal on cofinancing , which has poisoned the whole debate over the CAP .
We do not want to avoid this debate and we cannot escape it but it goes far beyond the question of the agricultural policy and is a debate that we have to hold at the right time , not now .
The European Parliament has reached a broad consensus on the CAP but the question of financing at this stage cannot be allowed to poison our debate , nor should it be allowed to divide us .
Madam President , I should particularly like to welcome the President-in-Office , the Austrian Minister for Agriculture , along with his many assistants who are here this evening .
This is a very positive signal from the Austrian Presidency .
I should also like to congratulate Mr Görlach on his report , which I think lays a very solid foundation for the rural policy in Europe which my group feels is so badly needed .
It will have to be defended in future , particularly in international circles in my view , as part of the ' blue box ' .
While we on this side of the Atlantic are busy drastically reforming the agriculture policy that we feel we need , those on the other side are sending out completely different signals , however understandable this may be , by suddenly increasing their subsidies enormously .
It would be interesting if the Commission could analyse , and let Parliament know , whether this extra aid is classified as being in the blue box or the green box .
It will inevitably be part of Europe 's future agricultural policy , to be paid for from Category 1 .
The main problem with income support in future will be that once the Central and Eastern European countries have joined , they are sure to apply for it .
This will be very difficult : it will become unaffordable , and then the common agricultural policy itself will come under threat .
I favour cofinancing under strict conditions : only if there is no renationalisation , and if the Member States are obliged to pay or face strict sanctions if they fail to do so .
You will not be surprised to hear that I also advocate a policy of promoting good-quality agricultural products .
In my report a few months ago , I gave a detailed account of how this should be approached , and I hope that the Austrian Presidency will bring this matter up again in its discussions in future .
Madam President , Mr President-in-Office , as the Commissioner explained to us a few moments ago , in answer to the protest from certain Member States who make net contributions to the Community budget , the Commission has just drawn up a report on the own resources of the European Union , with a view to readjusting Member States ' contributions .
The Commission puts forward three options , one of which is the national cofinancing of direct aid to agriculture at a level of 25 % .
This proposal may be tempting at first sight as it would have a considerable effect in terms of readjustment for certain Member States whose agricultural sectors are smaller than the Community average .
However , in the short and medium term , there is a danger that national cofinancing could weigh heavily on the national annual budgets of certain Member States , such as France , who would be forced to significantly increase their agricultural budget .
Yet this goes against the policy of controlled expenditure needed for the success of the euro .
Also , national cofinancing represents a real threat to financial solidarity among Member States .
There is a danger of intolerable imbalances among the fifteen Member States , which would lead to the formation of a two-speed Europe : a Europe of rich states and a Europe of poor states .
I am opposed to national cofinancing .
The Commission 's proposal poses a serious threat to the common agricultural policy and could mark the beginning of its renationalisation and , over time , its disappearance .
The progressive and underhand dismantling of the CAP would irreparably challenge European unity as the CAP is the first Community policy which , for 50 years and despite battles fought over agricultural matters , was able to give strength to the cohesive force and spirit of solidarity that are characteristic of the European Community .
CAP reform is necessary but it should not trigger the collapse of Europe .
Madam President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , I think firstly that the Cunha report - which is an excellent report - brought to light the contradictions , imbalances and effects of the 1992 reform .
I do not think it is right that the Commission should propose Agenda 2000 to us without having completed the task of presenting a report evaluating the effects of the 1992 reform .
Commissioner , reports from universities are not enough : the Commission 's political responsibility obliged it to set out the effects of the previous reform before this Parliament in order to have an adequate debate .
This was one of the Commission 's major responsibilities .
With regard to the proposals , the Commission has restricted itself to drawing up proposals for sectorial reforms , without having an overall plan . What is more , the reforms it is proposing are , in general , price reductions that are not partially compensated for by direct aid to incomes , and a widespread system of replacing purchasing intervention with aid for private storage .
With the development of the international financial crisis , it would also have been desirable to use more specific tools for analysing these measures and the effects that the international crisis might have on this sector .
Finally , on behalf of my group , I would like to congratulate Mr Görlach , and draw attention to rural development , Commissioner , as neither the tools nor the financial resources considered in the Commission 's proposals are satisfactory with regard to this issue , and they will in no way be able to compensate for the negative effects of the remaining proposals on the rural society and economy .
I would like to add a few thoughts on the subject of co-financing .
What is proposed is not a policy of solidarity , because the real economic policies - the internal market policies and the common commercial policy - are not reflected in the budget .
Therefore , presenting matters in terms of net balances is inappropriate and very inaccurate .
Perhaps we are seeing there the hand of a Member State , and the Commission should be more generous and not give in to certain pressures .
Allow me a final thought : what is happening with Agenda 2000 is an example of institutional game play within the context of Europe .
It is very important to keep to timetables , but it is just as important to take the right decisions , with the appropriate methods and pace of debate and with sufficient transparency .
Madam President , Commissioner , a great deal of money is spent in the agricultural domain ; just imagine that all the money that has been poured into agriculture in the past had gone towards this second pillar we are discussing here today .
Commissioner , it is impossible to assess the extent to which rural areas could have flourished , how many jobs would have been created and preserved , how much agricultural spin-off development we could have initiated too .
If we consider how much innovation has taken place as a result of the frugal programmes we have had and through the funds that have trickled into the Leader programme and the accompanying measures , we can obtain a rough idea of the sort of impact these programmes would have had if they had been furnished with the necessary capital .
Nevertheless , what is planned for the second pillar is very sound in terms of quality , but in quantitative terms its resources are meagre .
We should be bolder here , and above all in the other areas , in the traditional agricultural domains , in the support premiums for price reductions ; we should surely look long and hard at the social and environmental quality of our measures and adjust them accordingly , with a view to bringing them into line with our social and environmental policies and to charting a new course , so that these funds will eventually flow into what we now call the second pillar , which within five or ten years - perhaps we should not set ourselves too tight a schedule - could become the first pillar .
If we make wise use of the funds at our disposal , if we do not let them disappear into the national treasuries , we stand a great chance of succeeding .
I would ask you , Mr President-in-Office , Commissioner , to be rather more daring and to adopt a somewhat more positive approach in explaining to the public the great opportunities that lie along this route .
Your native country has some valuable tips and good examples to offer us in this respect .
Madam President , Commissioner , Mr President-in-Office , I would simply like to make two points .
Firstly , we are used to hearing that the CAP has achieved its objectives of self sufficiency , as set by the Treaty .
Then we immediately think of overproduction , set-aside , fallow land , the drop in agricultural prices and yet , it has to be said , this does not really reflect the reality of the situation .
The Union is in deficit in certain products that it could easily produce itself .
We import 70 % of proteins for livestock farming , but also 50 % of honey and a considerable amount of citrus fruits , fish , wood and even sheep whilst , at the same time , troubled rural areas remain unused .
Also , on a budgetary level , we should not be decreasing aid but rather improving it , without diluting it with hypothetical cofinancing . Such cofinancing promotes selfishness in national accounting and harms the founding principles of solidarity within the Union .
This reform should redistribute production among the various regions , climate zones and countries .
This reform should stop making intensification a priority .
The main aim of reform cannot be to satisfy the multinationals of the food and farming sector .
We understand that European citizens do not wish to continue financing such a convoluted system .
A European agricultural model does exist .
It is not uniquely based on the Union 's exports , nor on a widespread drop in prices .
It is based on the multi-functional nature of our agricultural sector and on the patchwork of our land . We should ensure that they complement one another with a view to sustainable rural development in the human interest , and the creation of jobs .
And what of the world market ?
We must , of course , take our place in it , but not at the expense of our fellow citizens and their health , nor at the expense of their environment .
This is also the price we pay for European integration .
It is also the price we pay for having a European Union , a worthy partner that is respected and well-known in the globalised world .
Madam President , the proposal for a regulation on support for rural development from the EAGGF incorporates all of the existing measures relating to Objective 5a of structural policy .
I find that the Commission proposal lacks realism and does not take into account the negative impact that the 1992 reform of the common agricultural policy had on the economic fabric of rural areas .
A perfect example is the frantic race for output , productivity and enlargement in order to maintain an income that no longer allows profitable investment .
Our group , both in committee and in the House , has tabled a series of amendments which include all economic sectors in rural areas in the support mechanism for extensive agricultural production . This support is provided by compensating for the supplementary production costs for farms in less-favoured areas .
A large number of these amendments have already been adopted by different majorities in the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , thereby showing both the Commission and the Council how much importance we place on rural development for a healthy balance in European society .
As regards financing the CAP , we are opposed to any system where Member States cofinance a common policy due solely to the fact that Article 2 of the Treaty of Rome lays down the principle of financial solidarity .
Moreover , although the national cofinancing of aid would at first be compulsory , the methods for implementing it would soon become optional or discretionary .
As a result of this cofinancing proposal , Mr President , I question the Commission 's objectives .
Do you really want to maintain a Community agricultural policy , the only existing common policy along with the Common Fisheries Policy ?
If this is not the case , then it must be stated clearly and without pretence in order to allow Member States to renationalise agricultural policy to defend their own interests themselves .
Madam President , CAP reform is dictated by outside considerations , particularly in the eyes of the Commission , and it should now be clear that developments in the international arena , with the crisis in Asia and Russia , mean we must be more realistic about export possibilities for our agricultural products .
We must be wary of being too confident in this area .
Similarly , enlargement to include the CEECs should be subject to careful consideration .
In this respect , it must be clear that such enlargement should not lead to our common policies , particularly the CAP , being watered down .
In addition , it is also in our interests as Europeans to note that , currently , the United States is once again being forced to strengthen public support for its farmers .
These are new arguments to justify our CAP and the European agricultural model within the WTO .
But I would also like to draw attention to more internal aspects of our forthcoming reform . The legitimacy of our agricultural policy needs to be renewed .
For the consumer , the quality of products needs reinforcing , and the taxpayer needs to be reassured that public money is being wisely spent . And our fellow citizens need to be reassured that we are safeguarding regional balances and promoting sustainable development .
More importantly , we must make our CAP more coherent , as the Cunha report suggested .
From this point of view , I would like to warn against the initiatives and decisions in favour of Member States cofinancing the CAP as this measure , if it were taken , would challenge the whole principle of financial solidarity , one of the basic tenets of the CAP .
It may also lead to the renationalisation of the CAP as , when national partners have to vote on appropriations for their country 's farmers , it will not be long before they use national criteria to decide which way they vote .
For these reasons I cannot sanction the idea of cofinancing , and I call on my colleagues to be most careful on this matter .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I too should like to begin by thanking the rapporteur for his cooperation and his willingness to compromise .
A report on the funding of measures for rural areas is very difficult to deal with , not only because of the host of amendments but also because of the diverse needs of the Member States .
The development and promotion of rural areas is a particular concern of mine , since I am convinced that Europe , in all its diversity , will only have a future if its less-developed regions , including its rural areas , receive targeted and effective support .
I therefore crave your indulgence , ladies and gentlemen , for my repeated interventions in the House on behalf of rural areas , but I consider rural development to be a very important subject which warrants these constant reminders and which needs to be explained clearly to all our citizens .
Alongside regional policy , agricultural policy plays an important role in the development of rural areas .
While regional policy focuses its array of instruments and resources on supporting the rural population and the economic base of small and medium-sized businesses , agricultural policy supports the farming community through the EAGGF .
This fund and the regional support measures are now to be made available as a combined package , primarily to meet agricultural needs and requirements .
In my opinion , this idea of an integrated policy for rural areas is extremely important , but let me emphasise that care must be taken from the outset to ensure that these resources are used efficiently .
In other words , measures which primarily affect agriculture must be financed from this fund , whereas measures that affect rural areas without having any link at all with agriculture and the multifunctionality of rural areas should actually be supported within the framework of regional policy .
I also support the constructive approach based on the principle of good professional practice .
Good farming practice is really the basis of the way in which farmers run their businesses .
They must be specially recompensed for any contributions they make , over and above that basic farming practice , to improve the environment , promote animal welfare , care for the countryside and help society in general .
Let me just remind you of the Commission 's policy , the aim of which is a relentless process of price liberalisation ; that makes it all the more important that our farmers should have the opportunity to top up their incomes by providing additional services .
I am naturally a staunch advocate of transparency in the production chain , of environmentally acceptable production methods and of high standards of animal welfare .
Farmers , however , cannot be expected to make these contributions without the guarantee of a commensurate income . It is on that guarantee that the future of our European model of agriculture depends .
Madam President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , Agenda 2000 aims to facilitate the eastward enlargement of the EU and to prepare for the next WTO talks .
The Agenda 2000 timetable was decided at the Edinburgh summit , and the ELDR Group is pressing ahead with the agreement of reforms laid down in the timetable .
The costs of enlargement have been assessed too conservatively .
The global economic situation has got worse and so the plan for the funding of enlargement has altered .
The new situation prompted the Commission to draft a report on own resources , proposing as one solution the partial assumption of the burden of funding agricultural expenditure by the individual states .
This national funding of Common Agricultural Policy expenditure is already routine in Finland , for example , which acquired the right to finance aid itself during the transition period , in order to ease the integration of Finnish agriculture into the EU single market .
The co-funding of environmental aid is also something already happening .
The national funding of agricultural expenditure must be very strictly regulated , so that farmers in the Member States receive equal treatment .
When operating in a single market under very different circumstances the worst-off producer regions must be supported by means of a common agricultural policy .
The Agenda 2000 reform , therefore , should have given more weight to the needs of the worse-off regions , as was called for in the Luxembourg resolution .
I hope more consideration will be given to these needs in future .
The Agenda 2000 reforms further reduce the share producers get from the market place , which is a particularly serious problem for the worse-off regions .
The share of direct aid in the income structure for the Finnish farmer has now grown too large .
Agenda 2000 is only exacerbating the situation .
How , I would like to know , is the spirit of enterprise in farming to be kept up ?
The provisions on forestry aid in the Agenda 2000 reforms are worded very unclearly , and it is thus difficult to discover what they mean , for example , in terms of funding .
The ELDR Group opposes extending the aid policy to cover the forestry sector , which falls into the category of free trade .
Madam President , in the available time it is not possible to deal with the many challenges facing European agriculture or the role of farming as a central pillar in rural infrastructure .
Neither is it possible to evaluate that role in economic terms .
In spite of generous EU support , which I acknowledge , family farms are disappearing from the rural landscape .
The age profile of farmers is deteriorating and young people no longer see farming as a sustainable career .
How then is the European family farm model to survive ?
What are the consequences for long-term food security and quality , not to mention the role of farmers as managers of the environment ?
To those politicians who see farmers as a legitimate target to boost their own political careers with urban voters , I say that they are displaying an appalling lack of understanding of the unique role of agriculture in the context of broader national and EU policy .
They are ignoring the fact that in the present circumstances food is now being produced at profit levels that are marginal and , in many cases , below the cost of production .
In Ireland there is certainly a short-term crisis for beef and sheep producers which could not have been foreseen at the time of the 1992 reform .
The collapse of the Russian economy and the fall-out from BSE are just some of the problems that are impacting on our beef sector .
Taking the long-term view in the context of Agenda 2000 , we must ensure that family farms and their individual enterprises are supported within the available budget resources .
Large-scale commercial enterprises should not be allowed to usurp funding which should go , in my view , go to family farming .
In conclusion , I fully support those who say that there should be no co-financing of the common agricultural policy .
I would certainly oppose any move towards renationalisation .
Madam President , I should like to congratulate Mr Görlach on his excellent report , in which he emphasises the fact that rural development is in danger of falling between two stools , in other words being virtually gambled away , since according to the Commission 's proposal , it is no longer to be a separate objective .
I wonder whether a proper analysis of the consequences has been carried out .
It is important to support and encourage interaction between rural areas and towns , since each provides the other 's resources .
The development of agriculture - in which the EU plays an important part - has brought about a situation in which it is often impossible to depend on the family farm as the principle means of employment and sole source of income .
Running a farm often has to be combined with other work to make it feasible for family members to remain in the countryside .
The situation is particularly acute in sparsely populated areas .
Therefore , the support criteria need to be changed , otherwise only the large agricultural units will continue to thrive , while the small , environmentally friendly farms see their future disappear .
Rural depopulation would continue , leading to the painful demise of small towns and villages , since it is the small and medium-sized undertakings that keep the countryside alive .
The EU 's agricultural policy therefore needs to be flexible to allow the countryside to go on flourishing .
Madam President , I should like to begin by congratulating the rapporteur .
He is a man we all respect within the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development and Parliament .
Rural development is being put forward at the moment as a second pillar for agriculture .
The question I ask myself is : will the second pillar be any use ?
You can only give it the strength it requires by providing sufficient finance to give maximum support to the rural community .
I am extremely concerned that the second pillar will create an even more uneven playing field within the European Union than presently exists .
To only make the agri-environmental measure mandatory is an extreme weakness .
It gives Member States the licence to pick and choose to their own advantage , which may not be in the best longer-term interests of people living in the country , especially those dependent on the land for their support .
Rural development , as proposed , can never hope to address the serious problems facing the rural and agricultural communities throughout the European Union at present .
This will not protect the family farm structure that we have within the European Union .
Farmers throughout Europe are asking where do we go from here ; what do we do and what have we done wrong ? We should ask ourselves what we have done wrong .
We are the people with the responsibility within the Commission and Parliament .
We are the people who have to point the way forward .
We are the people who have to find and ensure that there is a way forward .
Unfortunately , to date , I do not see within this proposal enough support for the family farm structure within the European Community .
Madam President , we need to be serious in this Parliament about achieving genuine reform of the common agricultural policy for the 21st century .
Mr Görlach produced an excellent report on the Commission proposals for rural development and put forward a small number of very practical amendments to bring them more closely in line with the Cork Declaration which the Commission had watered down somewhat .
Those amendments recognised the reality that in the conditions of the 21st century European agriculture will be much less labour-intensive and more mechanised in almost all sectors .
It is therefore essential to see rural development as support for the creation of a range of additional occupations in rural areas , not just those relating directly to agriculture and food processing , important elements though they will certainly continue to be in such areas .
It was therefore disappointing that the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development introduced many additional over-detailed amendments to link support primarily to farmers and weaken the commitment to wider rural development .
We are not the farmers ' committee and we have a duty to look beyond personal vested interests and towards the interests of all those citizens living in rural areas who will not find jobs in agriculture .
I hope this House will reject the majority of amendments so that we will have an opinion from the European Parliament which is realistic and constructive in adapting the European model of agriculture to new economic and social conditions as set out in the joint resolution from our colleagues , Mr Fantuzzi and Mr Graefe zu Baringdorf .
They identify as key factors sustainable development , quality food production , consumer safety , protection of the environment and biodiversity , animal welfare and rural development .
To achieve the latter we need LEADER type programmes to assist small-scale enterprises to develop new jobs in high technology as well as in tourism , traditional crafts and skills and environment-enhancing projects .
They should not only be in Objective 1 and 2 areas but everywhere the rural environment is suffering high unemployment and social deprivation .
Madam President , I have listened very carefully and have participated actively in many debates on the major elements of Agenda 2000 .
I fully agree that the Union must plan its course for the future .
But the proposals for CAP reform are based too heavily on measures to ease the cost of enlargement to the East and to satisfy US pressure in WTO .
It is very clear that there is a strong move to reduce farm prices to world price levels and the levels of Eastern Europe to save money .
This approach requires EU farmers to sell their products below the cost of production and depend for their income solely on partial compensation .
This is not sustainable and should be changed .
The system is already generating angry criticism of farmers as the amounts of these payments are identified separately from the costs of products that farmers produce and are seem by some as handouts .
In fact , you yourself , Commissioner , used the word subsidy .
The Court of Auditors report this week is a good example .
It certainly generated widespread headlines almost implying that farmers are criminals .
The system is also acting as a deterrent to young people making a career in farming .
The environmental benefit of their management , their energy and their skills is also being lost .
I can find no basis for the Commission 's optimism that farming incomes will increase except at the expense of a sharp decline in numbers .
The proposals will cost an extra six billion euros and make farmers a lot poorer .
I would appeal to the Commission to soften the severity of these proposals and find a better way .
Farmers in my country are already suffering a huge decline in income .
Beef prices to farmers are 40 % lower than two years ago .
Pig prices and sheep prices have collapsed .
Lastly , can I ask the Commission again to investigate why food prices to consumers are not reducing in line with the huge fall in farm prices ?
Madam President , Commissioner , Minister , I think that it is extremely important that we should follow up the report by Mr Görlach and the proposals from the Commission by developing a broad rural policy .
Why do we need this policy ?
The point has been made several times this evening : because we need new economic platforms in rural areas .
I would like to draw attention to two aspects that have scarcely been mentioned this evening .
Eighty per cent of the population live in towns or cities .
I think that people in rural areas must realise that , when we develop a rural policy , it has to be geared to the people in the towns .
This is what I mean by a broad rural policy .
I would also ask for attention to be given to women in rural areas , who are often a powerful voice for change , often much more so than men .
I would like to see them given extra help as part of this rural policy .
Madam President , we agree that the CAP needs to be reformed , partly because of the new economic circumstances but also because of the malfunctions that have been noted in it so far .
We say yes to reform , reform that will reduce the inequalities between countries , regions and farmers , reform which will contribute towards ecological development of the countryside , reform which will support the farming populations in our countries .
So we back the measures proposed by Agenda 2000 , which move along those lines and are compatible with the fundamental principles of cohesion and financial solidarity .
We must point out , however , that like some other objectives , the objective of developing the countryside will be nothing more than wishful thinking unless it is accompanied by sufficient funding .
However , the need to reform the CAP must not serve as an excuse for its virtual abolition .
Consequently , we cannot support proposals such as the co-financing of direct aid for farming , which , though it responds to the demand by some Member States that their net contributions to the Community 's budget should be reduced , leads the CAP along the way to renationalisation and in essence calls into question the level of the agricultural guideline .
At the same time , the adoption of co-funding will have an adverse effect on the flow of funding from the Structural Funds to the Union 's poorer countries , so increasing the inequalities that exist already .
I think the need for reform is more or less agreed .
That should allow us to proceed more steadily , taking careful steps towards a well thought out reform which the farming world really needs .
Madam President , Minister , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , this important debate must end with approval of a document on the reform of the CAP .
I do not want the difficulties that have emerged in relations between the political groups to lead to the defeat of the resolutions tabled .
In my opinion , this would be serious for the European Parliament , which ought to express itself clearly and not just leave the decisions to others .
There has to be a realistic assessment .
Cofinancing can make it possible to resolve the conflict which has developed on the net contributions of Member States to the agricultural budget .
What must be avoided is renationalisation of the CAP and reduction and weakening of the spirit of internal solidarity .
That is why I am in favour of the proposals which clearly uphold all these principles and I urge all my colleagues , starting with the Italians , to vote consistently tomorrow .
Ladies and gentlemen , if we do not decide on an approach here and if the Council does not find a solution to the problems soon , the risk is that the decision will pass to others , to the Ecofin Council of course , and it certainly is not likely to increase the relevant resources , which would be needed to sustain the reform of the CAP .
So the cofinancing can be there if the demand for a new equilibrium and internal cohesion remains firm .
Madam President , Commissioner , 80 to 90 % of Europe is countryside .
A vast area of Sweden consists of countryside , but only a small fraction - 10 to 20 % - of the population lives there .
If no one lived in the countryside , half of Sweden would be uninhabited .
It is therefore very important for us that support should be given to rural development and agriculture .
Support for Objective 6 should be included in Objective 1 , and support for Objective 5 should be included in Objective 2 .
The criteria for support should remain the same .
The countryside , the people , nature , the soil and water are all resources that Europe should be using sensibly .
It is also important to strengthen local communities , coordinate support , address education , protect the environment , encourage organic farming and invest in bio-energy and new types of fuel such as ethanol and methanol , as well as in tourism and transport .
However , these activities must take place in accordance with the wishes of the people concerned , if rural development is to be successful .
Madam President , Commissioner , Mr President-in-Office , Agenda 2000 is most certainly one of the issues that has caused the greatest activity in the European Parliament over the past ten years .
The length of the debates and the number of meetings that all Parliament 's committees have devoted to it lead us to expect a far-reaching project .
We were finally about to give birth to Europe , so to speak , to an ideal Europe where our children were be able to live in peace as free citizens , from the Atlantic to the Urals .
We were going to open our doors to new countries , countries that may be poor in financial terms but are rich in hope .
At last we had stopped being afraid and were marching towards the creation of a European state .
This state was to be a area of intellectual freedom where the concerns of political and economic leaders would be centred around human concerns .
We were going to leave hormone-laden meat and the quest for profit at all costs to the Americans and to their World Trade Organisation .
We were ready for true solidarity , where the rich - as indeed we are - offer a helping hand to give and to support rather than to take and to trample .
Yet this was just another dream .
I woke up this morning and my blood ran cold when I realised how we have behaved .
Once again , we are ready to pretend to help our poor , each of us entrenched in our own little states , made more callous by our narrow-mindedness .
Sadly , cofinancing will for example legally allow our richer states to help their own farmers .
If there is no longer any solidarity in Europe , if Agenda 2000 consists simply of allowing rich Member States to obtain rebates of their own money , then who will pay for the poor in the poorer countries , be they in southern Europe today or in eastern Europe tomorrow ?
Once again , we are doing the opposite of what should be done , and this is unfortunate for our children .
Madam President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , nobody doubts that a reform is necessary and nobody doubts that the common agricultural policy is not entirely fulfilling the role assigned to it in the Treaty .
When this policy is judged from the point of view of its contribution to economic and social cohesion , the level of criticism is sometimes outrageous .
However , in my opinion , the most worrying thing is that with a reform process that is so highly complicated , particularly given the small amount of resources set aside for rural development policies , the debate on the Community 's own resources has become involved .
In this context , it is true that the Commission has restricted itself to presenting a report with various options , but our experience in the Community means that we are accustomed to fearing reports , White Papers and Green Papers drawn up by the Commission .
In the end , there is a considerable possibility that the option that has the most support and the most justification will become a definitive part of Community legislation .
Co-financing direct aid to incomes represents not only a breakdown in the principle of financial solidarity , but also a violation of the principle of ' means necessary ' , as laid down in Article F.3 of the Treaty on European Union .
It is not a means of improving the efficiency of the CAP , but simply a mechanism for redistributing the burden of spending .
The proposals involved are clearly regressive , are largely detrimental to the ' economic and social cohesion countries ' and benefit the more prosperous countries , with the exception of France and , to a lesser extent , Denmark .
This would lead to the paradox whereby enlargement would take place at the expense of the ' cohesion countries ' , whose relative share in category 2 has been considerably reduced and that , in addition to this , the reform of CAP funding would also affect those countries again .
Moreover , Commissioner , that does not take account of the fact that , according to the information provided by the Commission in June , the list of direct aid that Directorate-General XIX has used for its calculations includes a much smaller amount of aid than that which is considered direct and subject to regulation in the reform that we are currently dealing with .
This means that the proposals are even more regressive .
Madam President , the common agricultural policy was established in the 1950s , when there were only six Member States .
As nearly everyone recognises , this policy is not ready to cope with an enlargement which will mean the Union consisting of some 20 countries .
The Commission has submitted its proposals for specific changes to the agriculture policy , and we are currently studying our attitude to the reform of the CAP in several parliamentary committees .
The main ideas are well known : the across-the-board support schemes will be abandoned , and European farmers will have to compete on the world market , where liberalisation is now in full swing .
This will mean that prices have to fall into line with those on the world market , and that will put an end to milk quotas and stocks of surpluses .
This should not take place at the expense of our farmers , who will find it difficult to hold their own in free competition .
On the contrary , future agricultural support needs to be much more targeted .
Price support should be replaced by increased direct aid for those farmers who really need help .
Support will also continue to be provided for areas and sectors which have special problems .
The present form of agricultural support is based on quantity rather than quality .
It takes no account of animal welfare and environmental considerations , and in my view is in fact totally out of step with the growing importance which most consumers attach to these values .
The agricultural policy cannot continue without change if European farming is to participate in competition on the world market .
And the CAP currently swallows up more than half the EU 's total budget , and with enlargement things will become even worse .
Our consumers are increasingly demanding to be told what their food contains and how it has been produced .
They want to have natural systems of production which protect the welfare of animals and do not harm the environment .
It is important to realise that we have to organise our common agricultural policy so that it meets the current demands both for the present Member States and - not least - for those which join in future .
Madam President , Commissioner , the farmers in the new federal states , like farmers everywhere , are following the decision-making processes in the realm of agricultural reform very closely .
Even though it has not yet filtered through to everyone - I know that it filtered through to you long ago - most of these farms of ours correspond to the European model of agriculture .
They are multifunctional , they are sustainable and they are at least potentially competitive .
We all know that some of those in favoured locations are very competitive .
Let me say a few words on multifunctionality with special reference to communal farms , which of course account for most of our farmland , especially in less-favoured locations . Not only are these farms multifunctional , but - and this is our main concern , and I believe you are aware of it - in truly rural areas where unemployment is in the 30 to 40 % range , such as Mecklenburg / West Pomerania and other regions , they are the only guarantors of the relatively few jobs that still exist .
With regard to this second pillar , to which we all look forward eagerly and which ought to become strong as quickly as possible , under no circumstances must we permit the rules governing the first pillar to break down the last bastion of employment in these regions .
I believe this point has been taken on board .
As far as long-term prospects are concerned , I should like to make explicit reference to the re-established family farms , which are reasonably sized from our point of view , because their size is based on the sole objective of passing on the farm as a viable business to the next generation .
Here too , the degressive intentions of the Commission meet with very little comprehension .
Madam President , Mr President-in-Office , Commissioner , I shall begin with the point I feel is closest to the statement made by the Commissioner , that is , we cannot carry out a ' reformlet ' but it must be a real reform - I would even say a great reform .
The problem facing us at the end of this century is not one of production .
Production is doing fine and Europe has nothing to worry about .
Since 1950 the rural population has dropped from 35 % to 5 % , yet production has increased almost eightfold . As you have just said , Commissioner , this reform is going to lead more people away from the countryside .
That means that the Commissioner is going to spend half of the Community budget on far less than half of the population and , since there is profound injustice in the entire common agricultural policy , the Commissioner is going to spend 40 % of the Community budget to benefit 1 % of the richest people in the Community .
While 20 % of all farmers get 80 % , the Commissioner can work it out for himself that 1 % of the richest are going to be receiving 40 % of the Community budget .
After all , the problem is not one of production .
The problem is one of justice , a just policy to defend people living in the countryside .
That policy of justice is not understood or even being discussed by the Commission .
That is the fundamental issue at stake because today 's problem is whether the Commissioner or the Council are going to put a complete end to aid to production .
As they stand , they are the enemy of quality , the enemy of the environment , and the enemy of jobs , because the crops that the Commissioner gives most of the finances to are those with the highest levels of unemployment : cereals currently receive 43 % but producing cereals is the least labour-intensive of all the types of farming that exist .
In other words , unemployment is being subsidised .
The Commissioner is doing nothing to regulate , set ceilings or ensure that justice prevails .
It is the vital issue of justice that we ought to be discussing because productivity is doing very well , thank you .
Madam President , although I am speaking last , I do not think I am speaking about anything trivial if I take up the points made on this issue by the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection .
The aims of agricultural reform in the Agenda 2000 document are in principle very much a step in the right direction , taking account of the decisions taken , for example , at the meetings in Amsterdam and Cardiff .
The aim is to make agricultural policy more environmentally-friendly , and to serve the needs of the consumer to a greater extent .
In practice this is not actually being implemented very successfully .
The problem is that the Commission is leaving these issues to be decided at national level .
The decision on whether or not to link environmental matters with income support is being left to the national authorities .
There is no desire to make joint decisions , but this is vital if we are to be able to change tack .
Agriculture , as is well known , is one of the worst polluters of soil and water .
We will only see genuine improvement when we devise common rules for good agricultural practice which apply the principle of sustainable development , and only when these practises are introduced can we share the benefits of a common agricultural policy .
As for future agricultural policy in the European Union , the issues have been gone over at many summit meetings .
Along with the approach to the environment that emerged from the Cardiff conference , emphasis must be given to the policies agreed at Luxembourg , which stated that in the future we must be able to practise farming everywhere in the European Union area , including the north .
Thank you , Mrs Myller .
The Council and the Commission have indicated that they will forego their statements if there are no further questions , as seems to be the case .
I am grateful to everyone for staying with us for so long .
I have received eight motions for resolutions tabled pursuant to Rule 37 ( 2 ) .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 9.30 a.m.
Finally , I must not forget to thank the interpreters , who have worked for much longer than was originally planned .
I wish you a safe journey home .
( The sitting was closed at 0.17 a.m. )
Mr President , I am sure the House will join with me in condemning the action of the British House of Lords last night in rejecting the British Government 's attempt to bring the United Kingdom in line with the rest of the European Union by introducing proportional representation in the United Kingdom .
Mr Donnelly , that is an opinion on another parliament 's decision .
This House is not the place to condemn or approve actions of other Houses .
We have to respect other parliaments .
Mr President , I wish to bring to the attention of this House a totally unacceptable and disgraceful attack on the government of Italy yesterday by the Prime Minister of Turkey speaking before the Turkish Grand National Assembly .
I would like to ask you , Mr President , to make clear to the Turkish Prime Minister that this House utterly rejects and condemns his accusation that failure to hand over Mr Abdullah Ocalan for trial in Turkey is tantamount to becoming accomplices in murder .
Italy has a clear legal , indeed constitutional , obligation not to return a person under extradition to countries where the death penalty still exists .
In that context , it must be said that Italy embodies the values of this House and the European Union generally .
Italy is currently going through the proper democratic and constitutional processes dictated by its constitution .
Encouraging demonstrations and trade embargos against one of our Member States is , frankly , unacceptable from a country which wishes and aspires to join us in the European Union .
An attack on the government of Italy in this way is an attack on all of us in the European Union : on the values which underlie this Union , on the solidarity and partnership which is fundamental to European integration .
Mr President , I would ask you to make clear the views of this House to the government and Prime Minister of Turkey and , indeed , to send a message of our strong support to the government and Prime Minister of Italy to continue with their proper democratic and constitutional processes , despite the harassment , to deal with the issue before them .
Perhaps we could ask the Turkish Grand National Assembly to join with us in seeing this moment not as a threat but as an opportunity to launch the political dialogue , which is the only way to solve the Kurdish problem .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , on behalf of our group I should like to express support for Mrs Green 's proposal .
We do indeed believe that the Turkish authorities - and more specifically the Prime Minister - have made unacceptable statements about Italy , accusing it of being an accomplice to terrorism if it fails to grant the extradition of the Kurdish leader Öcalan .
We believe that in this case Italy and the Italian authorities are respecting the rule of law by applying a constitution which prevents the extradition of an individual to a country which still has the death penalty .
I believe that the vast majority in this Parliament have always opposed terrorism , in all its forms , and that we can have every confidence in Italy , a Member State of the European Union , which has shown a fundamental respect for the rule of law and the fundamental rules of the constitutional state .
It will solve the specific problem it is now facing in accordance with these rules , of that we are convinced .
I should indeed like to support the request to protest to the Turkish authorities and to declare our support for the position of the Italian Government .
Mr President , on behalf of the ELDR Group I support the initiative of Mrs Green .
We believe that the Italian Government is respecting the rule of law , that we should show our solidarity with that process and that we deplore as misguided the political attack which has been launched against the Italians by the Turkish Prime Minister .
We reject the view that according any person whose extradition is sought their rights under law is tantamount to an implicit or explicit support of terrorism .
Nor does it in any way pre-judge their guilt or innocence .
We wish to show our solidarity with the Italian process .
Mr President , at the beginning of the week , I expressed my group 's concern regarding the Turkish Government 's request for extradition .
I had already made it clear , as other chairmen had made it clear , that we wanted Mr Ocalan to be granted political asylum .
We are now faced with a new situation that affects Parliament .
The co-chairman of the European Union-Turkey Joint Parliamentary Committee , Mr Bülent Akarcali , sent a letter to the various Italian Members threatening them on behalf of Turkey .
This letter ends by saying that granting Mr Ocalan political asylum would not only have a negative effect on the friendly relations between Turkey and Italy , but would also create a terrorist problem for Italy , Europe and the rest of the world .
It is entirely unacceptable that the co-chairman of the EU-Turkey Joint Parliamentary Committee , a country with which we have a customs union , should be allowed in both an institutional and formal way to threaten Members and Italian and European institutions with terrorism .
Mr President , I strongly call on you to write to this gentleman to defend the dignity of this Parliament , peace and democracy .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Greens in the European Parliament agree with what has been said here today .
But we should like to stress two points in particular .
Firstly , the way Italy and the Italian Government have been treated by the Turkish authorities is unacceptable .
This is not a dispute between Italy and Turkey . It is a dispute between Europe and Turkey , which is I why believe it is a good thing that the European Parliament - albeit a little late - is now giving its attention to it , as we knew on Monday already that serious problems were in store .
Secondly , a very clear majority in Parliament has taken the line throughout this debate that a political solution must be found to the Kurdish problem .
In this respect it is clear that at the very moment when the PKK - from which my group and all other groups have always distanced themselves - unilaterally declares a cease-fire in order to seek a solution by alternative means , Turkey has decided to resort to this sort of action .
We therefore believe that no pressure must be placed on Italy , that the whole of Europe must declare its support for Italy on this and above all that further efforts must be made in working towards a political solution .
Clearly there must be no pressure to extradite an individual to his enemies who have already shown in the past that they often use methods which are little better than his .
Mr President , we are not being asked today to judge the leader of the PKK .
In fact , on several occasions , particularly in the McMillan-Scott report , Parliament has given its opinion on this movement that takes part in terrorist activities .
What we are being asked today is whether or not Italy should extradite Mr Öcalan .
Italy is a state under the rule of law .
Italy has a constitution and case-law that prohibits it from extraditing anyone to a country that still has the death penalty .
We should trust Italy as a state under the rule of law .
It will abide by its constitution and its case-law and that is as it should be .
We support the Italian authorities .
Statement by the President
Ladies and gentlemen , I think that the European Parliament possesses sufficient moral authority , as a constant defender of the rule of law and as a Chamber that has always condemned terrorism , to show support and solidarity with a Member State that strictly adheres to these rules , and that respects the independence of the judiciary and the implementation of its own laws .
I therefore understand that I am responding to the requests that have been put to me by the vast majority of representatives of the political groups . These requests form a vigorous protest , on behalf of this Parliament , against the attacks the authorities of that country have been subjected to by no less than the Prime Minister of a third country .
At the same time , they express your outright rejection of the procedure whereby a co-chairman of a committee addresses the Members of this House and poses what could be considered a threat to both their independence and freedom in exercising their mandate .
Both aspects will be dealt with immediately .
Mr President , Article F of the Treaty of European Union requires the Member States of the European Union to be democracies , a provision which has , if anything , been strengthened by the Treaty of Amsterdam .
In the circumstances I am sure that the majority of this House would agree that the vote last night , in an unelected chamber ...
Mr Corbett , I say clearly that it is not up to this House to pass judgement on what the parliaments of our Member States do . They have their established powers .
It is not for us to judge the use they make of them .
I will not allow any further debate on this question .
VOTES
Madam President , I am sorry to have to intervene so soon , but it says on my voting list that if we adopt Amendment No 9 , then No 21 falls .

Amendment No 21 addresses an issue which affects not only Mr Barón Crespo 's report , but also Mr Sonneveld 's and my own , that is whether the applicant countries are to be represented on the appropriate monitoring committee or not .
The Committee on Regional Policy has advocated this .
We believe that these countries should be involved in the committee , at least in an advisory capacity .
We should be consistent across these three areas .
If we reject No 21 , then we should make a general statement to the effect that we do not want these countries represented on the committees .
If we vote in favour here , that would support the view of the Committee on Regional Policy , and then we would have to say for all three : they are in .
I believe that we should give them the opportunity to take part .
But this needs to be settled now , because it is here that it appears on the agenda for the first time .
Mr Walter , I shall give the floor to Mr Barón Crespo .
It may be that the request from the Green Group has created some confusion .
That is why I should like things to be clear .
I wanted to put to the vote first Amendment No 9 by the Committee on Foreign Affairs .
It seems to have been rejected , but we shall check that .
If it had been adopted , we should have voted on Amendment No 19 by the Green Group as an addition .
After that , I will of course put to the vote Amendment No 21 by the Committee on Foreign Affairs .
Is that how you see the matter , Mr Barón Crespo ?
Madam President , you said before the vote that you would also be putting Amendment No 21 to the vote .
The first phrase of this amendment ...
If Amendment No 9 had been rejected , Mr Walter , that is what I said .
But it was adopted - the result was quite clear .
Madam President , formally speaking , your conclusion might well be correct , but from a practical point of view , Amendment No 21 constitutes an addition , and I also think that it should be put to the vote , particularly as you said so yourself .
Many Members want participation in another form , within the meaning of our amendment , and I think they are now expecting that amendment .
That is why you have to put it to the vote .
Mrs Schroedter , I did not say that I would put Amendment No 21 to the vote in any event .
I said that I would put Amendment No 21 to the vote if Amendment No 9 was rejected .
But it was adopted - that was the decision of the House .
My personal view is that Amendment No 21 now falls .
I shall consult the rapporteur and , if he shares my view , we shall move on to the following amendments .
Madam President , I would like to ask the Commissioner , Mr van den Broek , if he still opposes Parliament 's amendments , as he announced yesterday in the House .
Madam President , I thought that after what I said in Parliament yesterday it was clear that there is one category where we have said : yes , we agree .
There is also another category where we clearly respect the reasoning .
But we do not yet want to formally support these amendments , because we have the feeling that the Council will perhaps make changes here and there to the way they are formulated with which we would be able to agree .
I therefore believe that I must stand by what I said yesterday .
Madam President , in view of the Commissioner 's response , I would ask that , pursuant to Rule 60 ( 2 ) of the Rules of Procedure , this report be referred back to the committee responsible .
( Parliament decided to refer the matter back to committee )
Madam President , I would draw your attention to the fact that the Presidency has been somewhat inconsistent because by voting for Amendment No 16 , Parliament has just contradicted what my report says , despite the fact that I had previously warned of this .
Parliament has given its opinion as regards the committee 's composition in terms of my report and has now just adopted a resolution that contradicts this .
I would like the first vote to count .
Madam President , given that Mr van den Broek did say yesterday that , while many figures could be accepted or incorporated , some important parts could not actually be adopted , I would request referral back to committee pursuant to Rule 60 ( 2 ) .
( Parliament decided to refer the matter back to committee )
Madam President , following the Commission 's unsatisfactory response - that it is not prepared to accept Amendment No 1 , on which we have just voted - I should just like to announce that , if the Commission has not changed its mind on Amendment No 1 by January , when we have the proper reading of this document , then we will propose that the report be referred back to the committee .
I should like to make that clear here .
In so doing , we are giving the Commission time to consider whether it might not rethink its position on Amendment No 1 by January .
Before the final vote
( Parliament approved a request from the rapporteur for the matter to be referred back to committee )
Madam President , I would like to remind you once again that we are about to encounter a problem that I outlined in writing to the ' Steering Committee ' and to the Presidency and that I repeated today .
Madam President , I do not want to be held responsible for this .
I understand that Amendment No 30 by the Committee on Agriculture , which is along the same lines as the one to which I previously referred , namely Amendment No 16 by the Committee on Regional Policy , has lapsed . If this is not the case , then the Hughes procedure and coordination we are involved in serve no purpose whatsoever .
As I have already stated , I would ask the Presidency and its services to take this matter seriously and not to leave all the responsibility to the Member .
I think that we should act in line with our rules .
Mr Barón Crespo , it is not a question of shifting the responsibility on to someone .
As you know , the House is sovereign , which is a principle of democracy .
Madam President , I believe that Amendment No 30 deals with something different from what Mr Barón Crespo was just talking about .
This is a consultative committee on which the EU Member States and the applicant countries have a representative , but it is a committee concerned with the preparation of projects and that is central to my report .
This is most definitely different from what Mr Walter was just talking about .
I would not therefore bring it under the same regulation as Mr Barón Crespo just mentioned .
Madam President , I assume that this is not good news to the Commissioner , and that he has changed the position he announced yesterday .
In that case I should like to request that the report be referred back to the committee responsible .
Mr President , if we are going to try and get this vote through quickly , I suggest that the PPE , if they are going to continue to vote against their own amendments , actually have the courage to withdraw them before we go right the way through this session .
It is ridiculous .
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
Mr President , I would also like to invoke Rule 60 ( 2 ) of the Rules of Procedure and ask that this report be referred back to committee for two reasons : to be able to proceed to a second reading and to be able to initiate talks with the Council .
I hope that the House will unanimously support this request .
( Parliament decided to refer the matter back to committee )
Mr President , since Mr Fischler informed us last night , or rather very early this morning , after the debate , of the amendments which the Commission can on no account accept - and I assume that the position has not changed since then - I request that the report be referred back to the committee , pursuant to Rule 60 ( 2 ) .
( Parliament decided to refer the matter back to committee )
Mr President , in order to further lighten the work of fellow Members , our group has submitted a proposal to you to vote at the next part-session on Mr Ferri 's report , which is now finished , rather than this week .
I understand that most Members agree with this .
It is a very complex report .
( Parliament agreed to the proposal )
I propose that we vote on the remaining reports this evening , since we have already done a good deal of work .
Mr President , in relation to the vote on the McCarthy report , I wish to say that my explanation concerns the Irish situation .
We have been main beneficiaries of EU Structural Funds and Cohesion Funds and have used them very well over that period .
As a result , we now have a very prosperous economy .
However , we still lag a considerable way behind our European partners in terms of our infrastructure , in particular transport , telecommunications and environmental protection facilities .
We still have enormous problems of social exclusion , especially in deprived urban and rural communities , and , indeed , underdevelopment .
All these problems have to be tackled and for this reason I welcome the Commission 's proposal that there should be no sudden end to funding from Brussels .
This should be reduced gradually .
However , I deplore the cynical manner in which the Irish Government has chosen to divide the country into regions for party-political purposes , with scant regard for the aim of structural funds which was to assist with economic and social cohesion .
They are thereby depriving both the urban and rural poor of the full benefit of funds and , indeed , state aid .
Mr President , on the McCarthy report . We voted against this report for the following reasons .
Firstly , on Objective 2 , we think it is inappropriate for unemployment to be the dominant criterion .
It is essential to broaden these criteria , in particular with a view to protecting rural areas .
Secondly , on Objective 1 , the criterion put forward by the Commission must not be watered down or extended by the introduction of exceptions .
Thirdly , we particularly emphasise our support for all those measures which will help to ease the pressure of making adjustments on regions bordering the CEECs .
We therefore support the provisions seeking to adapt the Community initiative Interreg , but at the same time point out that this will only be able to make a limited contribution to providing the desired assistance .
I voted in favour of this report in the final vote because I feel that , in the end , it does not compromise Portugal 's specific interests in the negotiations on Agenda 2000 , despite relevant factors with regard to economic and social cohesion .
On the other hand , I voted against Amendment No 2 , which calls into question the future decision-making capacity on the financial perspective . I also voted against Amendment No 5 , which , following approval of Amendment No 7 - which I again voted against - , could lead to a restrictive reading of the Council 's decision-making capacity concerning the regions in Objective 1 .
I would like to begin my comments by saying that I welcome the decision of the Irish Government this week to sub-divide the country for the purposes of drawing down EU Structural Funds during the year 2000-2006 .
It is only correct and sensible that poorer regions in Ireland should receive a higher proportion of European Regional and Social Funds to redress economic performance in all these areas .
The benefits of Objective 1 status are very clear :
A higher proportion of European Regional Development Funds so as to redress the infrastructural deficit in the less well-off parts of Ireland.-A higher amount of state aid to be given to industry setting up in the Objective 1 regions in Ireland.-The fact that Objective 1 status in transition may be accorded to the poorer areas in Ireland post-2006.The fact that this decision has been taken will mean that the correct infrastructures will be put into place so as to win over a higher proportion of industry setting up in the Objective 1 areas in Ireland
Ever since the Single European Act was implemented in 1987 , it has been clear that one of the core policies of the European Union is to ensure that all regions in Europe can effectively participate within the Single European Currency regime and within the internal market .
I would like to commend the efforts of all the people involved in the process of lobbying for Objective 1 status for the poorest regions in Ireland for the next round of EU Structural Funds for the period 2000-2006 .
This will go a long way towards redressing the problems of rural depopulation in Ireland , which has reached very high proportions in recent years .
I would like to thank the Members of the House for supporting my report today .
I know that voters in my constituency in the East Midlands will be pleased to know that Parliament is supporting continued European funds to the rural , urban and industrial heartlands of our region where lower levels of unemployment mask underlying structural and social weaknesses .
Indeed in accepting an additional two years of funding beyond the Commission proposal for areas going through restructuring , this will sustain the process , particularly in the coalfields and rural areas .
I am particularly pleased that the release of the latest Eurostat figures indicates that four UK regions are on track to gain Objective 1 status .
Although negotiations still have to be held and decisions taken next year the figures will form the basis of those negotiations .
Merseyside , in the north west region , with a GDP of 72.54 % which falls within the 75 % threshold , has ongoing structural problems which mean the area will continue to need priority EU status .
On Objective 1 status , Parliament has made it clear that any exception to the 75 % GDP application must be annexed to the regulation before we deliver our final assent on the Commission proposal .
The House also voted in favour of a new ' Urban ' Community initiative and a separate initiative for future crisis sectors or regions ; a kind of ' Restruct ' initiative .
Manchester , Liverpool and Nottingham which have benefited from the Urban fund will be delighted to hear that Parliament has backed its continuation .
As rapporteur I will now take forward this first reading position in our discussions with the Council and the Commission , and hope to achieve Parliament 's priorities as outlined in the report .
While we must recognise that standards of living have increased in Ireland due in part to the contribution of the European Union Regional , Social and Cohesion funds , I still believe that much work remains to be done if there is to be a quality of access and opportunity for Irish businesses , exporters and manufacturers to compete on an equal footing within the frontier-free trading block of the European Union .
I welcome the acceptance of the European Commission of the need to introduce changes in European funding for Ireland on a gradual basis which is known as the ' soft landing ' approach .
The continuation of European funding after the present programme concludes next year is vital if we are to consolidate the strong economic growth rates of recent years .
A sudden cut-off of European funding would risk provoking a major shock in our economy and in the process undermine recent gains .
It is a priority for the government and for the Fianna Fail group of the European Parliament that the European Regional Development Fund and the European Cohesion Fund continue to apply in Ireland in as an extensive role as possible under the next round of funding 2000-2006 .
The reasons for this are as follows : our road infrastructure is still well short of the standards enjoyed by most regions of the Community ; our peripheral location creates a greater need for relatively high levels of investments in ports and regional airport infrastructure ; investment is required to meet compliance with the EU Urban Waste Water Treatment Directive which is going to cost £ 1.6 billion to implement in its totality between the year 1994-2005 .
Thirty-five per cent of all structural fund programmes in Ireland is presently spent in the areas of education and training under the European Social Fund .
While this is likely to be reduced in part post-1999 priority must remain for the provision of better education and training facilities for those who lack the necessary skills or have difficulties in securing employment .
The transition period proposed by the European Commission post 2000-2006 will ensure many important roads , environmental protection schemes , industrial , tourism and rural development projects will now be able to proceed as planned .
This decision will means that more communities both urban and rural will be able to avail of European funding for projects to generate new jobs , improve the environment and guarantee continued economic growth .
In the light of the European Union 's enlargement process , the Commission 's proposal for reform of the Structural Funds acquires a particular importance for the future of European citizens .
We must confirm that the Union cannot be merely a large market that is given over to the excesses of liberalism , but that mechanisms are to be established for catching up and for keeping up ; in short , for practising solidarity .
We should not forget that regional policy is still an essential component in moving towards the Europe of citizens .
We should therefore continue to work in that direction so that we may better understand the challenge of enlargement .
The report before us today is the product of many hours of discussion and compromise solutions reached by our two rapporteurs , and I thank them for their work .
We can support the general substance of the report , which incorporates the principles of concentration , simplification and decentralisation proposed by the European Commission . At the same time , it specifies certain eligibility criteria - youth unemployment , long-term unemployment , the level of GDP , and so on - particularly as regards Objective 2 , and emphasises the need for transparency .
However , we could not vote in favour of the final resolution .
Indeed , our opinion remains negative despite the positive aspects of the report .
These include the horizontal implementation of Objective 3 , which is essential in achieving social cohesion , the provision of training and the fight against exclusion . Other important aspects are the maintenance of the URBAN initiative , which for the first time caters for small and medium-sized towns , the recognition of the need to draw up a new initiative to deal with the economic and social crises that lead to job losses , and the revision of the inappropriate and ill-defined ' performance reserve ' envisaged by the Commission .
Our opinion remains negative because , with regard to Objective 1 , we have no wish to reopen Pandora 's box .
While we are aware that nobody can escape budgetary cutbacks , we maintain that aid should go to the weakest first .
That is why in our countries we will no longer have regions with a development lag that receive European aid in this respect .
We would like the criterion of 75 % to be stringently respected , and no exception should be made to this principle .
Our opinion remains negative because we cannot , under any circumstances , allow appropriations from the guarantee section of the EAGGF that are used in connection with Objective 2 to be considered as non-compulsory spending , since that infringes the Treaty .
And finally , our opinion remains negative because we would consider it to be harmful to our democracy if our Amendment No 46 to paragraph 53 of the resolution were not adopted by the House . In the interests of transparency , this amendment calls for an assurance that appropriations from the Structural Funds will be used in a non-discriminatory manner in the various regions involved .
This is why , Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the French Socialist delegation to the European Parliament will not vote in favour at first reading .
The Agenda 2000 action programme cannot be dissociated from the Commission report on the system of own resources .
It even seems more logical to first consider the reform of own resources , because that will condition the three programme areas : the budget , the agricultural policy and the Structural Funds .
In the long term , the system of own resources should be given a new focus to make it fairer and more effective .
That means giving up the VAT resource , which distorts the fair division of contributions among the Member States , and adopting one of the measures proposed by the Commission : the integration of a tax on earnings from securities into the own resources system .
It does not appear that the other Commission proposals would actually increase own resources : the tax on CO2 would not generate a great deal , while harmonising corporation tax would involve substantial technical difficulties .
Community measures concerning speculative capital movements , for which legislation will eventually have to be provided , might be added at a later date .
The ultimate aim must be to ensure that all Member States pay a fair contribution based on the criterion of GDP per inhabitant .
In the short term , it is time for certain European countries to stop advocating the theory of a fair return .
Such a theory corresponds to a mercenary conception of the construction of Europe that would make the enlargement negotiations considerably more complicated .
The fair return is , in effect , the antithesis of enlargement .
It makes no sense to support the accession of countries that are far less developed in economic terms than the 15 Member States and to simultaneously reduce net flows within the Union .
And what about the different areas of Agenda 2000 ?
As far as the budget is concerned , the ceiling of 1.27 % of the Union 's GNP is a realistic figure under present conditions . It would not be possible to agree on an increase and this figure has the advantage of obliging the Union to undertake a more effective reform of current expenditure .
Nonetheless , we might still wonder whether this position is realistic in the medium term , when the accession of the Baltic countries and Poland becomes imminent .
The figure of 1.27 % cannot , however , be a definitive standard .
In the meantime , this solution requires that ceilings be established for the agricultural and structural policies .
Without such ceilings , there is a risk that no funds will remain for the policies that , in our view , deserve priority : research , employment , networks and foreign relations .
As regards the agricultural policy , it is essential to avoid the major pitfall of revising the CAP in a manner that would carry the European Union towards a de facto renationalisation .
Consequently , Member States should not be given excessive leeway in the use of funds .
The success of the CAP reform will be measured by the extent to which it enables European agriculture to become competitive once more , without sacrificing the development prospects of rural areas .
In other words , the economic dimension of agricultural activity must be enhanced , while simultaneously reconciling agriculture and society on the basis of a sustainable development model that respects the environment and that focuses mainly on the development of rural areas , product quality , consumer safety , respect for biodiversity and animal welfare .
In the light of the enlargement to include the countries of Central and Eastern Europe , the new European model will have to further decentralise its day-to-day management and substantially simplify its legal framework .
Simplification and subsidiarity will be the key to the successful development of a new process of integration .
In terms of the Structural Funds , the first two objectives are very different from the third .
Their activities are focused on restricted geographical areas whose economic and social development is clearly below the average of the other areas of Europe , either because they are disadvantaged , or because they need to be converted .
These regions are either subject to a development lag or industrial decline , or they are made up of rural or urban areas that are experiencing serious problems .
Massive financial investment with a clear focus will seek to help these regions counteract the negative effects of an open market that is increasingly deregulated .
The regions involved should be small enough to ensure that the impact is visible .
Objective 3 , meanwhile , is of a very different nature .
Here , it is not a question of seeking a localised cure , but rather of triggering an overall movement in society through the development of human resources .
It is a question of investing in people rather than in infrastructures .
The development of human resources should play a central role in the European and national employment strategies . And the juxtaposition of a general , horizontal objective alongside vertical objectives that are focused on specific areas is to be welcomed .
Thought should be given to the resources that are available for achieving such an ambitious objective .
Although the motion for a resolution tabled by Mrs McCarthy and Mr Hatzidakis on the Structural Funds speaks of the ' horizontal nature ' of this Objective 3 , and considers that it should cover all areas of the Member States , there is reason to fear that lack of funds will cause the Objective to be confined , as suggested by the Commission , to only those areas that are not covered by Objectives 1 and 2 .
In my view , its most innovative aspect would thus be lost .
We know that the disparities between Member States have increased in terms of both training and unemployment levels : one young European in five is unemployed and increasing numbers of families live below the poverty line .
This is a decisive element as far as the competitiveness of regional economies is concerned .
Such disparities , which are equally apparent in the fields of scientific research and technological development , cannot be tolerated in political and social terms and they undermine the position of the European Union in the light of global competition .
I would therefore ask that Europe ensures that it has the resources needed to allow Objective 3 , which must cover the entire territory of the Union , to be fully implemented .
It is only when Europe has proved that it is able to resolve the major problems faced by our society , namely unemployment , poverty and exclusion , that public opinion will support , with total confidence , the strengthening and enlargement of the Union .
People in the EU 's less developed areas regard the review of the regulations governing the Structural Funds and in particular their funding from the Community budget with particular disquiet .
Though the report by the Committee on Regional Policy confirms the proposed 0.46 % of Community GDP for structural activities between 2000 and 2006 , since the matter remains outstanding nobody yet knows what the total funding for the Community budget will amount to during those years , and what contribution will be made by the Member States .
The inadequacy of the amounts provided so far to close the gap between the less and more developed regions is evident , given that the desired result of real convergence is not only failing to be achieved , but even greater discrepancies are appearing , as confirmed for example by figures relating to my own country , Greece .
While the sums provided are inadequate , and while the funding of the Community budget has still not been settled , to the Objective 1 countries are being added the most remote areas of the Community ( from which , quite unreasonably , the Aegean islands are excluded ) as well as the areas covered by the old Objective 6 .
At the same time , there is a looming risk that some areas in countries covered by the Cohesion Fund , where per capita income is lower than 75 % of the Community average , may be excluded from Objective 1 .
In other words , as we say in my country , ' a mouse carrying a pumpkin will not fit into its hole ' .
It is known that the required co-financing of projects covered by the Community programmes absorbs almost all the national resources available for development .
From that standpoint , then , the proposal to increase Community participation from 75 % to 85 % is well founded .
The fact remains , however , that because of the total absorption of national resources , the potential for applying any national developmental policy is decisively limited and necessarily moves within the framework of Community imperatives .
To impose still greater control and obedience to the Community 's choices , the Commission proposes to create a reserve amounting to 10 % of the appropriations and maintains that appropriations not used after 2 years should automatically be cancelled .
Quite rightly , the Committee on Regional Policy rejects the proposal to create a reserve and also insists that appropriations unused after 2 years should remain available for the same country to which they were originally allocated .
While Community funding could play a helpful part in bridging the gap between the less and the more developed parts of the Community , in essence they are a drop in the ocean , designed to throw dust in the eyes of the people of Europe , to buy off consciences and to create mechanisms for promoting the major monopolistic interests which are essentially the main beneficiaries of Community programmes , since they possess the necessary equipment and technical knowledge .
It is known that a large part , if not the lion 's share , of the amounts available for structural aid go back to the better developed Member States .
We have decided to abstain in the final vote .
We are among those who are critical of the EU 's Structural Funds because they have not attained their objective of smoothing out regional differences .
The bulk of the Structural Funds should be transferred to national level , where control and monitoring of standards is considerably tighter than appears to have been the case at EU level .
There is a willingness on the Commission 's part to simplify and refine structural support which we regard as a step in the right direction .
The same remarks apply to a restriction on the number of Community initiatives .
The European structural policy may have proved itself , but it is in need of reform .
It is necessary to establish an appropriate structural policy for the next seven years , which will promote economic and social cohesion , while meeting the general requirement of greater efficiency and transparency .
This is no place for thinking in terms of vested interests .
The purpose of the European structural policy is to make it possible to close the gap between the Union 's poorer and wealthier regions .
By way of an example , I will simply mention the Cohesion Fund , which was created to help Member States experiencing particular difficulties to prepare for participation in economic and monetary union .
If this aim has been achieved , then the Cohesion Fund has fulfilled its task .
Any further funding for Spain , Portugal and Ireland from the Cohesion Fund is , therefore , neither justified nor - in view of the enlargement of the Union - feasible .
' Innovative actions ' are also encouraged through the aid granted by the Structural Funds .
However , the number of projects submitted to the Commission often bears no relation to the number finally considered eligible for funding .
This is due first and foremost to the low funding capacity .
Between 1994 and 1999 , 1 % of the Structural Funds ' resources are set aside for innovative actions .
I very much hope that Parliament will declare itself in favour of increasing these appropriations .
These projects are of particular importance for individuals , clubs , associations and organisations in all the European Union 's regions , because they are thus spared the often complicated and tedious alternative of going through the regional authorities .
In addition , simply because Structural Fund appropriations are concentrated in the worst-affected areas of the Community , this should not mean that national support measures are permitted only in these regions .
The European structural policy has brought us considerably closer to realising our aim of reducing the disparities between the levels of development and per capita incomes in the Member States and their regions .
I am sure that the reform of the Structural Funds will further strengthen the social and economic cohesion between the regions of Europe .
In the long term , Europe can only grow closer together if the existing economic and social disparities are permanently eliminated .
An absolute condition for reducing the number of objectives and other changes to the Structural Funds is the transferral of the unaltered criteria for sparsely populated areas in Objective 6 to Objective 1 .
In addition , the criteria for Objective 5 should also be included , unaltered , within the framework of Objective 2 .
Furthermore , the conditions relating to sparsely populated and rural areas , which Sweden negotiated as part of its membership package , should not be undermined .
Enhancement of the Structural Funds is of considerable significance as regards the process of widening and deepening within the European Union .
In our view , reforming the Structural Funds contributes towards strengthening social and economic solidarity in Europe . It also has an important role to play in meeting the need for increased employment , emphasising the importance of sustainable growth , pursuing a tough environmental policy and enabling us to achieve solidarity between the rich and poor European regions .
The Structural Funds are a financial instrument that serve to underline the EU 's powerful coordinating role in areas where the wishes of European citizens can only be met through greater cooperation across national frontiers .
In this respect , there is a need for reform of the Structural Funds .
In particular , we think they should be concentrated on the areas needing most attention , that there should be three main objectives , and that their composition should be simplified .
Furthermore , we think it is important that any expansion of the Structural Funds - and the same applies in the case of the common agricultural policy - should be adapted to meet the challenges that will be posed by the enlargement process .
Reform of the Structural Funds should be regarded as an instrument for facilitating enlargement .
Above all , we would like to stress the need for a financial ceiling of 0.46 % of GNP .
In addition , structural support should be allocated in a flexible , horizontal and decentralised way in which there is plenty of scope for partnership as well as national , regional and local initiatives .
Under Objective 1 , the 75 % criterion should be strictly applied , and the previous Objective 6 criteria included under the new Objective 1 .
Objective 2 should apply to large conurbations , and Member States should not be given unlimited freedom to decide on the distribution of support measures .
In our opinion , Objective 3 should be broadly based and allow for support for normal education .
The Structural Funds should be subject to stringent financial rules .
Our standpoint on these issues has served as a guide on how we should vote on the different proposals , while we still greatly respect the position of the PSE Group .
We have decided to allow ourselves to be influenced as little as possible by strictly national considerations , since our remit as MEPs extends beyond Sweden 's immediate interests .
The following are some comments on our position as regards the organisation of the Funds , their size and distribution . These three aspects should be coordinated to coincide with the different obligations of the Structural Funds , but the proposals in the report and the amendments do not meet these requirements in every case .
We have already mentioned that the financial ceiling must not exceed 0.46 % , so we have decided to support the amendment that corresponds to this objective .
As for the rest of paragraph 2 , which deals with financial calculations , we take this to mean that the proposal should not be interpreted as indicating a willingness to raise the financial ceiling .
With regard to Objective 6 and its incorporation in Objective 1 , we approve the amendment that is closest to our position on the inclusion of a population density criterion .
Paragraph 6 , as well as several other amendments , all refer to distribution in relation to population density .
While we find this manner of distribution worthy of consideration , we do not think that the percentage allocations as specified , are appropriate in the present situation .
On paragraph 31 and additionality , we think that the proposal to also take account of macroeconomic conditions is formulated in a way that makes it difficult to assess the work involved in carrying out the proposal .
As regards continuing to consider the structural measures under Heading 2 as an expenditure target , we think that this should be discussed in more detail than in paragraph 46 and the related amendment .
Amendment No 94 on evaluation is well-intentioned , but it should be noted that the proposed method of evaluation could lead to increased bureaucracy .
We should also like to indicate that we do not support the proposal on signs as set out in paragraph 55 .
There should be signs , but their design should not be as strictly prescribed as in the report .
We agree with the proposal on equal gender representation in monitoring and advisory committees .
Finally , we especially approve of the proposal contained in the report regarding a strong role for the European Parliament .
Ireland has been one of the main beneficiaries of the EU 's Structural and Cohesion Funds over the last decade .
EU support has helped turn the Irish economy around and create thousands of new jobs .
As a result of our economic progress , Ireland has now reached average EU wealth levels .
But we still lag a considerable way behind our European partners in terms of our infrastructure , particularly as regards transport and telecommunications , and environmental protection facilities .
And we still have enormous problems of social exclusion , especially in deprived urban and rural communities , and underdevelopment .
All of these problems have to be tackled .
For this reason , I welcome the Commission 's proposal that there can be no sudden end to funding from Brussels .
This will have to be reduced gradually .
This is likely to be the last occasion Ireland receives substantial financial support from the EU .
This is not a sign of failure on Ireland 's behalf but of success .
It is a sign that we have made good use of the assistance we have received .
But mistakes have been made .
Too much has gone on golf clubs and marinas .
We must not repeat this error .
We must ensure that the next round goes to those who most need it , the deprived urban and rural communities across the country .
These must be the absolute priority during the next round .
The report forms part of the collective strategy for reforming the Union 's structural support system .
I have decided , in the main , to support the Social Democratic Group .
I am pleased to note that the Structural Funds are more focused and directed towards the areas where support is needed , rather than being ' spread around ' and ending up like a rebate from the Union .
I am also glad to see that we are at last beginning to appreciate the potential problems that might arise in relation to structural and agricultural policies as a result of enlargement - a welcome development , in my opinion .
The Group of Independents for a Europe of Nations wished to express its misgivings during the vote on the various reports on the reform of the Structural Funds .
These misgivings do not relate so much to the reports as such or to the authors , whom we congratulate on their work , but to the Agenda 2000 proposals themselves .
They are frequently incoherent , they are sometimes dangerous for the territorial balance of the Member States and they neglect the difficulties experienced by many European workers , particularly fishermen .
During the debates , everyone concentrated on defending the interests of their region or their country , which is , of course , perfectly legitimate .
Our German friends certainly appear to be the most skilled at this game : they claim , for the benefit of anyone who wants to listen , that they are net contributors to the budget of the European Community .
Before demanding a reduction in their financial contribution , our German friends might do well to remember that the Community largesse bestowed on the former East Germany makes them the main beneficiaries of the regional policy .
In addition , it would appear that the reform of the Structural Funds unfortunately neglects a number of issues .
For instance , the regions that depend on fishing have been forgotten .
Likewise , we might wonder about the implications of Agenda 2000 for the rural regions , which are among the most fragile regions in the European Union .
In this respect , 9 % of the population of the Member States of the Union benefited from Objectives 5a and 5b ; in the future , no more than around 5 % of the population will be eligible for such aid .
A number of rural regions will cease to be eligible , at the very time when the reform of the CAP and the fall in agricultural prices are eroding the situation of our farmers .
In France , 9.7 million people lived in areas covered by Structural Fund activities ; in the future , that figure will be reduced to 7.1 million .
Some 3 million French citizens who live and work for the most part in rural regions will suffer as a result of the new reform : 20 % of French territory will no longer be eligible for aid from the Structural Funds .
We should remember in this connection that , following the GATT negotiations and the reform of the CAP , which had been highly detrimental , rural regions had obtained more ambitious structural aid measures by way of compensation .
Today , the reform of the Structural Funds calls into question the geographical scope of these measures , even though the effects of the Uruguay Round and the fall in agricultural prices , exacerbated by the new reform of the CAP , are still being felt and increasingly so .
This is blatantly inconsistent .
What is more , the Structural Funds seem , in fact , to be a tool of federalist redistribution , whose objective is to make the recipient regions more and more dependent on the Commission , rather than allowing them to overcome their difficulties .
We would like to take advantage of these debates to point out once more that , instead of indulging in the sterile scattering of public funds , the Union should concentrate its efforts on the existing common policies : the CAP and the CFP .
Unfortunately , however , that is not the course that has been chosen , since some people are using this opportunity to try to garner a little more power , to the detriment of the nations and their local authorities , in contempt of the principle of subsidiarity and to the sole benefit of Brussels .
We hear calls for ' the establishment of a European regional planning strategy ' or even for the introduction of an ' integrated urban policy ' .
In this respect , it would be better in a general sense if , rather than constantly seeking to gain more powers , the European Union concentrated instead on assessing the repercussions of the existing Community policies , the decisions it makes or the negotiations in which it participates , both at WTO level and in the context of international agreements , on the balance of European territory with a view to doing away with their negative aspects .
Indeed , it must be acknowledged that Community action has sometimes had highly damaging effects on economic and social cohesion , a matter people are all too ready to revel in , but one that should be resolved .
Unfortunately , in the final vote I had to vote against , because
1.my Amendment No 47 on improving national support was rejected , and2.many additions were made to the proposals , which will ultimately overstretch the funding .
Out of loyalty to our political group , we have decided that in the main we will keep to the PSE Group 's voting list .
We firmly believe that the Structural Funds are ineffective and should , to a large extent , be returned to the Member States in the form of reduced Union charges .
A sizeable share , say 20 to 30 % , could be retained and the entire sum used to provide aid for the Eastern European countries , where there is a considerably greater need than in Greece , Italy , Portugal and Spain .
I am voting for this interim report as in my view it represents a sound response from this Parliament to the immensely complex and potentially controversial changes needed to the Regional and Structural Funds suggested in the Commission 's Agenda 2000 plans .
Given the concerns of people in areas which currently receive EU funding about their future status as we need to move towards funding the costs of enlarging to the East and South of Europe , the rapporteurs are quite right to call for the Regional Policy Committee to scrutinise the eventual list of eligible regions and any possible exceptions .
Equally important is the report 's argument for any regions which do in fact lose funding to be given a transitional period in which to adjust .
In particular I applaud the rapporteurs ' call for low GDP , wealth disparities within regions and any decline in the number of people of working age in a region to be included as factors taken into account alongside unemployment when judging which areas in future will be funded under the new Objective 2 .
If the Commission and Member States follow the fair and sensible approach advocated in this report , with transitional rather than overnight reductions in funding , calculated by a balanced set of criteria to decide which EU funding goes to which areas , I believe this would strengthen public understanding of the changes needed to secure the enlarged and more prosperous EU of tomorrow .
We have voted against the report on the Cohesion Fund .
The fund is intended to assist Ireland , Spain , Portugal and Greece to meet the convergence criteria in order to become integrated into EMU .
It does not come under the EU 's regional and structural funding , but is direct aid to those countries .
As soon as they fulfil the EMU convergence criteria , the aid should be phased out .
The countries that would then be entitled to subsidies should seek assistance from the EU Structural Funds .
There must be an end to the everlasting aid which has already fulfilled its purpose .
In the past , the EU 's regional policy has unfortunately included many negotiating arrangements where secondary agreements have been set up to create forms of compensation other than those intended to smooth out regional imbalances .
For example , the European Regional Development Fund ( ERDF ) was established in 1975 to resolve the United Kingdom 's budgetary problems , and not to iron out regional imbalances .
Enlargement to include the new member countries of Central and Eastern Europe on the basis of the current support criteria implies either greatly increased contributions for countries like Sweden and Germany , or a smaller total amount of financial support for agriculture and rural development .
A complete reform of agriculture is required that would increase labour and product costs and reduce subsidies .
It is unacceptable and shows a lack of solidarity if the Central and Eastern European countries receive less aid than the rest of Europe .
A reduction in EU subsidies with the possibility of more support at national level should be the way forward in the future .
Agricultural subsidies in Sweden must be shared equitably between north and south .
The Cohesion Fund is very important with respect to economic and social solidarity in Europe .
The question of its future in relation to the countries that have qualified for EMU definitely needs to be discussed .
Once the common currency has begun to play its part in strengthening European economic and social solidarity , then the future of the Cohesion Fund and its importance should also be reappraised .
Therefore , we do not think that a direct connection can be made between meeting the convergence criteria and the possibility of receiving aid from the Cohesion Fund .
Countries that have complied with the convergence criteria have undoubtedly performed well according to the macroeconomic indicators , but at the same time , this does not necessarily mean that complete social and economic cohesion has been achieved in and between those countries .
We would also like to emphasise the need for effective financial management and control .
I voted for this report because the specific vote rejecting the proposal to limit the Cohesion Fund to countries outside EMU , to discriminate against Portugal , was so overwhelming , with more than 300 votes against , that the minimum conditions have been created to prevent Portugal 's exclusion from the Cohesion Fund and its benefits .
The European Parliament is explicitly confirming the Commission 's position to guarantee a more favourable position for Portugal 's interests .
The proposal for the Cohesion Fund included in Agenda 2000 - a document presented by the Commission in the middle of 1997 - states that the beneficiaries of this Fund should be countries that continue to have a GNP less than 90 % of the Community average , regardless of whether or not they participate in Economic Monetary Union .
The Council 's legal services later issued an opinion confirming , in the light of the Treaty on European Union , the eligibility for the Cohesion Fund not only of Greece - which is outside the single currency - but also of Spain , Ireland and Portugal - whose governments decided to join the euro .
For us , there was never any doubt as to this question and we think that no Community institution has the legitimacy on this score to undermine the Treaty and the principle of economic and social cohesion on which the very creation of the Fund was based , and prevent Portugal from having access to the Cohesion Fund .
The Collins report corroborates this view and we can , of course , vote in favour of it .
In addition , and in keeping with what we have always contended , the report also questions the condition of meeting the convergence criteria to receive Fund money and also opposes the Commission 's proposal that benefiting from the Fund means meeting the conditions of the Stability Pact .
Obviously , we should emphasise the fact that maintenance of the Cohesion Fund for Portugal should not be seen as something of enormous importance but instead as a simple confirmation that this was conceded a long time ago in the negotiation process on the next Community support framework .
We have therefore rejected the idea that maintenance of the Fund could be used as a smokescreen to conceal the real losses that Portugal might suffer in terms of the Structural Funds .
The vital issue is now that of the changes in the government 's negotiating stance , to solve the vital issue of increasing funds overall in order to tackle the new problems and burdens resulting from enlargement and prevent the financing of that enlargement from being carried out exclusively at the cost of the current cohesion countries , by jeopardising the very appropriations allocated from the Structural Funds .
The European Commission 's proposal did not aim to make any great operational changes to the EAGGF .
The objective was to clarify and extend the scope of the Fund .
As such , I indeed support the report as presented to us today .
In fact , the additions contributed by the European Parliament reflect the evolution of the European Union 's socio-economic development , of new technologies and of local services .
These are a series of new areas that we believe should be covered by the EAGGF .
Equally , the rapporteur considers that tourism and culture must both remain within the scope of the EAGGF .
Indeed , these two sectors are of key importance for job creation : culture accounts for 3.1 million jobs in the EU , that is , 1.8 % of the working population . Tourism frequently offers an alternative solution for regions that are suffering a structural lag or that are highly dependent on other sectors that are in decline .
Also , in connection with the report by Mrs McCarthy and Mr Hatzidakis , I strongly support the maintenance of the URBAN initiative for the development of a European urban policy .
Finally , it is essential that Parliament plays an active role in following up and monitoring the implementation of structural policies .
For all these reasons , I will vote for the report as amended .
We have decided to abstain in the final vote .
We are among those who are critical of the European Regional Development Fund because it has not attained its objective of smoothing out regional differences .
This type of funding should , in the main , be transferred to national level , where control and monitoring of standards is considerably tighter than appears to have been the case at EU level .
There is a willingness on the Commission 's part to simplify and refine structural support which we regard as a step in the right direction .
We are also in favour of the proposal to highlight environmental issues and working for equality between men and women .
We are unable to support the overall text of the proposal for a Council regulation laying down general rules for the granting of Community financial aid in the field of trans-European networks .
The TENs programme is often portrayed as one which has been introduced to promote environmentally friendly forms of transport .
Judged against this aim , one is bound to say that the programme has been a fiasco .
The figures from Eurostat show that the transport sector has now overtaken industry as the largest single source of pollution in the EU .
Another important part of the argument in favour of the TENs programme is that improving the infrastructure in the underdeveloped peripheral regions - in particular by connecting them to the key regions which are more developed - will help to bring them up to the economic level of the affluent regions in the centre .
Here too , Eurostat 's figures show that the difference between the richest and poorest regions in the EU is still as great as ever - in terms of prosperity , unemployment and so on - despite the fact that this programme has now been in existence for a number of years .
The TENs programme is now being extended to cover the countries of Central and Eastern Europe , and the arguments being used to justify the TENs are exactly the same as those that were used inside the EU 's borders .
In reality , the TENs programme is first and foremost about ensuring that the EU 's industry has the best possible access to its markets , including the new ones in Eastern Europe .
The Danish Social Democrats have voted in favour of a reform of the Social Fund .
With the new chapter on employment in the Treaty , there is a need for coordination between the Social Fund measures and the annual guidelines on employment .
We have voted in favour of a number of changes to the Commission 's proposal : provisions have been added concerning the need for sustainable development to be taken into account , emphasising the aspect of equal opportunities for men and women , and on interventions to benefit disadvantaged groups such as the long-term unemployed and handicapped persons .
Not less than 15 % of the resources should be reserved for women , for example .
We believe that all the Member States should be obliged to take action in the field of equal treatment .
Even a country like Denmark , which has come a long way in integrating women into the labour market , must still be obliged to make a special effort in the area of equal treatment under the Social Fund .
I have abstained from voting on the report on the European Social Fund , because the overall aim of the Fund is to help bring about social convergence in the Union .
The ESF is therefore an instrument for creating what is in fact a European social policy and for promoting economic and social solidarity .
The EU should not attempt to regulate the national systems of social and labour market policy , with a view to standardising the social security systems in the Member States .
Social and labour market policy must continue to be a national matter .
A series of judgements and assessments are presented in the report regarding Social Fund measures designed to promote equal opportunities for people to be integrated into the labour market , strengthen systems of education and increase the participation of women in the labour market .
The Fund is also to encourage local and regional initiatives on employment .
In the longer term , these measures are intended to help reduce the differences between the levels of development of various regions in the EU .
These initiatives all have some positive features , but the problem is that these efforts are linked to the establishment of a European social policy and the promotion of the social dialogue , which are ultimately meant to contribute to the establishment of a common European labour market policy .
At the same time , the report also contains moves towards the coordination of Community instruments in education policy .
I agree that underdeveloped regions throughout Europe should be supported .
It is also important to promote equal opportunities for people , so that they can be integrated into the labour market , but this should take place without any political undertones , and not as part of a strategy designed to bring about social convergence in the EU .
We welcome the current revision of the European Social Fund , not least in respect of the new chapter on employment in the Amsterdam Treaty .
The European Social Fund plays a very important role in employment strategies , since it supports and complements the strategies carried out at national level .
Previous experience of lower contribution payments to non-governmental organisations , as well as within the Peace initiative , has proved successful .
We therefore support the proposal , which aims to prioritise local projects in Social Fund programme planning activities .
My vote on this issue took into account the position on the proposal to cofinance income support out of national budgets , as suggested , in particular , in point 8 of the joint motion for resolution by the PSE and Green Groups .
I voted against that option - whose impact on the CAP has yet to be determined - because , in my view , it boils down to anticipating the decision on the financial perspective in accordance with one of the Commission 's proposals for solving the alleged problem of the excessive contribution by certain Member States .
In other words , the proposal sets out to correct the situation in Germany 's favour and , in particular , to the detriment of France 's current Community budget situation , but without safeguarding the situation of other Member States such as Portugal .
They could be penalised in terms of agricultural expenditure or even their overall receipts from the Community budget .
Fundamentally , this option would unacceptably make negotiations rely on the issue of own resources and confine Portugal 's negotiating position both on Agenda 2000 and on the financial perspective .
I supported the excellent proposals to reform the CAP contained in the resolution by the PSE and Green Groups and I hope that they will be endorsed .
A further integration of environmental initiatives must be included in any new revised common agricultural policy for the post-1999 period .
I believe that the EU 's goals of sustainable development , integration of environmental protection with agricultural initiatives and the recognition of farmers as guardians of the countryside must be made central concerns of the common agricultural policy .
Most parties are in favour of a further integration of environmental policy objectives into the CAP .
However , positive environmental results must be measured and rewarded .
In order to do justice to the role of the farmer in caring for the countryside , a further principle should be added , namely the principle that the steward is remunerated .
Farmers must be supported by the European Union in bringing about more environmentally friendly farming practices in the form of direct payment supports .
We already know of the success to date of the Rural Environment Protection scheme started in 1994 , whose aims include the establishment of farming practices and controlled production methods which reflect the increasing public concern for conservation , landscape protection and wider environmental problems .
The Rural Environment Protection scheme is also designed to assist in the production of quality food in the extensive and environmentally friendly manner .
This scheme must go from strength to strength and it was worth over £ 101.4m alone in 1997 .
Under the Operational Programme for Agriculture , Rural Development and Forestry for the period 1997 , £ 67.176m was allocated for direct on-farm investment .
This sub-programme was broken down as follows : improvement of dairy hygiene standards , £ 11.252m ; improvement of animal welfare standards , £ 149 000 ; farm improvement programme , £ 8.769m ; control of farm pollution scheme , £ 47.006m.
This programme has contributed substantially to reducing pollution on our farms as well as promoting environmentally friendly farming .
I support an expansion of EU assistance for on-farm investment in any new arrangement under the common agricultural policy for the period post-1999 .
Environmental concerns are becoming increasingly important in EU policies in general .
However , incentives and support arrangements must be in place through the European Union so that any changes in this sphere are brought about in a cost effective manner .
Rural areas are increasingly used by many people for leisure and recreational purposes .
Farmers receive no financial reward for maintaining and shaping the countryside .
Discussion should take place on these issues with farming organisations and with the Irish Government and the European Commission so that any changes which are brought about command the goodwill and the support of Irish farmers and national and European authorities .
I voted against the Fantuzzi resolution on Agenda 2000 and the reform of the CAP because in paragraph 8 , the rapporteur actually claims that cofinancing is not meant to solve the problems and meet the needs of agriculture but to deal with the issue of the Member States ' budget contributions .
I regret having had to vote against an otherwise excellent document on agricultural policy because the matter of financing the Community budget should be discussed at the right place and at the right time , with complete openness and transparency .
The review of the CAP in 1992 led to a large reduction of the Community budget amounts available for agriculture and to the annihilation of small and medium-sized family holdings , mainly in southern parts of the Community .
As a result , the numbers of holdings and people employed have been greatly reduced , the proportion of unemployment in rural areas has rocketed , and the rate at which the countryside is being deserted has increased to dangerous levels .
The new proposals put forward on European farming by the Commission in Agenda 2000 are perhaps the most representative indication of the EU 's overall intentions as regards its model of development .
The agricultural sector bears the brunt of the changes dictated by the medium-term strategic plans of monopolistic capital , since it is one of the most critical sectors for the shaping of the new economic landscape and the distribution of world markets .
The questionable argument in favour of continual cuts in the section of the Community budget devoted to agriculture , which the Agenda 2000 proposals and those for the review of the CAP put forward , is actually - and now quite openly - calling into question and undermining the decisive developmental role which agriculture has played up to now in most parts of Europe .
The EU is continually eroding its existing agricultural potential since its declared aim , besides saving resources , is both to prepare for the predatory enterprise of enlargement towards the central and eastern European countries and to secure further possibilities for responding - with customary subservience to the USA 's demands - to the new established order of the World Trade Organisation from 2000 onwards .
We have in our hands proposals which are contradictory , dangerous , without any balance between the human factor , production and land , proposals which aim to reduce the agricultural population still further , cut prices and production costs for the sake of competition , and in general replace intervention by help to accumulate private stores .
Those proposals will not only cause imbalances in production but will also constitute a direct threat to product quality , environmental equilibrium , farm employment and social balance and cohesion .
Furthermore , this proposal heralds flagrant and impermissible intervention in the budgets of Member States by introducing conditions of subservience with the compulsory co-financing of direct aid by the Member States .
This not only goes against the provisions of the Treaty , but indirectly paves the way for a substantive transfer of commitment expenditures to the budgets of the Member States - without the consent of the national parliaments - for policies and decisions laid down by the EU .
In the name of an unreasonable rationalisation which runs contrary to any concept of solidarity , renationalisation is being advocated with excessive hypocrisy and demagogy , though it will only relate to expenditure , while the Community will continue to have the exclusive right to determine every detail of the CAP - quotas , price and export subsidies , duties etc. without leaving any scope for flexibility or for the Member State itself to define its own agricultural policy .
In other words , ' heads we win , tails you lose ' !
We categorically oppose this Commission proposal and there is no margin whatsoever for its ' better management ' , as some people are saying in order to make it look better and more ' digestible ' .
It is our duty , both to the farmers and for the sake of social equilibrium , to prevent the evils prescribed by the proposal .
We must resist and avert a policy which is opposed not only by farmers in the EU but by all working people who will bear the brunt of this anti-agricultural EU policy which aims to use the budget resources of the Member States , and this in the context of a policy of financial discipline and strict austerity .
Parliament 's view is that it is extremely important for the reform of the Common Agricultural Policy to be harmonised with the interests and wishes of the large majority of the population , who are now certain to escalate their efforts to frustrate and avert this policy .
The way I voted on the whole of this resolution was conditioned by the introduction of the idea of cofinancing . This does not seem to be a problem concerning the CAP but one that has been created to deal with certain countries ' financial contributions to the budget .
Had the principle of cofinancing not been defeated by the European Parliament , considerable limits would have been put on Portugal 's freedom to negotiate on Agenda 2000 , and the aim of maintaining the same volume of Community financial support for the next framework , as a result of Agenda 2000 , would have been diluted .
Therefore , I consider the overall result of these votes highly satisfactory .
The voting behaviour of the Liberal Group has been strongly influenced by its conviction that in the future it would be desirable to have cofinancing with Member States of those items of agricultural expenditure that concern income support .
The reasons for this have been explained in various speeches by members of the group in debates on agricultural policy .
The Liberal Group therefore voted against all those amendments that concerned this cofinancing of agricultural expenditure .
It voted in favour of the PSE-V Group resolutions because of its conditional approval of income support despite the fact that the resolution contained various phrases ( conditionality of the various support measures ) that did not all reflect the position of the Group .
For the same reason it also voted for the PSE resolution and when both of the above resolutions were rejected it of course voted against the UPE and EDN resolutions .
As was to be expected , the ELDR Group voted in favour of all the articles of its joint resolution with the PPE .
When the final vote came it had to decide if it would vote in favour of the resolution despite the fact that paragraph 14 with its clause on cofinancing was defeated .
A majority of the Group take the view that it could still vote in favour , as with the adoption of paragraph 13 the discussion on the financing of the common agricultural policy can continue , especially in the light of the various votes on the oral questions which indicated that those amendments that rejected cofinancing were defeated outright by a very large majority .
I will be using my vote to condemn a Community agricultural policy that basically adheres to a rationale of reducing prices and lowering the value accorded to labour , a policy that is so destructive that it calls into question the CAP itself by proposing the cofinancing of agricultural spending .
If the desire exists today to meet the aspirations of the people who have condemned the ultra-liberal policies , then existing policies must not be eliminated .
Not only should the CAP be maintained and reformed , but it should also be given a new direction .
The broad outlines of this new direction have already been outlined by the House .
It supports the concept of ' a high level of employment ' , including in agriculture .
It intends to provide safeguards against the race for productivity .
It wishes to meet the new challenges facing mankind in the areas of food , energy , the environment , water supply and sustainable development .
We already have the principles in the form of the single market , financial solidarity and the Community preference , which may be renewed .
The principle financial resource is the CAP budget .
This involves substantial public funds that must not be used to produce surpluses that are sold cheaply on the international market . Instead , they are to be used , above all , to meet the Union 's internal needs , to provide each production sector with the means to manage the market , to correct the injustices between farmers , types of products , regions and countries , and to develop international trade that is of mutual benefit .
Other funding could be created with cheap credits allocated selectively for employment , productive investment and sustainable development , with taxation on financial movements and with the tools to ensure the fair distribution , by sector , of the wealth generated between agricultural production and consumption .
That might be a genuine alternative policy .
Five million farming jobs have been lost in the EU between 1980 and today .
The proportion of unemployment in rural areas is higher than in urban areas , and the countryside is being deserted ever more rapidly , with young people as the first to go .
That is the dramatic situation to which the catastrophic policies implemented have led the countryside and the farming economies of the EU 's Member States .
And now we are talking about even worse measures , whose exclusive aim is to accelerate the rate at which agricultural activity is being abandoned by small and medium-scale farmers , so that land and production will be concentrated in the hands of fewer and fewer people .
This policy is laying the ground for a new feudalism and we are sorry that although the rapporteur himself recognises the dramatic situation , his report and amendments only oppose it symptomatically and he attempts to correct the letter of the regulation but does not touch , oppose or try to alter its spirit .
On the other hand he unleashes a potential storm by giving his blessing to the opening of the countryside to alternative activities , not only by farmers but by anyone else who wants to ' make something ' of the scorched earth left behind by catastrophic and anti-agrarian policies .
The rapporteur forgets , and is also trying to persuade farmers to forget , that the countryside , the farming areas in which 25 % of the EU 's population live , are closely interwoven with farming and livestock breeding , and that farmers are indissolubly bound to the land and to their work .
What matters is not to reorientate , or rather , disorientate farmers by covering up and whitewashing hostile policies .
Within the framework of a now unashamedly anti-agrarian policy whose chief aim is to accelerate the reduction of the farming population , is it not Pharisaic to talk about being interested in employment in the countryside ?
Is it not pure hypocrisy to make proposals for dealing with the problems of poverty zones when everyone agrees with the overall policy which creates the poverty zones in the first place ?
Is it not contradictory to make proposals about incentives to regenerate the agricultural population while continual quota reductions virtually debar young people from taking up farming ?
Is it not hypocrisy to proclaim interest in environmental protection while traditional crops are being extirpated and genetically modified crops are accepted even before serious and detailed research has been carried out and completed on their environmental impact and their consequences for the consumer , solely because that is what the multinationals which produce genetically modified reproducing species dictate ?
How is the wishful thinking about the countryside 's prosperity to be realised when the financial resources available are continually being cut ?
What European farmers expect and demand is that we should do all we can to defend their right to continue their activities without interruption and under the best possible conditions , and their right to make a decent living from those activities .
That aim will not be achieved by hypocritical half-measures and placebos .
It will be achieved by their own struggle , the struggle they are developing for example in my own country even as we speak , and which we support unreservedly .
For that reason , we will vote against the proposed Council Regulation and the report , which despite the few positive points it contains , does not dare to reverse the overall anti-agrarian content of the proposal as it ought to .
We are voting against the report relating to support for rural development through the EAGGF .
The Commission has not gone far enough in its proposed agricultural reform within the framework of Agenda 2000 .
We have generally abstained from voting on forestry policy , because we do not think it is appropriate to deal with forestry at Community level .
It makes sense to have an instrument , independent of the arrangements for supporting production or those for overhauling infrastructures directly linked to farming activity , to support other activities very closely related to agriculture and used mainly by farmers .
These would include forestry activities , fire-fighting , and environmental and landscape protection , which , if developed integrally , could help in the fight against rural desertification and bring about economic diversification in the countryside .
This instrument could also help to reduce some serious , well-known imbalances .
All of these aims are set out in the justification for the Commission 's proposal .
There is also an appropriate proposal to introduce some uniformity into the patchy and rather unknown regulation on this question .
However , these good intentions are contradicted by the proposals that have actually been made .
This instrument does not have at its disposal the financial resources needed to tackle the problems that it sets out to solve . In particular , it seems that it will not even have at its disposal resources to be withdrawn from other areas of the agricultural policy , which in themselves are already underfunded .
For agro-environmental measures , it establishes a regulation that really seems to be a measure to help the farms and finances of certain Member States , small in number , in the centre and north of the European Union .
The report does nothing to change the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development-environmental guidelines nor does it eliminate the apparent aim for people or bodies not directly related so far with farming to benefit from this instrument .
They should be given support in a different way and not through this instrument , which should exclusively be at the service of farmers .
There are positive aspects in the report as a result of the amendment that we tabled , for example , the doubling of compensatory amounts per hectare or possible assistance with investment in State or common ( fallow ) land . The recognition of specific regional needs and the call for improving the balance between Mediterranean and continental crops are also positive .
However , the overall resources remain insufficient and the basic guidelines have not been changed .
That is why we abstained in this vote .
The report forms part of the collective strategy to reform the EU structural support funds .
Out of loyalty , we have decided to support the bulk of the PSE Group 's proposals .
However , we firmly believe that the Agricultural Fund should be phased out and the money returned to the Member States .
A sizeable share - 20 to 30 % - could be retained by the Union and the entire sum used to provide aid for the Central and Eastern European countries , where there is greater need for financial support than in the Mediterranean countries , which already have a perfectly acceptable standard of living .
I welcome the fact that the European Commission is proposing to include agricultural structural measures in a framework regulation .
This will make it possible to better coordinate the various instruments .
In the Commission 's proposals this is largely a matter of continuing and improving the existing measures , and we broadly agree with this .
In particular , I believe the support measures designed to encourage agriculture to adopt more environmental and natural farming practices are very important .
In his draft report the rapporteur sought to extend the present measures , which are mainly aimed at developing agricultural structures , to other rural activities .
His amendments were rejected by the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development .
As far as we are concerned this took the sting out of the report and at the final vote we were able to vote in favour .
Rural policy must remain primarily the responsibility of national and regional government .
They are better equipped for this than the European Commission which has a limited capacity to implement and is not close to the problems in the regions .
( The sitting was suspended at 1.05 p.m. and resumed at 3 p.m. )
Displaced persons
The next item is the report ( A4-0399 / 98 ) by Mr Wiebenga , on behalf of the Committee on Civil Liberties and Internal Affairs , on
I.Amended proposal for a Joint Action on the temporary protection of displaced persons ( COM ( 98 ) 0372 - C4-0505 / 98-97 / 0081 ( CNS ) ) II.Proposal for a Joint Action concerning solidarity in the admission and residence of beneficiaries of the temporary protection of displaced persons ( COM ( 98 ) 0372 - C4-0506 / 98-98 / 0222 ( CNS ) ) .
Mr President , the proposal for joint action on the temporary protection of displaced persons is a good one .
It would apply to cases where a large number of people must all be offered sanctuary at the same time with the result that , in such an emergency situation , normal asylum procedures cannot be applied .
An amendment brought by the European Parliament establishes that these arrangements simply supplement the treaty on refugees rather than replacing it .
An interesting procedure is involved here .
This is the first time the European Commission has used its right to initiate legislation under the third pillar .
On this second reading the Commission - Commissioner Gradin who is here today - has accepted many of the European Parliament 's amendments .
I would say the most important of these is the introduction of a five-year limit to the temporary protection and above all the burden-sharing between the various Member States .
These changes , and I say this in the framework of the third pillar , are a feather in the cap for the European Parliament .
So much for the positive comments .
Now the day-to-day reality .
It is incomprehensible and irresponsible that the European Union , that is the Council of Ministers where the third pillar is involved , has still not established any fair system for sharing the burden of displaced persons or for receiving them .
We all know that this is too late for the displaced persons of Bosnia .
They were and still are dependent on the benevolence of a few Member States , namely Germany , the Netherlands and Sweden , while others have done much less .
Things are quiet in Kosovo at present , fortunately , although the situation there is of course very tragic in humanitarian terms .
But if , God forbid , things get out of hand there again and large numbers of Kosovans come to the European Union , then we will find once again that nothing has been arranged at European level .
The same is true if major problems arise anywhere else which lead to a massive influx of people , such as in Algeria for example .
The question is which Member States in the Council of Ministers are not prepared to cooperate in drawing up such a system .
I hear rumours that they include Spain , France and the United Kingdom , but we cannot be certain as the Council meets behind closed doors .
I should like greater clarity from the Commissioner on this .
Much remains to be done in the field of asylum and immigration policy .
The Eurodac data exchange takes much too long .
There are no agreements on external border controls .
There is no common return policy .
The Council of Ministers has found itself in an impasse over recent years .
This is why the Liberal Group also believes it is a good thing that the Austrian Presidency has now taken the initiative to move towards a more systematic approach to asylum and immigration policy , in particular in the light of the entry into force of the Treaty of Amsterdam .
But under that Treaty the European Commission itself is going to have to do more and my view is that the present department , with the number of officials available to Commissioner Gradin , is much too small for the European Commission to be able to take the necessary action after the Treaty of Amsterdam enters into force .
I would be interested to know if there any plans to improve matters in this respect .
The proposals for joint action for the protection of displaced persons look reasonable now that a number of Parliament 's amendments have been adopted .
The second field of joint action , namely in relation to burden-sharing , represents major progress , because last year there was no such proposal for a regulation on the table .
Our parliamentary committee also believes that the method of this burden-sharing must be very different from that proposed by the European Commission .
First must come the balanced distribution of displaced persons between the Member States and only then the matter of financial compensation .
The Council of Ministers is already much too late .
If we once again fail to achieve a speedy decision because a couple of Member States refuse to cooperate then an alternative solution must be sought and those Member States who are indeed prepared to assume their responsibilities must work together in a coalition of the willing .
Mr President , in some national parliaments the asylum and refugee debate is plagued by a populist game appealing to xenophobic sentiments in the hope of scoring electoral points .
There is none of this in Mr Wiebenga 's report .
He clearly sticks to traditional liberal principles , adopts the right tone and shows concern for the fate of displaced persons .
The improvements he brings to the two Commission proposals make these even clearer and more humane .
The rapporteur rightly favours a strengthening of Parliament 's role .
In addition , he seeks a stronger legal basis for refugee policy and , like most of us , he is trying to avoid dependence on a unanimous vote in the Council .
The Committee on Foreign Affairs , Security and Defence Policy finds it interesting that he partly attributes the phenomenon of mass displacement to the Council 's deficient foreign policy .
He thus supplements the rules for sharing responsibilities which the Commission wants to introduce by considering the efforts which Member States could make to prevent the massive displacement of persons , such as military intervention and other conflictprevention measures , as part of this shared responsibility .
These are very laudable additions to the Commission 's already praiseworthy attempts .
Yet the rapporteur still has to wrestle with the same dilemma which confronted the Commission .
Over recent years the Council has certainly repeatedly given the impression that it is aware of the need for a real sharing of the burden or responsibility for the protection of displaced persons . But when it comes to the crunch the Council remains powerless .
The Commission is seeking to find a way out of this by splitting its proposal into a part which can win the support of the Council and a part which cannot .
Each time the need for unanimity serves as an alibi for Member States to whom European solidarity means nothing , yet which these same Member States are so prone to invoke when it is purely their own interests which are at stake .
I wonder whether or not it could be possible to compensate for the refusal to share responsibility out of some European Union fund or other .
You cannot dine à la carte at the EU table .
The call for the abolition of solidarity from Member States who have no desire to share the burden of this European issue falls on very receptive ears in the many countries which contribute to the Union .
I regret this .
The unwilling Member States are in fact sawing off the branch they themselves are sitting on .
It seems from his explanation that the rapporteur has serious doubts about the way in which the Commission is resolving its dilemma .
The question is whether much progress can be made before the Treaty of Amsterdam enters into force .
Is the Commission 's solution not a self-deception by which we give the Council a loincloth to hide its shame ?
Mr Nassauer will be making the necessary comments on this on behalf of the European People 's Party .
I believe that because each action first has to overcome the barrier of unanimity , the Commission is not giving us much at all .
I would like to warn against allowing ourselves to be caught up in a game which simply allows the Council to offload its problems onto us .
Mr Wiebenga 's idea to try to make the most of it nevertheless is very laudable .
The way in which he has formulated this in his report is also excellent .
But I also believe that many people share his doubts as explicitly expressed in his explanation .
Although we appreciate the work he has done on his report , this doubt remains with us all and we have no choice but to draw the consequences .
Mr President , I hope you have been informed that I have an additional four minutes from Mr Schulz .
I am pleased that Mrs Gradin - the Commissioner dealing with this issue - is with us here today .
I always think it is very important for Commissioners to attend debates .
I should , however , like to express my own frustration and that of my group at the report being constantly rescheduled this week .
We do not agree that we should be discussing this report at a time when all Members believe that we should actually be discussing topical and urgent matters , and not such an important political issue as this .
This is about refugees entering the Union , refugees who are treated disgracefully and shabbily ; we always feel that they are too much for us , that we do not have room for them , and that we would actually rather ensure that we rid ourselves of these people as quickly as possible .
This is reflected somewhat in the way in which we are dealing with this debate here .
This debate is taking place when many colleagues are prevented from being here by other appointments .
It is a fact that the topical and urgent debate does not concern everyone and , as a result , other appointments are arranged , at a much earlier stage than our debates are .
That explains why too few Members are here .
I must also apologise on behalf of several colleagues from my own group - who actually wanted to contribute to this debate - for their not being able to be here either , because they made alternative appointments some time ago .
This is true of the chairman of our committee , who is usually always present when debates involving our committee are being held in the plenary , and takes part in the debate .
Unfortunately , she cannot participate today because she too has another long-standing appointment , which could not be further postponed .
I should like to warmly congratulate Mr Wiebenga on his report .
Admittedly , there are a few points on which we disagree straight away , but he is aware of that .
Above all , however , I believe that it is important to make sure that the report is ready before the Council meets in December , so that Parliament is able to make its views known on the Commission 's amended proposal and to vote on it .
Since the war in former Yugoslavia , the European Union has been faced several times with admitting large numbers of refugees from various regions , and in particular recently - as Mr Wiebenga also mentioned - from Iraq and Algeria .
The European Union has never had an instrument which firstly includes solidarity measures to make it easier for Member States to admit refugees and , secondly , offers bureaucratic protection .
The tragedy of the refugees from Kosovo has once again revealed the inability of our governments to respond to events of this kind in a way which is commensurate with their own professed standards of morality and human rights .
Now refugees from Kosovo are being detained at the Union 's external borders as illegal immigrants , and are also very often treated as criminals .
This cannot and must not continue .
We want to be able to continue to offer sanctuary in the European Union to those fleeing from armed conflict , sustained violence , or systematic or widespread violations of human rights .
We believe it is right for all present and future Member States to contribute to fulfilling this humanitarian commitment .
Ethnic or religious persecution can , however , also constitute grounds for refugee status .
In my group , in any event , we agree that these grounds should also be accepted .
This is also shown in the draft own-initiative report produced by my colleague , Mrs Lindeperg , which we will soon be debating .
We are not disputing the fact that a restrictive interpretation of the Geneva Convention on Refugees has led to a gap in the protection offered to refugees of civil war in Europe .
This must be closed , but not exclusively by means of the measures now on the table .
I would therefore ask you to vote in favour of certain parts of the text originally proposed by the Commission , because we believe that some of the points it contains are better than some of the amendments .
It makes absolutely no sense , in the event of a mass influx , actually to have a joint action offering refugees protection in the Union , and yet alongside this not to make any arrangements for how these people are actually going to reach the Union .
Once the Member States have resolved to apply the joint actions , it is only logical that they should then disregard visa restrictions and dispense with the principle of safe third countries .
On burden-sharing , the Commission 's proposal gives priority to balancing out the financial burden over balancing out the distribution of people .
I could also go along with this approach , precisely because of what we saw with the refugees in Germany : many came to Germany because they had personal contacts there , because they knew the language , because they had already been there as migrant workers , and had thus found sanctuary with families .
They had become integrated to a certain extent through their knowledge of German , which meant that they were able to support themselves and earn their own living .
I doubt whether this would have been possible in the same way if we had , from the outset , forcefully transported these people to an area where they did not have contacts of this kind , for example .
Refugee quotas seem , therefore , on the basis of previous experience , to be rather counter-productive , and balancing out the financial burden is the right way forward .
I do , however , endorse my group 's opinion that it is possible , either before or when the refugees arrive , to allocate them to individual Member States .
However , this requires very thorough planning , so as not to cause great personal and financial damage to the refugees , on the one hand , and to the citizens of the European Union on the other .
Finally , I should like to say that I hope that the Council will soon be adopting practical proposals on how this is to be done .
Mr President , having heard Mrs Zimmermann 's speech , I cannot help wondering whether she was giving the opinion of the Committee on Legal Affairs , as announced , or whether she was speaking on behalf of the Socialist Group .
I should like to ask Mrs Zimmermann to clarify that point .
Mr President , I did say at the beginning that I would take the four minutes allocated to Mr Schulz , and I therefore spoke both for the Committee on Legal Affairs and for my group .
Mrs Zimmermann , I think Mr Nassauer will have been satisfied by your answer .
Mr President , I suppose I have four minutes ' speaking time and I should like to make it immediately clear to Mr Nassauer that I will be speaking on behalf of the Socialist Group and not for any committee .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I am very relieved that the European Parliament is after all managing to deal with the Commission proposal for temporary status during this part-session , because it must be clear to us all that time is very short .
While everybody recognises that the ethnic Albanians in Kosovo are still being persecuted , that there has been a major political problem for many years and a war is being fought on Kosovan territory , there is still no European agreement to protect refugees from these areas .
Yet all our Member States are confronted with the most harrowing circumstances of these refugees .
Fleeing Kosovars are being plucked from lorries by the dozen and in some cases the Member States assume their responsibilities and initiate asylum procedures .
In many other cases , people are simply expelled or abandoned to their fate .
The only response which the Schengen countries could come up with when boatloads of Kurdish refugees arrived on the Italian coast , for example , was to call Italy to order and promptly close the borders .
So I believe that it is high time the Union Member States assumed their joint responsibility and together approved this temporary status for displaced persons .
Ladies and gentlemen , a number of warnings would not be amiss in this debate .
First of all , this temporary status is intended to protect refugees and to grant them social rights solely in cases when the massive influx renders it impossible to handle individual asylum applications within a reasonable time-frame .
It must not be the intention to use this so-called B status , which gives refugees fewer rights , in order to undermine the A status conferred under the Geneva Convention .
Let us be very clear on this : the broad and humanitarian interpretation of the Geneva Convention has not been superseded , as the Austrian Presidency said with a slip of the tongue in its first document , but on the contrary also covers most situations of displaced persons , inter-ethnic conflicts and civil war .
The problem lies principally with the European Council which in March 1996 itself gave a restrictive definition .
This is why the European Parliament is sticking to the right of refugees to submit an individual request for asylum despite the temporary protection .
Secondly , we believe that the temporary status must necessarily be coupled with solidarity among Member States in accepting the refugees .
Not only financial solidarity , but above all solidarity in practice by actually agreeing to take the refugees .
We naturally assume here that the Council is where the stumbling block lies in approving the proposal .
Many Member States would prefer to buy an easy conscience , preferably by using money from the European refugee fund , than to actually accept the refugees .
The Commission has nevertheless deemed it useful to separate the two proposals in order to give the proposal a chance of success .
I now understand that Mr Nassauer and the PPE Group apparently want to recombine the two proposals in one text .
This will certainly have an effect one way or another .
Mr Nassauer , we all know that if we do this now it will indefinitely delay the whole matter of the temporary protection of displaced persons .
This means we are giving the Council an excellent argument not to do anything more .
Thirdly , the proposal states that temporary protection can be ended if the situation in the region of origin is safe .
My group would like to add two further conditions .
Firstly , the human rights of displaced persons must be respected and nobody can be discriminated against .
Secondly , refugees must be able to return without problems to the place they came from and not just dropped off somewhere in the region .
I believe there is good reason for this .
I and many other colleagues are very shocked at the proposal by some of the political parties in the Netherlands to send back the Bosnians when some of the human rights organisations are saying that conditions are anything but safe there .
These are the points we want to make clear in the Wiebenga report .
Finally , Mr President , we hope that Parliament will not give the Council an excuse for failing to approve this temporary status and I hope that the House can agree on this .
Mrs Van Lancker , you asked whether you had four minutes , so please stick to them if that is your allowance and do not just carry on as long as you like .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I will begin by thanking Mr Wiebenga , our rapporteur , who as expected has produced an excellent , careful and very balanced report for Parliament .
I should like to point out that - contrary to the impression which Mrs Zimmermann and Mrs Van Lancker sought to give - this is not a question of whether refugees are admitted into the EU or not .
Of course refugees from civil wars are admitted into Europe , in their hundreds of thousands .
The problem is burden-sharing .
The question hiding under the title ' temporary protection of refugees ' is essentially whether , as in the case of former Yugoslavia , two countries - namely Austria and Germany - should take in more than twice as many refugees as all the others put together , or whether a just way of sharing the burden should be found ; that is the political problem .
In any case , no one in this House who is to be taken seriously disputes the fact that people should be admitted under humane conditions .
The problem has been an urgent one ever since the civil war in Yugoslavia put hundreds of thousands of people to flight .
Since then there have been calls for burden-sharing .
To briefly recap the course of events : some time ago , after prolonged hesitation and prolonged pressure on the part of the countries concerned , the Commission drafted an initial proposal on this subject .
I do not wish to examine now why we deemed this to be inadequate , whether it was because the Commission did not dare to do more , or - and I have to grant you this , Mrs Gradin - because it saw clearly that this was all that could be achieved .
The gist of this first draft on the actual important issue of burden-sharing was , however , as follows : in the event of a mass influx of refugees , the Council considers the appropriate measures , so not with the objective of approving assistance .
No , it considers the appropriate measures and in doing so meets its commitments .
This was an absurd way to settle the burden-sharing issue and thus also failed to be supported by a majority of the Council .
The Commission has redrafted its paper and has now come up with a very peculiar idea .
It has now proposed two legislative acts , the first on admitting refugees and the second on solidarity in the admission of refugees .
If you take a closer look - something I strongly recommend - you will see that the decision to admit refugees is taken by a qualified majority ; if necessary , therefore , this can even be decided if the particularly burdened country admitting the refugees votes against . You will also see , however , that the solidarity measures - the assistance - require unanimity to be approved and are not a binding stipulation ; in the Commission proposal this is only a ' may ' provision .
That is decidedly too weak .
This is not the solidarity of which the title speaks , but is clearly only the solidarity of those who wish to reject a fair system of burden-sharing .
That is why we cannot accept these two proposals in this form .
What we are calling for and what should be proposed is the following : the burden-sharing must take place at the same time as the refugees are admitted .
When the refugees are admitted , it must be clear straight away which countries are to admit them and in what proportions , which should take into account the countries ' capacity and economic performance .
If that does not happen , there will not be any burden-sharing at any later stage .
Certain details also ought to be mentioned .
We place the emphasis on admitting the refugees into different countries , not on financial assistance .
We would also ask you to consider , Mrs Gradin , whether five years is the right duration for the temporary admission regime .
Five years is more of an indicator of immigration than temporary protection .
From my own experience , I know that once someone has been there for five years , they will find it very difficult to leave their host country again .
We will certainly have to discuss all the other details .
I might mention the problem of family reunification .
It would be better to give someone outside the Union the opportunity to come in , rather than giving someone who has already come in the possibility of bringing his whole family to join him straight away .
That increases the number of those admitted and the corresponding burden .
The question for us was a political one : is the progress being made here such that , despite all the criticism , we can approve it ; or is it so little that , if we agreed to it , we would meet with the reproach in the future that it has already been settled ?
We say that the progress being made here is so minimal that we cannot pronounce ourselves satisfied with it .
That is why , Commissioner , we must unfortunately reject these two proposals .
Mr President , I would like to begin by paying tribute to the work of Mr Wiebenga on temporary protection for displaced persons .
The report he is presenting and the motion for a legislative resolution , if adopted by the Council , would provide an effective instrument for dealing with a migratory wave on the scale of that experienced in Bosnia and Herzegovina or , closer to home perhaps , a large-scale movement of displaced persons from Kosovo towards the Member States of the European Union .
I use the conditional tense for the simple reason that we cannot be careful enough in what we say since , having been asked to reach a decision in December on the matter currently under discussion , the Council is far from unanimous with regard to the proposals that have just been put forward by Mr Wiebenga .
The Commission 's proposals for joint action on the temporary protection of displaced persons and solidarity in the reception and stay of those benefiting from such protection make up a whole .
The rapporteur has clearly highlighted the manner in which the first section of his report complements the Geneva Convention on refugees .
We are in complete agreement and we intend to keep up the pressure on all international bodies and all the authorities involved , with a view to influencing international law on this issue .
Moreover , experience shows that an unequal distribution of burdens gives rise to many problems linked to the implementation of the right of asylum or the treatment of persons who , for one reason or another , see no other solution to their sad fate than to cross the borders of the European Union .
We might remember the panic , which I would call ridiculous if the situation had not been so serious , that was caused by the arrival of a few Kurds in Italy last year , as though the presence of a few thousand Kurds in the territory of the European Union was likely to destabilise 350 million Europeans .
It is obviously absurd .
If the proposals contained in this report had been in force at that time , particularly those regarding burden-sharing in relation to the problem of displaced persons , the drama I have just mentioned would probably not have occurred .
Burdens must be fairly distributed for reasons of morals , ethics or simply a fundamental need for solidarity .
The example of the arrival of a few thousand Kurds in Bari effectively highlighted the weaknesses and gaps involving this issue and in terms of the application of existing rules .
It also shows that if a larger number of refugees were to arrive on our territory , Europe would be ill-prepared to handle the situation .
I would not , however , want this debate to lead to a dialogue of the deaf on this matter because , as it is , considerable progress has , in fact , been made . That is why I call on the House to adopt the measures proposed by our friend , Mr Wiebenga , whom I would again like to thank most sincerely .
Mr President , it is always welcome when a rapporteur tries to make an already good report by the Commission even better .
As in the past , when he proved successful , the rapporteur has tried to do this here too , and we can support the main thrust of his proposals .
But we cannot support him on a very important point , namely Amendment No 5 to Article 3 concerning the maximum period during which this regulation would apply . Already set at five years in the proposal , he advocates further extending it , potentially by another five years .
I have two major objections to this .
First of all , I find the first period of five years already exceptionally long for temporary status .
This is a measure providing protection for temporarily displaced persons . In the light of all such cases which have arisen in the past , five years is very long .
If we are talking about a stable integration , a stable laying down of roots in a society , then people should not live for five years with the idea that the next day or perhaps at the end of this period they will have another status which may be much better , let alone that at the end of this five years they may find themselves facing another five years in this intolerable state of uncertainty .
We would therefore most strongly oppose the rapporteur 's proposal for temporary status to be extended to a maximum of 10 years .
Another question , addressed not so much to the rapporteur as to the Commissioner , is that the precise role of the UNHCR remains unclear .
Various comments are made , but for example the second proposal on financial solidarity in Article 2 ( 2 ) says : can ask the UNHCR for advice .
We believe this should be ' must ' and in a number of explanations it has given it also seems as if that is what the Commission wants .
I should therefore like some clarification from the Commissioner on this point .
A good point in the proposal is that temporarily displaced persons are not going to be moved around .
We are now seeing where this can lead , because with the Dublin agreements that can indeed happen with asylum-seekers . Following claims made on that basis very large groups of asylum-seekers are ending up on the street , even in the Netherlands , because the Netherlands refuses to admit them because they were previously in another European country .
Fortunately , no such proposal is made in this case .
Finally , the rapporteur would like to see the word ' solidarity ' deleted from the report .
He has good formal grounds for this .
I would be very pleased not to see the concept of ' solidarity ' or the sense of the concept of ' solidarity ' disappear , but simply the word .
I cannot help saying that it seems easier to pursue a liberal asylum policy in Europe than in the Netherlands .
I refer to Mr Wiebenga who is a front-runner for the VVD in the coming European elections and I must say that I have every sympathy for his traditional liberal approach , as it has already been described .
But that does not apply to his party in the Dutch Parliament .
Mr President , it goes without saying that the Group of the European Radical Alliance will fully support the text presented by Mr Wiebenga , and we would like to congratulate him very sincerely on his tenacity in this matter .
The problem today is that , on the one hand , refugees must enjoy a common system of protection and , on the other hand , the states and governments that take them in must themselves make similar efforts or at least employ comparable budgetary resources .
However , this all goes without saying .
The real problem lies in Europe 's absence .
Earlier , Mr Zimmermann , who is regrettably absent , referred to the desert-like appearance of this Hemicycle , which precisely reflects Europe 's total absence from each of the current crises .
Europe does not exist or , to be entirely accurate , Europe has failed to provide itself with the wherewithal to be present and active . It carries no weight in any of these crises .
We see this clearly in the eastern Mediterranean , we saw it in Bosnia , and we see it in Kosovo .
Europe 's absence is a disaster , particularly since the United Nations itself has not been able to establish a form of intervention that allows it to preserve peace , to at least prevent armed conflicts from erupting , to prevent them from spreading when they do occur , and to protect civilian populations .
This does not mean that we wish to become the policemen of the world following the example of another great power .
However , it is our duty to promote the structures for action by an international police force , which would not necessarily be European . That is what we should work towards .
Meanwhile , we will grant temporary shelter , we will provide protection for refugees , we will ease our consciences before sending them back home as soon as the situation in their country has changed , when it has become less heated or when our guilty consciences have become less acute .
We support the Wiebenga report , but it is only a beginning .
The bulk of the work remains to be done .
Thank you , Mr Pradier .
I would like to ask our friends in the galleries not to call out during the debates .
I am afraid that is not allowed , and I would not wish to have to ask for the galleries to be cleared .
If the speakers ' words fire you with enthusiasm , please keep this to yourself and express it in a different place .
Mr President , I would like to begin by thanking Mr Wiebenga for his work .
Even if I do not always agree with him , and there are indeed a number of points in his report that I do not agree with , I would be the first to acknowledge that he is a person who is extremely serious and most courteous in his work .
Nonetheless , I find it surprising , and excessive , to consider temporary protection for five years , which may be doubled , thus totalling 10 years .
This , in fact , is no longer a question of temporary protection but involves immigration , which is not the topic under debate today .
Moreover , I am astonished at the proposal to replace unanimity , which has until now been used for decisions on solidarity mechanisms , with a qualified majority .
If the system is to work , the countries involved must give their consent .
However , I agree with Mr Pradier that this issue goes to the centre of the question of Europe 's international influence .
We are told that ' Europe means peace ' , but Europe does not mean peace , because we have unfortunately seen that there is war in Europe and that the European Union allows the United States to settle European conflicts .
I wonder whether the unshakeable desire to have a common policy in diplomatic affairs is the right course and whether it would not have been preferable , particularly in settling the Yugoslavian conflict , to make use of the competences , traditions and historical relations of certain European nations , for instance between Germany and Croatia or between France and Serbia . This would have been better than trying in vain to achieve a unanimous position , which , at the end of the day , condemned Europe to a form of impotence that was deeply regrettable , both for the countries involved and for the European Union itself .
Clearly , we have a duty to take in refugees .
We have a duty in particular towards Central Europe .
I will never be able to repeat enough that the countries of the European Union have enjoyed freedom and prosperity at the cost of 40 years of slavery and abject poverty suffered by the countries of Central Europe .
Mr President , with a total of 90 seconds ' speaking time I will confine myself to two interesting quotations . I would also briefly make the point that I continue to believe that Parliament leaves itself open to ridicule by limiting speaking time on such an important subject as asylum policy to such an extent that speakers are obliged to deal in superficialities .
The first comes from the Dutch liberals , from Frits Bolkestein , and dates from before the last European elections .
I quote : ' Refugees from outside Europe must find sanctuary in safe countries in their own part of the world .
As soon as a country becomes safe again , all refugees from that country should return . '
Surprisingly enough I do not find this spirit present either in the report or in the words of our liberal colleague Mr Wiebenga , who was nevertheless elected on this programme .
I therefore ask the question : Are there perhaps two VVD programmes , one for the electorate and one for the elected , one for the election campaign and one for afterwards ?
The second quotation comes from the Flemish socialist Louis Tobback who in an election leaflet describes the majority of refugees in general as : ' Gulls who come to settle here on a rubbish tip , as that is easier than fishing or farming the land back home . '
These are not my words .
It is not even my conviction .
These are the words and the conviction of the leader of the socialists in Flanders .
But the elected representatives for this party also sing another tune here in Parliament than their party leadership back home sing for their own voters .
This is deceiving the voters and I will continue to denounce it .
Mr President , Commissioner , in the last few months of this year , we have seen similarly steep and dramatic increases in the number of asylum seekers as we saw in 1991 and 1992 .
We note that the mass of asylum seekers is again concentrated on the selfsame countries as it was in 1991 and 1992 .
My colleague , Mr Nassauer , has already referred to the fact that two countries , Germany and Austria , admitted more than half of the refugees at that time .
The burden placed on these two countries is huge .
We know that their capacity to bear this burden and to integrate these people will reach its limit if this continues .
That is why I strongly urge you to be reasonable , so that the burden of admitting these people can be shared in the future .
The current situation is intolerable , and the proposals tabled thus far are not likely actually to solve the problem either .
Burden-sharing is absolutely essential for Europe .
I see the proposals presented as a ploy to prevent a real solution emerging .
The decision to admit refugees is to be taken by a majority vote , which means that it can also be passed against the wishes of the countries concerned .
The decision on distributing the refugees , which is then of course difficult , requires unanimity ; we may as well assume then , that it will not happen .
As a result , the countries facing the greatest influxes of refugees now will continue to do so in the future too .
In addition , the whole business then has a multiplier effect : these are the countries which already received the most migrant workers in the past and integrated them along with their families , and so those seeking asylum go to those countries because they have relatives , acquaintances and friends there .
If we do not find a solution quickly , I fear that these countries ' capacity to bear this burden will not only reach its limit , but in some cases will be exceeded .
None of us want that to happen .
The second point is a completely unacceptable proposal from the Green Group ; Mr Voggenhuber thought that refugees should also immediately bring all their relations with them .
We all know what that would mean .
You can reckon on a four- or five-fold increase in numbers , and everyone can imagine the kind of problems that would cause .
I also fail to understand - and here I have also received the support of the left side of the House , which is particularly pleasing - why a temporary right of asylum can , according to the proposal , be granted for five years .
I know from experience that , during the last crisis , we in Austria admitted more than 60 000 asylum seekers from Kosovo and integrated a large proportion of them .
We know from practical experience , however , how difficult it is , when people have already spent three years in a country , to make it possible for them to return home and to help them to reintegrate .
It really is incredibly difficult .
In my opinion , therefore , to make it possible for them to reintegrate , a temporary right of asylum should initially be granted for a maximum of three years and should only be extended in special cases .
In so doing , we want to ensure that people who are , after all , uprooted and find themselves in other countries , are able to go back , and are not deprived of the opportunity of becoming part of their old communities again .
The Wiebenga report has undoubtedly shown that we need solutions .
The proposed plan is not yet adequate .
I should like to see a solution on the table very soon , because time is pressing and we already have the problems .
Mr President , Commissioner , what I have just heard makes me very unhappy .
This is because I feel that an unholy alliance is being formed - one that we also see in other circumstances - in which one side claims it wished the best to be the enemy of the good .
It is quite unacceptable that Parliament should run the risk of making a complete fool of itself by throwing out the proposal and achieving nothing .
Then the Council would also be able to accuse us of not wanting to do anything .
If that is what Parliament really wants , then we have to give some careful thought to our role !
In fact , I cannot help thinking that this is similar to the discussion we had regarding the Members ' Statute .
In that discussion , the same people employing the same argument tried to delay the work .
Now - when there is comparative calm on our external borders - is the time to get on with it .
I really hope we can reach an understanding and approve Mr Wiebenga 's excellent initiative .
I think that one of the most important aspects is that we should move to majority voting , since it would mean that Europe was really working .
Clearly , we shall be able to take a decision in conjunction with the Member States affected by it , at least that cannot be prevented .
I would also prefer to see my own country join the cooperation initiative . I am among those who think that Finland has taken very little responsibility in the refugee issue and that it has been very short-sighted in its policy .
I should like to commend Mr Wiebenga on his report , and I hope we can all support it in order to avoid any unpleasant scenes when it comes to the vote .
I have one small comment , namely that we should pay more attention to last year 's Council resolution 13 / 48 , in which the EU and the Commission are requested to cooperate with the Council on this type of issue .
Mr President , I should also like to congratulate Mr Wiebenga .
A generous policy towards refugees should be pursued as a matter of course in all democratic countries , and hence in all EU Member States .
Unfortunately , there is still considerable room for improvement .
There should be constructive cooperation to help people in need and those who are displaced .
Such cooperation should involve a voluntary agreement on burden-sharing , but it should not be a matter for legislation .
It should be painfully clear that this is a question of common humanity .
To ensure that such a policy becomes firmly established in the Member States , a unanimous decision is vital .
We in the Green Group would naturally like to see our amendment approved , and we believe that Commissioner Gradin 's proposal on joint action to provide temporary protection is worth considering .
The report reinforces the human dimension , but such an instrument must nevertheless be seen as complementing the Geneva Convention on Refugees and definitely not as an alternative .
It is important for refugees to continue to have protection under the terms of the Convention - any other arrangement would be wholly unacceptable .
Mr President , you cannot open a newspaper anywhere in Europe without being confronted with the dramatic issue of asylum-seekers and the major differences of opinion of governments on this .
This is a huge problem and I must say that if what I learned at school was true , that to govern is to anticipate , then people have governed very badly in the various Member States and in Europe in recent times .
The conflict in the former Yugoslavia was clearly going to create flows of refugees .
The conflict presently raging in Kosovo could have been predicted two years ago .
As early as 1997 there was talk of the need for a displaced person status .
I am convinced of the need for this .
I am interested to hear the different views , the differences of opinion and objections of all concerned , but I have to say that by trying to do what is best we can fail to do what is good .
If at present we have no European solution then this means that there is no solution anywhere .
Because when a solution is found in Germany which is different to the one found in the Netherlands , then the flows of refugees simply shift .
We therefore need a European status and we must also ensure that solidarity is given an acceptable form .
For this reason we will say ' yes ' to the proposal , even if we are tempted to debate a number of aspects which are important but on which we will never reach unanimity and which must not prevent us from doing what must be done .
But despite all this I still think it is scandalous that we have no common foreign policy worthy of the name .
It is scandalous that the European countries are still failing to confront the real causes of these flows of people seeking security and a better life , because our development cooperation is no good and because we close our eyes to the need for a mobility policy which is also concerned with people and not just capital and goods .
Mr President , the situation of the refugees from Kosovo does urgently require a solution , and this above all means having a fair system for distributing the people .
Austria 's response to the crises of recent years , as also acknowledged here , has been exemplary ; it has admitted displaced persons , in particular from the stricken area of Bosnia , and has integrated most of them into society .
In the meantime , however , - as Mr Pirker rightly said - the capacity of the Austrian population to bear this burden has reached its limit .
If the word solidarity is not to be meaningless in the European Union , it is time for us to take action in pursuit of our common objectives .
No Member State should be able to buy its way out of this responsibility .
Each one should admit displaced persons in numbers corresponding to its size and population , and in so doing reveal the much flaunted European conscience .
We believe - for the reasons already mentioned by Mr Nassauer - that dividing the proposal into two parts , and thus deferring the issue of burden-sharing , is unjustifiable .
Only if a decision is taken as rapidly as possible on the whole package will we really do justice to the concerns of European citizens .
Mr President , I did not wish to interrupt Mr Hager , but simply to say the following . At three minutes past four , I asked to make a point of order for the following reason .
There are two possibilities : either you begin the topical and urgent debate at 4 p.m. precisely , or you take all the remaining speakers on the Wiebenga report after 4 p.m.
What is unacceptable , however , is for you to give some colleagues the floor after 4 p.m. and postpone others ' interventions to this evening .
It has to be one thing or the other !
Mr Posselt , we had to complete the first round of speakers from all the political groups .
That is why there has been a delay of three minutes .
The debate on the Wiebenga report is suspended , and will continue after the voting on topical and urgent subjects .
Mr President , I assume that the Commissioner , Mrs Gradin , can speak again in the course of this debate in order to reply to the points and questions we have raised .
Mr Wiebenga , you must understand that the order of business has been established in advance and we are sticking to it exactly .
The debate on your report will continue when voting has been completed .
TOPICAL AND URGENT DEBATE
The next item is the debate on topical and urgent subjects of major importance .
The next item is the joint debate on the following seven motions for resolutions on food aid to Russia :
B4-1002 / 98 by Mr Väyrynen and Mrs Kjer Hansen , on behalf of the ELDR Group ; -B4-1008 / 98 by Mr Swoboda and others , on behalf of the PSE Group ; -B4-1018 / 98 by Mrs Carrère d 'Encausse , on behalf of the UPE Group ; -B4-1019 / 98 by Mr de Lassus Saint Geniès , on behalf of the ARE Group ; -B4-1030 / 98 by Mrs Schroedter , Mr Lagendijk and Mrs Aelvoet , on behalf of the V Group ; -B4-1034 / 98 by Mr Provan and others , on behalf of the PPE Group ; -B4-1043 / 98 by Mr Seppänen and others , on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group .
Mr President , Commissioner , on the subject of the granting of aid to Russia , the Liberal Group wants the European Union to grant emergency aid to the Russian Federation .
That is clear .
The people of that country are facing an extremely difficult , precarious and cold situation .
We must not close our eyes to the fate of the population and stubbornness on our part due to reasons of accounting is out of place in the face of such problems .
But this does not alter the fact that the Russian Government must clearly understand that this positive signal from our side must meet with a positive signal from their side .
A responsible financial policy and firm undertakings to the IMF are essential in order to find lasting solutions to the problems of the Russian economy .
I know , these are just a lot of words , simple words , for a gigantic task .
A serious approach to fraud is also very important .
In this respect , in granting emergency aid the Union must also respect the Russian market as much as possible , which is why I call on the Council to approve the Commission proposal to make ECU 400 million available to the Russians .
Finally , the Commission must consult Parliament when drawing up the memorandum of understanding .
Thank you very much for the generous extra time .
Ladies and gentlemen , the time available for topical and urgent debate is very short , as you know .
So please stick to the time each speaker has been allocated for his or her speech .
Mr President , the problem we are discussing today , food aid to Russia , is of the utmost importance .
It is important because , in recent weeks and months , Russia has not only been experiencing an economic and financial crisis , but is also having to live with the effects of crop failure .
In 1998 , only half as much grain was harvested as had been expected ; the potato harvest does not appear to have been much better ; and in the allotments , which most Russians have - and which indeed they need for their basic food supplies - much poorer yields have also been produced .
The decline of the rouble has compounded the problems .
Most Russians can hardly afford to buy themselves food .
They are living either below or on the poverty line .
The need for aid is therefore beyond doubt , and I was able to see this for myself on visits to Russia in recent weeks .
Children and the elderly , in particular , are urgently dependent on our help .
Indeed , the first reports of people dying from starvation have already appeared in the media here .
At the moment , only one thing is certain about the food aid which the Council and the Commission wish to provide : it is help for European farmers , who are no longer able to sell their products on the Russian market because of the devaluation of the rouble .
Whether the food really does reach the orphanages , schools and hospitals , where people really need it , remains somewhat in doubt .
Agricultural products should be sold at market price , and the income paid into a special fund in the Russian budget and later used for social purposes .
There is no doubt that the Commission needs to consider once again here whether its approach is really the right one .
We cannot allow food to appear on the black market , or even to become a Russian export .
We want to support the poor in Russia and not the mafia .
That is why , in the motion , we call for humanitarian aid , as well as food aid , to be provided .
The Russian Red Cross , the churches and NGOs have pledged to help by identifying where need exists and distributing food and medicines , and they do have the required distribution systems .
A further issue is financing the food aid .
If it is indeed the case that this also helps and supports European farmers , then we believe that the funding should come out of the category on agricultural policy , Category 1 , and should not be charged to external policies , even if it is benefiting Russia .
I would urge the Commission to take the necessary decisions here .
Food aid will not solve the structural problems in Russia .
Russia needs to take action itself on that front , and finally present and implement the appropriate plans .
Mr President , it is 2- here in Strasbourg and it has snowed , but we are nice and warm with good food to eat .
That is why it is evident to me that we must help the Russians who are suffering extreme cold with nothing to eat .
My motto is : Help the Russians through the winter .
Of course we have not forgotten that billions granted in loans to Russia failed to achieve their objective and profited a rich elite .
The recent visit by German Chancellor Schröder to President Yeltsin shows that German flexibility in granting loans is over .
720 banks are on the verge of closure and the rest are unable to honour their undertakings .
Russia must pursue a different policy if it wants to escape these distressing financial and economic circumstances .
But this does not yet seem to be the case , because in his latest plans Prime Minister Primakov speaks of more State intervention .
Which means he has totally rejected Mr Schröder 's advice to follow the IMF rules .
Despite this we cannot disregard an appeal by the International Red Cross for food aid for the poorest people living in the most remote areas .
It is therefore an excellent thing for the Commission to have taken this initiative .
But I believe the Russians should agree to tax-free imports , fraud controls and unrestricted distribution .
Time is short .
We want to help the Russians through the winter , but they must give us the scope to explain to Europe 's taxpayers that their money is being used altruistically .
We are helping the Russians through the winter , but with checks .
Mr President , I think that what Mr Bertens has said diplomatically may be stated in a more direct manner .
The truth of the matter is that we are today prisoners of our credits to Russia .
It goes without saying that the Group of the European Radical Alliance will vote for this resolution in favour of humanitarian aid to Russia , given the current disastrous humanitarian situation in the country .
But , in point of fact , we have no policy regarding Russia and it is not possible to have one because our credits and the power they indirectly give the Russians over our banks mean that the Russians may do as they like . They turn a deaf ear to the demands of the European Union .
They do not undertake privatisations , particularly of land , which would place Russia in a position to produce what it needs for its own consumption .
Thus , our hands are firmly tied and it is quite impossible to promote or strengthen a reform policy in Russia .
Here again , the problem involves the lack of a European policy .
Mr President , in the discussion on emergency aid the question is often raised as to whether or not it is really necessary .
Is there really a food shortage in Russia ?
To be honest , generally speaking this is a difficult question to answer .
But what I am sure about is that there are most certainly major regions and major groups facing a real food shortage .
Consider the regions in northern Russia .
I read a newspaper report this very morning that the Eskimos in northern Russia are facing a severe food shortage and are moving south in large numbers .
Then there are groups such as old people living alone , the homeless and prisoners who certainly do not have enough food .
In addition to food , there is clearly also a shortage of medicines almost everywhere , which is why I believe it is a good idea to grant this emergency aid .
I understand that the Commission 's intention is not to give the food free of charge but to sell it and set up a social fund with the proceeds .
It seems to me that one of the conditions for this must be not to set the prices too high as otherwise you will not help the people you want to help , who are mainly the people with the least money , while people with a lot of money will be able to buy the aid .
What must be carefully avoided , and I say this on the basis of fairly close contact with the people in Russia over recent weeks , is that people in Russia , and also Europe , get the idea that this food aid is being used to dump Europe 's surpluses .
They must not think that the motivation is to serve Europe 's interests by disposing of its surpluses rather than to help certain Russian regions and certain Russians to obtain sufficient food .
This impression must be avoided at all costs .
Finally , Mr President , a point which has been much repeated : distribution is a major problem .
I can well imagine that the Commission also does not know for sure whether everything that is imported goes to precisely the right area .
My suggestion would be to work principally with the regions rather than to try to reach everybody through a national distribution channel , because I am convinced that it is at regional level that there is the greatest certainty , the best chance of getting the food and the medicine through to where it is needed .
Mr President , it is not often that somebody from this side of the House can get up and agree totally with what has just been said before by the Greens .
I welcome very much what Mr Lagendijk has just said because I agree with him practically entirely .
We are facing a very difficult position as I am sure you are aware yourself .
Some of the difficulties that we are facing are because we are not sure of the actual facts and the information we are getting .
When a number of us paid a visit to Moscow recently we were surprised to find a number of the NGOs and , since my return , the World Health Organisation saying that they are not really sure that food aid is what is required in Russia at the present time : maybe in one or two of the regions but not necessarily general food aid .
The first essential to try to resolve the situation is to have proper political and economic stability within the country .
As a result of 17 August all sorts of financial consequences are really impinging very greatly on people .
Until 17 August we had also seen huge fraud and a huge incidence of crime .
That is very much to be regretted and something that has to be stamped out if we are going to get proper aid programmes developed for the people in Russia here and now .
The real problem is non-payment of pensions , of soldiers , doctors and teachers .
We could go through a number of categories of people who are just not getting the income to be able to buy the food that may be available within the country itself .
This is causing huge hardship to great sectors of the population and the lack of purchasing power therefore has a consequence on the food supply .
The lack of cash for medicines has also to be tackled because the health problems that the people are beginning to face in Russia are severe .
The government can no longer afford to import food from outside their own country .
They have been depending on 40 % of their food supply coming from outside and that is the void that we are going to have to try and fill .
It is really an economic problem .
The banks are bankrupt .
The issue is not necessarily food shortage and if we are to get the food distributed properly we have got to find ways at European level of making sure it is actually going to go to the regions that require it .
The second essential is that we have to work closely with the United States on any programme we develop .
It would be wrong for a ' divide and rule ' policy to be undertaken by the Russian Government at the present time , which is what could happen .
We must address all the questions of food , health , the economy and political stability in one programme , if that is possible .
Mr President , Russia has made an abrupt switch from communism to capitalism .
It has been a bit like making a U-turn at top speed .
The nation has gone flying off the stage and into the mud , but the oligarchs sit safely strapped in by their state-issue seatbelts and wave their hats .
The first condition of financial aid must be that it no longer goes to those engaged in shady dealings .
Corruption at government level must be stopped .
And so to the question of food aid : when you have problems in common , you have opportunities in common .
I do not believe that aid should be given via a commercial chain and all at once , but gradually and through social organisations .
We lost money the last time through using commercial networks of distribution .
There are plenty of community organisations and they target a great number of different areas .
There is even a TV programme called VID , which specialises in helping people .
Let us use care links such as nursery schools and old people 's homes , and then we will be able to exert effective control on three levels : the EU , the state and the ministry that deals with emergency aid , which has the means and resources .
Mr President , as we have heard , there is a serious state of affairs in Russia , and the financial situation means that the scope for importing food has been greatly reduced .
This should be seen in connection with the fact that Russia depends on imports for 40 % of its food supplies .
It is therefore very welcome that the Commission is now ready to propose , after months of pressure from the European Parliament and elsewhere , that food aid should be provided with a value of more than DKR 3 billion .
However , it is absolutely vital - not least in the light of the discussions currently taking place on the discharge - that this measure is implemented properly .
This also means that we are insisting that the food aid must not distort the domestic market , and that it is targeted and given to those most in need .
Finally , I should like to ask the Commissioner to appreciate that the implementation of this food aid measure will be closely followed by Parliament and also by the European public , and it is crucial that these things are carried out properly .
I thank the honourable Members for their contribution , from which I clearly conclude that there is broad support for a food programme for Russia .
I welcome the content of the motion for a resolution now before us and we also regard this as important support for our work in this field .
It was not until 12 November that the Commission received a formal request from the Russian Government for a special food programme , although it had long been clear that such a request could be granted .
As has been pointed out this afternoon , it is just that it is difficult to determine exactly how large and important the need for food aid really is .
It also varies very much from one region to another .
We are at present thinking in terms of a programme of between ECU 400 and 500 million for the supply of various products worth around ECU 400 to 500 million .
As has also been correctly pointed out this afternoon , implementing the programme is a complicated business .
This is why we very recently distributed for Parliament 's information a Commission document which clearly sets out the background and bases for this action .
It is indeed exceptionally important for the Russian Government to submit a detailed implementation plan as soon as possible for the regions needing aid and also concerning the distribution channels and the various checks and controls .
The Commission also intends to attach a number of other stringent conditions , such as the immediate halting of distribution if there is any question of the goods being re-exported to other markets outside Russia .
The goods must also be sold at local market prices and the proceeds must be transferred to a special provision in the Russian budget set aside to finance special programmes .
The Commission will soon be having discussions with the Russian Government to draw up a memorandum of understanding .
There have of course already been talks on this and a delegation visited Moscow .
This memorandum of understanding must also set out the basic principles for the action to which I have just referred .
It is also important to ensure the closest possible cooperation with our American partners who have also drawn up a food programme .
Precisely because of the political as well as humanitarian importance of this whole operation , a specific draft regulation will be drawn up as soon as possible setting out all these basic principles for the information of the European Parliament .
I should like to stress very clearly that this is not a zero risk operation .
The whole programme is surrounded by far too many uncertainties which cannot be removed .
All we can do is to provide the maximum protection against these risks by setting conditions , drawing up a memorandum of understanding with the Russian Government and exchanging experiences with other donors such as the Americans .
We believe it to be a far greater risk to do nothing at all because of these uncertainties .
That too we could not allow .
When the regulation is submitted to you for consideration under the urgent procedure , I would also ask Parliament to give the necessary priority to delivering its approval or opinion so that we can act quickly .
Winter has begun , stocks are shrinking and this is a case where we must be ready as quickly as possible .
Finally a few words about the more specific humanitarian aid .
This week the ECHO mission travelled to Russia and ECU 7 million will soon be made available to fund a number of projects already prepared by non-governmental organisations .
In talks with the Russian Minister Bulkak , who will soon be visiting Brussels , I will once again be stressing the need for a solution to a number of barriers which currently stand in the way of providing effective aid , especially for these NGOs .
The intention is for this aid to go mainly to hospitals , hospital supplies and similar .
Mr President , we hope that we have at least made a gesture of solidarity towards Russia , but you can be sure that we will impress upon the authorities inside the country the need to closely monitor the programme 's implementation .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place at 5.30 p.m.
The next item is the joint debate on the following six motions for resolutions on nuclear disarmament :
B4-0998 / 98 by Mr Bertens , on behalf of the ELDR Group ; -B4-1009 / 98 by Mrs Theorin , on behalf of the PSE Group ; -B4-1031 / 98 by Mrs Schroedter and others , on behalf of the V Group ; -B4-1035 / 98 by Mr Cushnahan , Mr Oostlander and Mrs Oomen-Ruijten , on behalf of the PPE Group ; -B4-1040 / 98 by Mrs Ewing and Mrs Maes , on behalf of the ARE Group ; -B4-1044 / 98 by Mr Carnero González and others , on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group .
Mr President , the liberals are very pleased at the initiative by the New Agenda Coalition .
Eight countries from five different continents , very varied in terms of size and political relationships , are seeking to intervene in nuclear disarmament .
My group wants initiatives to be taken which will break the deadlock on nuclear disarmament , certainly now that the world is no longer bipolar and locked in conflict .
We are therefore very pleased that 12 of the 16 NATO countries have had the courage to depart from the stance of the nuclear superpowers and to opt for an unorthodox approach .
They rightly raise a number of questions .
When will START II be ratified ?
When will negotiations on START III begin ?
When will the nuclear nations begin real negotiations on nuclear disarmament ?
That is why I am pleased that the UN First Committee voted by an overwhelming majority for a resolution calling for ratification of the CTBT and the de-alerting of nuclear weapons , cooperation with the IAEA and a moratorium on the production of nuclear material .
There is nothing controversial in this and it does not contradict NATO doctrine .
Finally , the UN resolution calls on the nuclear nations to consider additional measures , such as the promise not to be the first to use nuclear weapons .
Finally , we support the original text which supports the UN resolution , but not the amendments tabled by the Greens .
The Greens go further than the New Agenda Coalition , but that is not achievable and breaks the broad coalition .
This resolution is designed to win a broad majority at the UN General Assembly .
I believe the amendments tabled by the Greens will make this unlikely , and I therefore hope that the Greens will withdraw them .
Mr President , on behalf of Mrs Theorin , who initiated this resolution , and my Group I would ask all Members to support it .
Through their resolution in the UN Ireland and Sweden have taken the initiative in accordance with the Canberra Commission proposal for a nuclear weapon-free world .
We support their demand that all nuclear weapons should be taken off alert .
To have nuclear weapons on alert nine years after the end of the Cold War is unbelievable and creates great risks for us all .
As Mr Bertens said , Parliament supports the initiatives taken by the eight countries in the New Agenda Coalition .
The European Parliament has always made clear that it wants the European Union to be serious about the issue of nuclear disarmament and this particular initiative is one further step on the path to global nuclear disarmament .
Looking at the detail of the resolution , we would call on the Member States which have not done so - which are abstaining - to vote ' yes ' in the General Assembly .
We call on those countries which possess nuclear weapons to fulfil their commitment to disarm by virtue of Article VI of the NPT .
We also call on the non-nuclear weapons members of the NPT to fulfil their treaty commitments , i.e. not to receive , manufacture or otherwise acquire nuclear weapons or other nuclear explosive devices .
I hope this will have the wholehearted support of the House .
Mr President , nuclear weapons are weapons of mass destruction which put the whole of humanity at risk .
In an earlier resolution , Parliament has already clearly confirmed the judgment of the International Court of Justice which stated this , and that is why we should also remain consistent in our decisions here .
All of us know the threat that nuclear weapons represent .
It is absurd to want to continue to retain nuclear weapons or even the first-strike option .
The significance of the New Agenda Coalition 's success in the United Nations ' First Committee must once again be strongly emphasised here .
Out of 16 NATO countries , 12 voted in favour or abstained .
That also sends out an important signal to the European Union 's Member States to rethink their defence strategies .
In this respect , we regret the fact that Slovenia has now left the group of eight .
This country has the potential to play an important role in establishing a new security strategy in Europe .
It is important to abolish the right of first use of nuclear weapons , a vestige of the Cold War , and here I refer once again to the new German Government 's coalition agreement , bearing in mind that the German Government could perhaps take the lead on an initiative to further develop the common foreign and security policy .
The new federal government wants to keep to its objective of the complete abolition of weapons of mass destruction , and will participate in initiatives to this end in cooperation with its partners and allies .
It wishes to commit itself to achieving the aim of bringing nuclear disarmament to the fore and thus reducing the state of alert of nuclear weapons and abandoning the idea of first use .
I think that this creates significant impetus .
Mr President , I welcome the initiative taken by the New Agenda Coalition .
It is particularly opportune and appropriate that such a development should occur in the post Cold War period .
I would especially like to pay tribute to the current Irish Government for the pivotal and skilful role it has played in bringing this initiative to fruition .
It was encouraging that the United Nations First Committee passed the New Agenda Coalition resolution last Friday .
It was significant that members of the European Union either supported it or abstained .
I hope those Member States that abstained and displayed such openness will be persuaded to vote for the resolution when it comes before the General Assembly for a final vote next month .
Undoubtedly there are some Members who have some reservations about this resolution , particularly if they support the establishment of an EU defence policy .
I would like to reassure them .
Personally I support the establishment of an EU defence policy .
I see it as a core component of European integration and I do not consider it inconsistent to support such a view whilst at the same time working for nuclear disarmament .
It is also significant that the resolution before the United Nations in no way contradicts either existing EU or NATO policies .
I welcome the broad support for this urgency but , on behalf of my group , I would like to indicate that we strongly oppose the two amendments tabled by the Green Group .
I hope that at the end of this discussion we will have a resolution that will be overwhelmingly supported by this Parliament and , in its own way , will create an impetus for support for the overall resolution in the UN General Assembly .
Mr President , we view this resolution as part of the general push towards disarmament , and nuclear disarmament in particular .
We do not believe threats of suicide constitute effective defence - not even for those who still seek to defend the nuclear ideal of a deterrent .
This is no longer responsible , because in the meantime the proliferation of nuclear weapons continues unabated .
There must also be a stop to all nuclear tests and all research in this field .
But none of this should make us blind to the terrible effects of other weapons , of chemical weapons which we also want to see banished from the world .
Last week I was very struck by what I saw in the media concerning the development of biological weapons .
What I mean to say is that a general push towards disarmament , including what are traditionally known as ' light weapons ' , must not make us forget that most countries seeking a new world want to banish nuclear weapons first and foremost , but that is only the beginning .
We also need to take a good look at whether we in Europe should not put a stop to the smuggling of certain arms which still goes on in the Member States present here today .
Mr President , the end of the Cold War led us to believe that nuclear arms had disappeared .
They had perhaps disappeared from government priorities and also , regrettably , from the priorities of some sectors of public opinion , but in reality they continued to exist as the main threat to the survival of the planet .
Almost 10 years after the fall of the Berlin Wall , nuclear weapon stocks remain undiminished .
We have even seen France carrying out tests as recently as 1995 , while other countries , such as India and Pakistan , were testing only a short while ago .
It is therefore absolutely vital that we continue to call for nuclear disarmament .
And in this respect , we welcome the actions of those countries involved in the campaign urging the United Nations General Assembly to clearly indicate its position on this matter .
I therefore believe that with this resolution , Parliament will support their efforts , in line with public opinion throughout Europe .
Mr President , I would point out that this motion for a resolution is not directed at the Commission as we have no competence on this point .
So I would limit my comments to supporting the call for the nuclear countries to determine to make systematic and progressive efforts to reduce the number of nuclear weapons in the world with the ultimate aim of banishing them entirely .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place at 5.30 p.m.
The next item is the joint debate on the following motions for resolutions on human rights :
Freedom of expression in Algeria and Serbia -B4-0995 / 98 by Mrs André-Léonard , on behalf of the ELDR Group ; -B4-1012 / 98 by Mr Swoboda , on behalf of the PSE Group ; -B4-1032 / 98 by Mr Cohn-Bendit , on behalf of the V Group ; -B4-1036 / 98 by Mr Soulier , on behalf of the PPE Group ; -B4-1045 / 98 by Mrs Ainardi and others , on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group .
International Criminal Court -B4-1006 / 98 by Mr Cars , Mr Bertens and Mr Nordmann , on behalf of the ELDR Group ; -B4-1023 / 98 by Mr Dell 'Alba , Mr Dupuis and Mr Hory , on behalf of the ARE Group ; -B4-1027 / 98 by Mrs Aglietta and others , on behalf of the V Group ; -B4-1050 / 98 by Mr Puerta and others , on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group .
Akin Birdal -B4-1000 / 98 by Mr Bertens , on behalf of the ELDR Group ; -B4-1010 / 98 by Mr Titley , Mr Dankert and Mr Barros Moura , on behalf of the PSE Group ; -B4-1016 / 98 by Mr Pasty , on behalf of the UPE Group ; -B4-1025 / 98 by Mrs Aelvoet , Mrs Roth and Mr Tamino , on behalf of the V Group ; -B4-1038 / 98 by Mr Langen and others , on behalf of the PPE Group ; -B4-1051 / 98 by Mr Puerta and others , on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group .
Chalki seminary -B4-1013 / 98 by Mr Avgerinos and others , on behalf of the PSE Group ; -B4-1017 / 98 by Mrs Daskalaki and others , on behalf of the UPE Group ; -B4-1033 / 98 by Mrs Aelvoet and others , on behalf of the V Group ; -B4-1039 / 98 by Mr Christodoulou and others , on behalf of the PPE Group ; -B4-1049 / 98 by Mr Alavanos and others , on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group .
Anti-Semitism in Russia -B4-1004 / 98 by Mr Goerens and Mr Nordmann , on behalf of the ELDR Group ; -B4-1007 / 98 by Mr Barón Crespo , on behalf of the PSE Group .
Freedom of expression in Algeria and Serbia
Mr President , the joint resolution on the freedom of expression in Algeria is intended to demonstrate our solidarity with the Algerian press .
The country 's press , which plays a decisive role in combating the terrorist fundamentalism that rages in that country , has often paid a heavy price and too many journalists have died in the defence of freedom .
We certainly have no intention of interfering in domestic affairs , but we do consider that it is our duty to defend , here and elsewhere , fundamental freedoms , which obviously include the freedom of the press .
We must point out that the Algerian State has suspended the publication of a number of newspapers for several weeks , on the pretext of commercial disputes .
These newspapers had made disturbing revelations that directly involved individuals close to the President , in particular General Betchine , who is accused of financial embezzlement in the Benboualia affair , and the Minister for Justice , Mr Adami , who had apparently brought pressure to bear on the courts .
The fact that the authorities are able to take such action means that they have a de facto monopoly over the press , newsprint , the printing houses and advertising .
In a state that claims to be democratic , the press must be free and cannot be subject to State control , even indirectly .
We therefore call on Algeria to guarantee the freedom of the press , without any more pressure either from monopolies or the information code , and to carry out these reforms promptly .
We are only a few months away from the presidential elections of April 1999 , and we call urgently for fundamental freedoms to prevail and for the establishment of a transparent and pluralist democratic debate prior to the election .
Mr President , of course I come from a country where the freedom of the press was not something we experienced , and we suffered greatly as a result .
I therefore feel a deep sense of solidarity with the journalists in Serbia and , in particular , Algeria .
It is typical of governments who are no longer trusted one hundred per cent by the population to employ a means of retaining power , and this is called restricting the freedom of the press .
It is also very typical , and just as reprehensible , that methods such as a paper and printing monopoly are used to restrict press freedom .
In this respect , I should like , on behalf of the Greens , to express my solidarity with the journalists in Algeria , who have the courage to fight against this and often pay for this courage with their lives .
As the European Union , which puts democracy first - before economic relations - we need to insist on the freedom of the press being fully restored , both in Algeria and in Serbia , as the central pillar of democracy .
We cannot turn a blind eye and say : fine , then of course we can bring the agreement into force , then of course we can continue to send economic aid to this country , unless the freedom of the press is established first .
At this stage , I would ask Mr van den Broek how he sees the future of the Mediterranean Agreement with Algeria and what other measures Algeria will be required to take .
My second question to you , Mr van den Broek , is this : against the background of the Dayton Agreement , how do you intend to respond to the obvious restrictions placed on the press in the Republic of Serbia ?
Mr President , Commissioner , I have been to Algeria twice this year , and the Algerians were always very proud to point out that the press was free in their country , that there was even a very diverse press , and that is as it should be .
In the light of this , the restrictions placed on the publication of several newspapers were all the more incomprehensible and serious .
Although I know that behind all this there is also a power struggle - because the Algerians are again showing a certain pride here , that despite these restrictions two ministers have had to go - I still think that this internal power struggle should not and cannot be played out at the expense of journalists and newspapers .
Democracy is indivisible , and the freedom of the press is part of it .
I hope that the latest development , that these newspapers have all been published again , is a permanent one .
I would call on the Algerian Government to ensure that there is complete freedom here .
Personally , I see the situation in Yugoslavia as more serious .
Whenever Milosevic has had to give way outside the country , he has increased the pressure at home .
That is what he has now done with the universities and newspapers .
That is completely unacceptable , and we need to do all we can to help those who are displaying any final remnant of freedom and of plurality in this country .
In this context , I should like to ask you , Commissioner , to make a statement , here and now , that you will do everything in your power to ensure that the money and the support promised to the media there is actually delivered , and delivered in good time .
Unfortunately , we have had to hear from editors in Serbia , in Yugoslavia , that they are waiting a very , very long time .
I believe that until recently they were still waiting for money from the European Commission from 1997 .
It must not be the case that these newspapers are no longer able to be published not only because of Mr Milosevic , but possibly also because of the Commission 's inefficiency .
I would ask you to exercise your authority clearly here , Commissioner , to ensure that this help is given .
Mr President , very briefly , on the subject of Serbia , I think that I will abstain .
This is , yet again , a ' lukewarm ' resolution and I am beginning to fear that my friends in the PPE have developed the Socialist group 's syndrome , which is , as we all know , to never make waves and not to upset the governments .
Of course , the PPE is no longer a part of many governments , which leaves me some hope .
Nonetheless , I am beginning to fear that we will soon see an initiative supporting the award of the Nobel Prize to Mr Holbrooke and Mr Milosevic .
That is just how desperate I think the situation has become .
For our part , we will continue our campaign to ensure that charges are brought against Mr Milosevic .
There can be no aid , there can be no possible reform in Serbia while that crook remains in power , and people must begin to accept that .
There are already 120 of us who believe that in this Parliament .
As far as Algeria is concerned , the situation there is completely outrageous .
It is unfortunate that we must speak about this in the absence of one of our great contemporaries , Mr Cohn-Bendit , who initiated this resolution , together with others , such as Mrs André-Léonard .
He is also our rapporteur on the Algerian question .
It is madness !
The motives underpinning this resolution are disappearing .
All the issues have been removed from the original text because they have meanwhile been settled by the Algerian editors , its government and its parliament .
It is not just the Algerian Embassy that says so ; there are documents that bear this out .
The substance of this resolution is being removed , but it remains on Parliament 's agenda .
I believe that this manner of proceeding comes very close to the limits of our Rules of Procedure and , with all due respect to my very good friend Mrs André-Léonard , the situation of the press in Algeria is considerably better than in other countries , such as Tunisia , which is in the papers this morning , and perhaps also her own country .
I believe that a particular form of indirect censorship is indeed carried out in Belgium , and we have been among those who have identified it in a number of matters that are corrupting the country .
And it is not the only case in the Union , although I think that certain harmful developments there set it apart from other countries of the European Union .
So , we are doing all we can to undermine the credibility of a country , in this case Algeria , that has a huge problem , that must tackle the transition from a communist regime to a multi-party regime and that has adopted a number of reforms .
We are doing all we possibly can to prevent European investors from believing even for a moment in the possibility of a different future for that country .
We systematically send absurd signals that are not understood either by public opinion in Algeria or by public opinion in Europe . In the same way , they are obviously not understood by investors and those who could contribute something positive to Algeria .
It is outrageous !
Mr President , Mr Soulier was to address the House today .
Unfortunately , he has been detained by unavoidable circumstances and so I will speak in his place .
You will all remember that the European Parliament delegation , which visited Algeria in February and which was , in fact , led by Mr Soulier , had concluded that Algeria had embarked upon a democratic process following the election of President Amin Zeroual .
Elections by universal suffrage made it possible to elect the National People 's Assembly , marked by a multi-party system and freedom of debate .
Elections were held a few months later , also by universal suffrage , throughout Algeria that allowed local authorities to be established .
The members of the delegation had concluded that encouragement should be given to these efforts aimed at establishing democracy in Algeria .
That opinion has been corroborated by the various subsequent missions to that country , including parliamentary delegations from Spain , France and Canada . These also included the panel appointed by the UN , which was led last summer by the former President of Portugal , Mr Mario Soares .
However , while any obstacles to this progression towards democracy must be removed , we must not keep our concerns to ourselves or fail to offer the friendly advice that governments who wish to strengthen their relations should offer each other .
And that is the nature of the motion for a resolution before the House today .
In a few months time , Algeria will elect a new president .
It is to be hoped , for the sake of Algeria and the European Union , that the verdict at the ballot box is unequivocal .
The successful outcome of the negotiations culminating in the signature of the association agreement between Europe and Algeria depends on it .
Freedom of the press is one of the conditions of democratic debate .
All those who visited Algeria noticed the exceptional freedom in the tenor of the newspapers published in Algeria , both French and Arabic .
It is essential for this freedom to be maintained and guaranteed .
That naturally depends on constitutional guarantees , but also on the economic and financial conditions that must prevail in this sector that is part and parcel of democracy .
Mr President , my group is very unhappy , to say the least , at the actions of Milosevic and the Parliament of the former Yugoslavia to suppress freedom of expression .
By suppressing alternative information sources , Milosevic is trying to impose his will on the population .
Everybody knows that his is the voice of the old communism and narrow-minded nationalism which was also the cause of the tragedy in Bosnia .
If he gets the chance to pursue his dictatorial policy unpunished , the Kosovo question will also assume the same proportions .
I know , I am pleased to say , that the European Commission is pursuing an active policy to promote the freedom of the press in the former Yugoslavia .
I also understand that the Union does not have much influence over Milosevic 's policy .
Yet I hope that the Commission and the Member States will make an extra effort to promote free education and free media .
The Council of Ministers must remain very vigilant when it comes to political and military developments in Kosovo and we must keep the military stick to hand if we want to lend force to our policy regarding Milosevic .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Milosevic has not only waged a war for nine years , a war which began in Slovenia , Croatia and Bosnia .
He is not only establishing an apartheid regime in Kosovo , he is not only responsible for driving people from their homes , for war and death in this region , he is also constantly visiting disaster upon his own people , the Serbs .
He is violating his own people !
Since he came to power , despotism , fear and terror have reigned in Serbia .
He has also methodically destroyed Serbian institutions .
The Serbs feel like pariahs .
Two very eminent Serbs have demonstrated , in an open letter to Mr Milosevic , what he has done to his people .
He has made the university into a local farmers ' club , they write .
He has made the Academy of Arts and Sciences into a kind of nurses ' home .
He has devalued the media , the parliament , the legislation and the government .
These are all quotations from this letter .
He has allowed the citizens to become impoverished , but has made his wife , his cronies and himself rich .
Hundreds of thousands of young people - the intelligentsia - are leaving the country .
Milosevic is audacious , but the West is too timid , and incapable of putting an end to his activities .
He is still courted and not punished , despite the fact that , firstly , following the result of the Holbrooke negotiations - which actually was not a result at all - he has done nothing to bring a political solution to the Kosovo problem any closer .
Negotiations were supposed to start on 4 November - I did not see anything of the sort .
Secondly , the day after these negotiations , Milosevic banned all independent media .
Thirdly , a few days later , he whipped the undemocratic law on the press through a submissive parliament ; this law gags all journalists .
Fourthly , the law on universities contains provisions on making teaching conform to ideology , and that has huge significance .
It is actually driving the intellectual élite out of the country , and those remaining in the country are in internal exile and far from Europe .
The majority of the Serbs are waiting for a coup , which will give them back the air to breathe - the freedom to read , write and see .
The Serbian people would take the next available opportunity to vote these criminals out of office , if they had or saw any alternative .
We need to help to bring about this opportunity by supporting the independent media which can expose Milosevic , and we need to isolate Milosevic as an interlocutor .
The best way to do this is to indict this despiser of humanity for war crimes in The Hague .
That would be a clear sign .
As a German , I can say that with Hitler , a democratic Germany could not have been built .
With Milosevic , Serbia can never become a democracy !
Mr President , the closure of newspapers , the imposition of fines and the persecution of journalists once more show President Milosevic for what he is before the international community .
However , experience shows that measures directed against freedom of the press will sooner or later , but with mathematical certainty , backfire precisely against those who adopt such measures .
The government in Belgrade must understand that the tactics it is pursuing will not help to solve the enormous problems that prevail in the area .
On the other hand , we must welcome the decision by the government of Montenegro , a decision which ensures complete freedom of expression for the mass media , both local and international .
The European Parliament calls on Belgrade to change its attitude .
We express our solidarity with the journalists and mass media facing persecution , and I would like to ask Mr van den Broek to cooperate with us in helping those who are fighting for freedom of thought .
Mr President , the suppression of the universities and media in Serbia is , I believe , an encouraging sign , to the extent that it shows that there are forces for freedom there of which , unfortunately , too little is seen at international level .
The Serbian people and Milosevic are still lumped together in accordance with a thesis of collective guilt , something from which other nations have also had to suffer .
I should like to take up what Mrs Pack said .
Precisely because I am German , I should like to emphasise that a distinction has to be drawn between dictators and the people .
We need to support the liberal movements amongst the Serbian people with all our strength and we need to give more thorough consideration to the question : what will become of Serbia ?
Of course , that is also closely connected with finding answers to the Bosnia-Herzegovina and Kosovo questions , countries which have a right to develop independently .
There will never be peace and freedom in the region unless Milosevic finally disappears and ends up before the International Court !
International Criminal Court
Mr President , the events of the last few days , from Pinochet to Priebke to Öcalan , confirm - if it were necessary - the need , in fact the urgent need , for an international criminal court capable of dealing with crimes against humanity .
The increasingly tangible decline of the UN 's traditional role as a world organisation able to guarantee order and peace calls for the creation , still under the aegis of the United Nations , of new , more flexible international bodies , designed to deal with monstrous crimes like genocide , xenophobia , torture and violations of human rights .
So the decision taken on 17 July in Rome to establish the world 's first international criminal court is of historic significance .
No longer will justice be reserved only for the victors or the strongest - this is the beginning of real justice for the citizens of the world , all equal at last before an independent court .
The European Parliament , and more generally the European Union , must therefore do their utmost to prevent the civilising efforts of the Rome Conference from being wasted , getting Member States which have not yet signed the Statute to do so , urging all the Member States of the Union to ratify the treaty and taking practical steps to increase the number of states supporting the initiative , as well as making European Union relations with third countries subject to signature .
Finally , all the Community institutions must make it a priority to adopt the measures necessary for establishing the preparatory committee as soon as possible ...
( The President cut the speaker off )
Mr President , Commissioner van den Broek , I am particularly pleased that this debate is being held .
The House is not very crowded , it is true - and I say that in view of the vote - but I hope Parliament will demonstrate once again , as it has done before , its attachment to this cause , and highlight the need for the Statute to be ratified so that it can come into force as soon as possible .
We call for ratification by our governments , first and foremost , and by the other countries which decided to set up the court in the historic vote on 17 July in Rome .
60 countries are needed : we ask , through Parliament , for 31 December 2000 to be the date this court comes into existence and ends the impunity now protecting so many tyrants and dictators - not just in retirement , like Pinochet , but active , like Slobodan Milosevic and others - through the arrival of international criminal justice handed down by a permanent criminal court .
The European Union has been in the front line in this battle .
A great victory was won in Rome , thanks not least to the commitment of the European Commission , a commitment shared by many non-governmental organisations , which are here together today , moreover , as a result of an initiative which we took with Mr Dupuis , the Radical Alliance and the ' No peace without justice ' movement .
So let us launch a great ratification campaign to get the court established on 1 January 2001 !
Mr President , I would almost say that it seems like the devil 's work , but in the light of recent events there have never been so many good reasons to set up a permanent international criminal court quickly .
Mention has already been made of the Pinochet affair .
It is clear to me that in this case , when a request has been made for extradition for crimes against humanity , a permanent international criminal court could certainly be very useful .
The latest focus of attention , the extradition or request for extradition of Mr Ocalan , the former leader of the PKK , is somewhat more complicated .
But there too I am convinced that an international court could do a good job , if only to determine what is political and what is criminal in this case .
As far as we are concerned , recent events provide reason enough to set up this international court quickly .
Mr President , the creation of the International Criminal Court has been a triumph of what could be called citizens ' diplomacy . This huge movement of public opinion led in many countries to a large number of governments participating in the conference held in Rome , and , therefore , resulted in the creation of this Court .
With its creation , the Court has been granted insufficient powers and competences , and there is a danger that it might become what I would term ' the dreamworld of the just ' if enough governments do not quickly set up ratification instruments as well as , naturally , the mechanisms needed to enable the committee involved to set this Court in motion .
What is more , this citizens ' diplomacy , or public opinion , which led to the achievements in Rome , must be positively encouraged .
This is especially important when there are cases pending that evidently show that an International Criminal Court is highly appropriate for judging , for example , criminals such as the Chilean dictator Augusto Pinochet who , over the past few weeks , has sought refuge in the loopholes of national laws . I would like to take this opportunity to say that I sincerely hope that next Wednesday will be a day to commemorate as the day on which the decision was taken to extradite Pinochet to Spain , where he will be judged on the crimes he has been accused of , crimes that include genocide , torture and terrorism .
This International Criminal Court is , in fact , needed to do away with this protective shield of impunity .
It is quite incredible to think that such protection actually exists , given that the perpetrators of such crimes are known , yet the hand of justice cannot touch them .
I therefore think that the Council and the Commission must once again to do all they can to ensure that the treaty drawn up in Rome is signed , so that the ratification instrument can be set up and so that the International Criminal Court can soon become a reality .
Mr President , we have now debated three motions for resolutions , firstly on Algeria , then on Serbia and now on the International Criminal Court .
For me , it was actually very telling that the word Milosevic occurred in nearly every intervention , regardless of which topic was being addressed .
That should in fact show that we really do lack international criminal law and an institution such as an International Criminal Court .
We have two ' mini criminal courts ' dealing with Yugoslavia and Rwanda , but they undoubtedly do not have the scope which a well-funded International Criminal Court would have .
They are not empowered - and would need to be - to intervene in national matters , if they see that these are to do with protecting human rights in a particular context .
Nor are they able to become really involved in a case through a completely independent prosecutor .
I believe that it is necessary for us , as Europeans , to bring our influence to bear on the countries which have not yet signed the Rome agreement .
The United Kingdom and Germany , for example , are among them .
We need their signatures .
We want the Criminal Court to start on time !
Akin Birdal
Mr President , in its progress report on Turkey the Commission has already stated that human rights activist Akin Birdal most certainly did not receive a fair trial .
If this case stands as an example of the behaviour of the Turkish government and justice , then I believe Turkey can forget about EU membership for the time being .
Accession is linked to stringent , clear , strict and fair criteria .
If Turkey wants to join , it must do some work in the field of democracy and human rights .
I hope that President Demirel will see fit to grant a pardon to Mr Birdal , in the interests of democracy and good relations between the Union and Turkey .
I also hope that the Turkish Parliament will shortly make the necessary and long promised legislative changes in order to guarantee democracy , respect for human rights and an independent constitutional state .
My group trusts that the Commission and the Council will take steps to this end .
Mr President , Commissioner , I met Akin Birdal about two weeks ago in Turkey .
I saw that he is still suffering from the injuries he sustained in the assassination attempt .
I listened to his speech to the human rights conference in Ankara , and responded to it .
It was a very moderate speech .
I would advise the Turkish Government really to make use of the present situation to talk to people like Akin Birdal , who display a balanced , reasonable attitude , and to solve the internal crisis in Turkey , in particular the Kurdish issue .
I believe that Akin Birdal would also wish me to make a few fundamental remarks on the present critical situation .
It has already been stated this morning in the House , by Mrs Green and others , that we reject Turkey 's current position on the case of Mr Ocalan and his possible asylum .
I of all people , who make every effort to build up decent relations between the European Union and Turkey - and have been to Turkey three times this year and held talks for that very reason - have to dismiss the Turkish stance .
I should like to urge the Turkish Government once again to seize the opportunity now , so that even if the application for political asylum is accepted , neither side should resort to violence , and that also applies to the PKK and the Kurds ' political representatives .
There should be talks , which must not be held with the PKK , but with Akin Birdal , who is also quite prepared to take part in such talks , so that a solution can be reached providing linguistic and cultural autonomy within a unified Turkey .
Akin Birdal and his organisation are fighting for this too .
That is why I my belief is , in Akin Birdal 's best interests , that the Turkish Government should take the opportunity to make the best of this crisis and work towards a peaceful internal solution to the Kurdish issue .
Mr President , Commissioner , we are dealing with a specific case here .
Considered in the light of the Kurdish issue in Turkey , Akin Birdal 's sentence actually amounts to a ban from politics .
That effectively blocks the situation .
Secondly , we should not forget that the Turkish Parliament is in the process of amending the Criminal Code and deleting Articles 312 and 159 , under the terms of which Akin Birdal was sentenced , and also Article 8 of the anti-terror law .
In this situation , it is necessary firstly from a political point of view for Turkey to take the opportunity for dialogue , to which Akin Birdal has always referred ; secondly , from a humanitarian point of view , it is necessary for Akin Birdal - the victim of a shady assassination attempt , as a result of which he is still suffering - to be given access to medical care in Europe too .
It is with this in mind , as friends of Turkey , that we need to call on the Turkish Government to change its position .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , when six groups in this House introduce a joint motion with the intention of adopting it , that must be a sign to the Turkish Government and the Turkish President that this issue , namely the sentencing of the President of the Human Rights Association of Turkey - whom many of us , for example Mr Swoboda , know from numerous discussions in recent years - is not simply a question which we are debating as a matter of course .
For us , this issue is much more a touchstone of Turkey 's ability to be democratic , and a touchstone of its compliance with human rights .
Mr van den Broek did in fact recently present a report on the state of relations .
We all still remember - from when we supported the customs union - the promises made by the then government on bringing their constitution and human rights practices into line , but these have not been fulfilled in the meantime . That is why I am convinced that we cannot hold out any specific prospects for Turkey 's accession , while it is not possible for us to make real progress on these fundamental issues of freedom of expression and human rights .
I am being very clear about this , although I am aware that we have noted a definite improvement in relations over the last few weeks .
That is not enough .
More progress is needed .
The Turkish President , Mr Demirel , who after all appeared in Vienna just a few days ago , bearing demands relating to Turkey 's inclusion in the group of applicant countries , must take the opportunity to pardon Akin Birdal .
I think that this would be a practical test of Turkey 's ability to have closer relations with Europe .
Nothing else will take us any further .
That is why we in the PPE Group support the joint motion .
We hope that it will send out a positive signal , and that it will not introduce any further tensions into Europe-Turkey relations , as happened in the Ocalan case , for example .
Mr President , firstly , the Birdal case concerns a sentence handed down by a Security Court in Turkey .
Those courts , Commissioner , were described in a report by the Commission - evidently influenced by yourself on the grounds of experience , because you are well informed on Turkish issues - as inherently incapable of giving accused persons a fair trial .
It was that kind of court which condemned him .
Secondly , there is no possibility of appeal to a higher body .
Consequently , the decision is irrevocable and all the consequences against Birdal will persist for the rest of his life , even the fact that he is not allowed to seek medical help , until he is even eliminated biologically , which they failed to do with the attempt against his life .
The only way out is for Demirel to grant a pardon , and the only way that will happen is if the Commission brings pressure to bear for the pardon to be granted .
This is not an issue which concerns Birdal alone .
It concerns the freedoms of the Turkish people and even our own freedoms .
The Ocalan problem is a similar one .
We must resist Turkish and American pressure to have him extradited to Turkey , where he would be murdered either by execution or by being locked up in the Turkish prison camps , as often happens .
Both men are symbols of the struggle for peace , freedom and democracy .
Regarding Birdal in particular , I would point out that Turkey 's Supreme Court stated as the reason why the Security Court condemned him , that his main preoccupation and orientation were freedom and peace .
He is imprisoned because of that condemnation , and as Commissioners , you are morally responsible unless you intervene to secure him a pardon .
Chalki seminary
Mr President , I am no longer surprised by acts of the Turkish state such as those we are talking about today , and I fear this will not be the last time we will have occasion to talk about such acts .
Terrorism , flagrant violations of human rights and religious freedom , high-handed and unjustified decisions and even bomb attacks are just some of the elements which make up the picture of the Turkish state 's tactics towards the Ecumenical Patriarchate , in other words the world-wide spiritual reference point for 300 million Orthodox Christians .
The historical and traditional leader of the Orthodox Christians , the Ecumenical Patriarch Bartholomew , who usually prefers to keep a low profile , had this to say : ' we are not intercalated , transplanted or intrusive ; we are the indigenous people of this land ; the political equality , justice and religious freedom about which Turkish law speaks exist only on paper ' .
Turkey 's motive in doing this is clear .
It wishes to dispense with the Theological College of Halki once and for all .
It wishes to get rid of the Christians in Turkey once and for all .
It aims to terrorise those citizens , Turkish citizens , who happen to be Christians .
The issue of the Theological College of Halki yet again highlights the more general problem of respect for human rights in Turkey .
The European Union cannot play deaf when from the first day there has been an international outcry and condemnation of these unacceptable acts by Turkey .
The European Union and specifically Mr van den Broek must demand protection for the Ecumenical Patriarchate and the Orthodox community , as required by the Treaty of Lausanne .
Finally , he must also call for the protection of the Turkish people themselves , who are now daily being made victims of the Turkish state 's tactics .
Mr President , I believe that we need to draw a distinction here .
We should not say that Turkey has a particular character , and then put all manner of things down to that .
The demands are actually addressed to Turkey .
The official act , by which the school was closed down , must be withdrawn .
The Turkish Government has to make it clear here that freedom of religion - a fundamental human right - is guaranteed in Turkey .
The Oecumenical Patriarchate demands that this official act be repealed , and here the European Union should make it perfectly clear that this is a basic condition for any further dialogue with Turkey .
It is , after all , the highest seat of learning - if I may put it thus - of the branch of Orthodoxy centred on Constantinople , which does in fact exist throughout the world ; given that respect for the rights of minorities has been enshrined in treaties , the way in which it has been treated is unacceptable .
We should bear in mind , however , that behaviour of this kind also violates the laws of Islam , because freedom of religion is also one of the Prophet Mohammed 's explicit commands ; we should remember this ourselves and remind our counterparts of it .
Mr President , the Ecumenical Patriarchate and the few remaining Greeks in Istanbul have been there for many centuries , long before first the Ottoman and then the Turkish State .

As the Patriarch said , and Mr Roubatis too mentioned earlier , they are the indigenous people of the area , they belong to it ; they did not come from elsewhere , they are neither foreigners nor intruders , no matter how much Turkey may have managed over the years to eliminate the Greek element with systematic machinations and every kind of violence .
The most recent machination in the series is the illegal and unjustified dismissal of the members of the Supervisory Committee of the Theological College of Halki .
The purpose of that is obvious : to confiscate the College 's property and , mainly , to prevent it from working again .
In substance , this is another act of terrorism by a country with no respect for human rights , and which has no hesitation in eliminating any kind of threat no matter what direction it comes from .
We said the same thing this morning in a major debate on the events in Italy .
I do not think it is necessary to say very much in order to stress the seriousness of the matter .
Our joint resolution does that .
I would simply like to say , in conclusion , that if Turkey continually defies and distances itself from European ideals , that is also happening because Europe , by constantly putting only economic interests and criteria first , has not made Turkey understand properly that human rights must have priority .
Mr President , I am one of those who believe in a modern and progressive Turkey , which will at some time find its way into Europe .
I have the impression , however , that Turkey itself does not believe that .
One of the many indications we have is how Turkey is behaving towards the Ecumenical Patriarchate of Constantinople , and how it has behaved in this specific case towards the Theological College of Halki .
Turkey is blackening its own image , whereas it ought to understand that the Ecumenical Patriarchate of Constantinople brings prestige not only to Constantinople itself , but to Turkey as a state as well .
Having essentially closed down the Halki College , Turkey is now taking action against the College 's Supervisory Committee , which was the last sign that the College was still just about surviving , though not much more than that .
You know that Congress in America has repeatedly shown concern about this specific issue .
Today , at least , the European Parliament has woken up to it .
Commissioner , I think the European Commission should do likewise .
I understand Turkey 's economic importance , I understand the importance of trade and economic agreements - in any event , there are businessmen all over who have relations with Turkey , even in my own country , and rightly so - but beyond that point , beyond trade , there are also human rights , there is also our civilisation , there is respect for diversity .
Those things should not merely exist on paper , we must take action to demand them from the Turks , since it seems that they themselves have them in their constitution for the sake of appearances only , so that they can claim to respect human rights formally , whereas in substance they are violating them .
Let us therefore respond to the call of Patriarch Bartholomew , who is a moderate religious leader , let us do something about this issue .
I think it is important for our civilisation and for the values professed by the European Union .
Mr President , I would say , first , that if we vote unanimously for this joint resolution , the Commission and the other institutions will be compelled to act at last , because now I hear that Uncle Sam has also said yes , and Congress is taking action .
Do not be slow to imitate them when for once they are doing something positive .
The second thing I want to say is that this act by the Turkish Government - I do not say Turkey , I distinguish Turkey , in other words the Turkish people , from the state , the reactionary and fascist regime in power - is undermining the operation of the Patriarchate by depriving it of its functional organ , the College of Halki .
A college that was a beacon of ethics , culture , religion and peace for all peoples living in Asia Minor - as it happens I was born in the area , so I know this .
So take action and put aside half-measures , put aside evasiveness , forget about investments , pipelines , oil and gas , and remember for once that you wish to be known as a democratic institution , a democratic organisation , the European Union .
Mr President , Commissioner , the closing of the Halki School in Turkey is just one more stage in a process that has been continuing for years .
Turkey takes liberties in a way that no other European country would , so we must demonstrate our opposition to what is a direct and totally unacceptable violation of religious freedom .
What is happening in Turkey nowadays is exactly the same as in the past : persecution of the Kurds and the continuation of the war against them since 1984 .
The reaction of the Turkish Government against Italy today is in the same vein .
The EU Member States must oppose such actions .
We now have the opportunity to do so by requiring Turkey to comply with the undertaking it gave as part of the customs union agreement that we already have with it .
We , as Member States of the European Union , must do our utmost to ensure that this agreement is adhered to , that the war against the Kurds is brought to an end , and that Mr Ocalan is given asylum in Italy .
Anti-Semitism in Russia
Mr President , the primitive , irresponsible and even villainous nature of Makashov 's statements revolt and worry us for more than one reason .
The incitement given by former General Makashov to hate Jews responds to a system that is well tested .
Although the economic , social and political situation is alarming , some people cannot resist the temptation to bolster political and national unity by issuing messages of hate and accusation against a particular community , in this case the Jewish community .
It is worrying , first and foremost , to see that instead of unreservedly condemning the anti-Semitic utterances of one of its members , the Communist Party of the Russian Federation prefers to make solidarity its main concern and refuses to assume the responsibilities that ensue in such circumstances . In this instance , they would involve bringing a motion of censure against Makashov .
This is all the more regrettable because there is no shortage of international mechanisms to show the Russian Federation what to do .
The more the Duma fails to distance itself from such behaviour , the further it moves away from compliance with the principles to which the Russian Federation had committed itself when it became a member of the Council of Europe .
We therefore call on the Duma to reverse its decision and to reconsider bringing a motion of censure .
Mr President , I must present Mr Barros Moura 's apologies .
I should nevertheless like to say a few words on behalf of my group .
I believe that the unfortunate events repeated here are unacceptable .
Anti-Semitism is a form of racism which has done so much damage in Europe and further afield that we need to refute all such statements in the strongest possible terms .
In particular , I am disturbed at the failure of the Duma , or the other party members , to respond in an appropriate way .
When a major catastrophe has befallen the Jewish population on this continent , and when there have been various anti-Semitic actions and statements in Eastern Europe and Russia of all places , it is unacceptable for us to tolerate an anti-Semitic statement now .
We must therefore refute this in the strongest possible terms , and call on the representatives in the Russian Parliament to tell their colleagues quite clearly that an anti-Semitic statement must not and never can be tolerated .
Mr President , if you look at what is happening in Russia at the present time and listen to General Makashov 's statements , a cold shiver really does run down your spine , because here it is obvious that the most evil , communist reactionaries of Stalinism are re-emerging , and that anti-Semitic statements are being made in such a way as to cause those in Russia towards whom they are directed to be genuinely afraid .
I should like to remind you of one point : Russia is a country in which there is still a so-called autonomous Jewish area today .
It is the region to which Stalin once sent many Jews .
It is in eastern Siberia , and a small group of these Jews still lives there today , which really feels threatened and fears for its survival .
These Jews are only one representative example of many others in Russia .
We cannot simply remain silent !
In this century , we have already seen terrible acts of the utmost cruelty .
We cannot accept this kind of thing , we cannot witness this kind of thing again !
Commissioner , earlier we also debated the issue of food aid .
Perhaps this matter could be raised in that context !
Mr President , we started our look at topical events with the dramatic food situation in Russia and we are ending with a tragic aspect of spiritual life : anti-Semitism .
It distresses me very much to find that after centuries of pogroms and impossible living conditions in the stettels , our colleagues in the Duma are not prepared to denounce violent expressions of anti-Semitism .
It is difficult for Russian politicians of Jewish origin to make a career while retaining authentic Jewish names .
This is why it was only recently revealed that it was for this reason that the Russian Prime Minister took the name Primakov .
Since May rabbis and jeshiwa students have been beaten up and fire bombs thrown into synagogues .
As a Parliament we must continue to urge the Duma to take steps to combat racism and xenophobia and to adopt the necessary laws to this end .
At the same time the legislation within the European Union against political parties with such views is inadequate .
Financial penalties and imprisonment do not work and banning a racist party only leads to another party being set up under a different name .
I believe a good legal remedy is to take away rights to stand for election .
Such a measure does not exist in my country but the French courts have clearly understood the need for this .
The removal of the right of xenophobic parties to stand for election must be encouraged . At the Duma we must continue to stress the importance of point 9 against anti-Semitism in Russia .
Mr President , everyone owes it to everyone else to respect their dignity .
That applies equally in economic crises and when times are good .
Anti-Semitism reminds us of our continent 's darkest days , and of times when countless people treated these values with contempt .
That is why it is our generation 's common task to nip anti-Semitism in the bud .
That is true both of our own countries and our partners .
That is why we are calling on the Duma to be more sensitive and firmly to refute statements which are an affront to the dignity of Jews in Russia .
The fact is that extreme nationalist groups in Russia are being courted by this kind of despicable populism on the part of a few politicians , and that presents a danger to democracy in the country .
Mr van den Broek , we know that the grass-roots organisations in Moscow are the ones which are trying to take action on this .
I ask you now : is it not possible to give the money on the TACIS democracy line which you have not yet spent to these groups , so that you really do spend the money where it is needed , as we discussed on Tuesday ?
Mr President , the Alleanza Nazionale delegation supports the motion for a resolution on the resurgence of violent anti-Semitism in Russia .
Unfortunately history seems to have taught us nothing , because this is not the first time so-called Jewish plots have been blamed when a country is in crisis .
So we need to react with maximum firmness to isolate these expressions of political lunacy and put all the resources at our disposal into nipping this insurgence of hate and discrimination in the bud .
This is why I am anxious that you should know , for your information , that General Makashov received - I am quoting an authoritative Italian daily , the Corriere della Sera - ' tumultuous applause during the parades on the 81st anniversary of the October Revolution ' .
Well , delegations from the two Italian communist parties were at those parades .
Those parties are Rifondazione Comunista and the Partito dei Comunisti Italiani , the former part of the Prodi government 's majority , the latter holding some ministries in the D 'Alema government .
And so far there does not seem to have been any request for clarification or disassociation from the President of the Italian Council to those who are in his government and at the same time march side by side with people - communists and ultranationalists - who incite others to ethnic and religious hatred .
Mr President , the human rights debates in Parliament are never heartening , but they are nonetheless necessary .
I should now like briefly to give my reactions to the items on the agenda , beginning with Algeria .
It is clear to everyone , and I have also heard no voices to the contrary in this House , that while there might have been perhaps slight progress in the field of democratisation and freedom of the press in Algeria , an extraordinary amount remains to be done .
This is precisely why , for some time now , the Commission and the European Union have been allocating considerable resources in order to promote the freedom of the press in Algeria .
You will know that the Mediterranean countries are allocated a relatively generous budget , a large part of which goes to Algeria .
It is somewhat distressing to be speaking of freedom of the press and in the same breath to be denouncing the unacceptable and constantly escalating violence in Algeria , with dozens of innocent civilians murdered in cold blood over recent weeks .
That brings it home to us even more that a great deal has to change in Algeria before it will be possible to speak of a democratic state based on the rule of law .
We know how complicated it is .
We also know that the Union is trying to maintain dialogue with Algeria .


It is even trying to conclude an association agreement which could also institutionalise political dialogue , a point on which Algeria is very reticent .
I can agree with much of what has been said about Yugoslavia and President Milosevic , which is another subject on which we have exchanged views on many occasions .
It is not for nothing that we are still maintaining a comprehensive and extensive sanctions policy against Yugoslavia . Our criticisms and objections also concern the freedom of the press .
Most of the media in the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia which are now also coming under pressure , such as Radio Index , Donas or Nasa Borba , have received financial assistance from the Community .
In 1997 around ECU 4 million was allocated to support the independent media in Yugoslavia , while in 1998 the figure was more than ECU 5.6 million of the total amount of ECU 10 million provided for the whole country .
It is therefore receiving every attention .
You will understand why when we speak of Yugoslavia at the present time we place the emphasis on efforts to solve the serious problem of Kosovo .
This does not mean , however , that we are paying any less attention to other aspects of democratisation and democracy in the Republic of Yugoslavia .
But on that point too I must say that Mr Milosevic does not exactly give us grounds for much optimism .
I agree with all that has been said about the International Criminal Court . The Commission is also naturally pleased at the successful conclusion of the conference which set up the Court .
Although it was not possible to respect everybody 's wishes , the rules governing the Court 's statutes form the basis for an effective and credible tribunal which will mean that the most terrible crimes against humanity no longer need go unpunished while potential criminals , and this is certainly no less important , will also be discouraged .
We therefore express the hope that the 60 ratifications required will be quickly reached .
We have often discussed Turkey 's political situation and more specifically its human rights performance .
We share Parliament 's concern at the sentencing of Akir Birdal and the recent dismissal of the management of the theological school in Chalki .
Anybody who has already had the chance to see our progress report on the political situation in Turkey will see our concern clearly expressed .
I was in contact very recently with the Turkish Foreign Minister and I said to him : look , you have asked the European Union to judge you for future membership of the European Union according to the Copenhagen criteria .
So noblesse oblige , let us put it to the political test .
Let us above all intensify the political dialogue in order to try and improve these often unacceptable situations . What I have mentioned here is part of this .
Finally , I fully agree with all that has been said about the resurgence of anti-Semitism in Russia . Intolerable and unacceptable are the only words for it .
Unfortunately it is not the first time in Russia 's history that attempts have been made to use members of the Jewish population as scapegoats for a crisis . Against this background , the anti-Semitic statements of a member of the Duma , a member of the Communist Party , are all the more intolerable , especially now that members of this same Communist Party have taken steps to prevent the lifting of immunity for the said member .
Fortunately , on the other hand , a number of prominent figures , including the Mayor of Moscow , Mr Luschkov , have distanced themselves from such statements as have a number of leading organisations in Russia . It is also encouraging , and we should give all due attention to this more positive side , that the Russian Public Prosecutor has said he will be investigating the matter and that the incident is being discussed with the Russian Security Council .
Finally , in all probability the Duma will be returning to this question next week and I could well imagine that Members of the European Parliament , who have close contacts with members of the Duma within the Parliamentary Cooperation Council under the partnership agreement between the Union and Russia , will question their colleagues on this subject and express their concern , as we will also be doing in our regular contacts with the Russian Government . Thank you very much , Mr President , that concludes what I wanted to say on these matters .
Thank you , Commissioner .
Do you have another question , Mr Swoboda ?
Madam President , I asked the Commissioner quite specifically whether he was prepared to do everything in his power to ensure that the money set aside for the Serbian press or other media is also actually paid out quickly .
Otherwise some media would not only have to stop operating because of Milosevic , but also because of the money arriving too late .
Could you please give a brief reply , Commissioner ?
Madam President , what I have to say relates to the forthcoming vote . The point is that something has once again happened this time which I already complained about months ago : the joint motions for resolutions are indeed available in all the language versions , but the original texts are not .
You know how often joint motions are rejected here , and then the original texts have to be put to the vote .
But then , according to Rule 102 ( 1 ) , that would not be possible , because they are not available in all the languages .
After I complained last time , the situation was rectified .
Today , for the first time , it is once again the case that we do not have the original texts , and I would ask for steps to be taken to ensure that the proper arrangements are made next time !
I can understand your objection , Mr Posselt , but you must bear in mind that there are a huge number of translations which might then have to be carried out .
I shall bring this up again , but there is already a decision on the matter .
Mr Roubatis , do you have another question for Mr van den Broek ?
Madam President , in the last debate all the speakers asked Mr van den Broek to do something specific about the closure of the Theological College of Halki .
Mr van den Broek did not tell us specifically what he intends to do , what specific action he will be taking , to ensure that the Turkish authorities allow the college to function as it ought to .
Mr President , I promise you that the next time I am in contact with Turkey I will ask for this matter to be given attention and I will also convey the feelings of the Commission , which are the same as those of Parliament .
Thank you , Mr van den Broek .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place in a few moments .
We shall now proceed to the votes .
VOTES
In our explanation of vote , we should like to focus attention on the importance of patent applications and other patent-processing procedures being carried out in all Member States ' languages .
Any other system would be detrimental to enterprise and initiative in business development within the European Union .
We are delighted at the way in which the report highlights patent processing and language .
The European patent system is based on the Munich Convention of 1973 , which is an intergovernmental agreement .
Patents issued under this Convention can be applied in all the countries which have ratified it , which include all the EU countries and many others .
The Convention makes it possible to obtain patent protection in more than one state through a centralised procedure which is administered by the European Patent Office .
Patents issued under this procedure are subject to the national law of the individual countries .
There have subsequently been attempts to introduce two other patent conventions or agreements : the Luxembourg Convention of 1975 on the Community patent , supplemented by the 1989 Agreement relating to Community patents .
These two instruments have still not entered into force .
Now it is planned to create yet another Community patent , which will be valid throughout the EU .
The Member States ' courts will only have jurisdiction on questions of infringement of Community patents , and it is envisaged that the authority dealing with appeals will be the European Court of First Instance .
We believe that the introduction of a Community patent is a completely superfluous arrangement .
Since attempts have been made at agreements on Community patents which have still not entered into force after 23 years , why should we make the same mistake again now ?
Moreover , a Community patent would be valid in fewer countries than a patent issued under the Munich Convention .
We can fully endorse the recital in the report which states : ' the current combination of the European Patent Convention and the national patent systems presents a well-functioning and flexible patents system in the EEA ' .
The proposal to set up a Community patent system is an example of unnecessary regulation and duplication of bureaucracy at EU level .
As is clearly stated in recital E , the present European system of national and international patents is working well .
We have therefore voted against the report .
A well-established international system for patents has existed in Europe for a long time .
It functions very well and is linked to a major standardisation initiative .
There is no reason to set up a new system for the sole purpose of introducing an EU symbol .
Any reform should therefore be carried out to the present system in order to bring it up to date with modern industrial developments .
The European Union has forged a reputation for itself in the aeronautical and space industry .
Today , it is an economically competitive and promising sector that includes a number of successful companies . Airbus Industrie , which was established by France and Germany in 1970 , now accounts for 50 % of the world market in its sector following the Asian crisis .
Such results must not , however , blind us to the economic realities : as we approach the new century , we are losing ground .
Our many national enterprises are no longer able to keep up with global competition on their own .
The large American enterprises , in particular , are pursuing a relentless strategy of attack .
Moreover , we are currently experiencing a situation whereby the national demands for military aircraft are falling and national defence spending is being restricted .
Therefore , it is urgent for the sector to be restructured , as the Hoppenstedt report points out .
This is the only possible solution if we wish to achieve a genuine concentration of production and a real synergy of financial investments , and to optimise the results of research and technology transfers from the military to the civilian sector .
The European Union can provide this rapid and decisive momentum , which is all the more necessary since we have little time in which to implement this economic rationale .
In this connection , we must today take the same steps that were taken over a decade ago by the United States : opening up the military and civilian industrial structures , globalising defence and space activities , etcetera .
The fact that Europe has a potential viable base gives it all the more reason to commit itself more decisively .
Parliament 's Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy has worked hard on this matter , showing due regard to the ' employment ' dimension .
It should never be forgotten that over 700 companies provide a livelihood for some 370 000 families throughout the European Union .
We cannot therefore allow this sector of jobs to gradually disappear .
Nor can we leave ourselves without this industry if we still wish to comply with our responsibilities in the area of foreign policy and international diplomacy .
Consequently , I support Mr Hoppenstedt 's report and the free choice he gives both to the enterprises involved and to Member States in regard to the action that should be taken .
The Danish Social Democrats in the European Parliament have today voted overall in favour of the report by Mr Hoppenstedt on the European aerospace industry , because this sector will be an important source of employment for Europe in the future .
No fewer than 377 510 people were directly employed in the sector in 1997 , not counting the downstream employment in the form of jobs with subcontractors and so on .
The proposal is aimed at securing increased cooperation in research and development in the European aerospace industry , cooperation which we regard as essential if this sector is to survive in competition with its American counterpart .
The American aerospace industry benefits from the large orders placed by the US armed forces , and from the know-how which the military provides to private firms free of charge .
However , the Hoppenstedt report also includes proposals for the joint development of military aircraft and for a restructuring of both the military and civil aerospace industry , with a view to encouraging the consolidation of the defence industries .
This position conflicts with Denmark 's stance on defence and security policy , and we have therefore abstained on paragraphs 6 and 7 , since we do not wish to stand in the way of other Member States moving in this direction .
I think that a distinction should be made between the research and industrial activities carried out in the civil branch of the aerospace sector and those carried out in the military branch .
The EU should confine its activities to civilian matters , bearing in mind that , to date , the Treaty contains no provision for combining the two branches .
Consequently , I do not support the Commission communication on the aerospace industry .
I would prefer to see restrictions imposed on the industry 's activities and clear rules established on how those activities should be carried out .
This does not mean that I am totally opposed to research and industrial activities in this area , but I think that the situation with regard to military activities should be clarified .
Nor am I in favour of the report 's underlying view , which took shape following a meeting between six EU Defence Ministers earlier in the year to discuss integration and restructuring of the defence industry .
It is particularly regrettable that representatives of the Swedish defence industry took part in the meeting , since Sweden is a non-aligned and neutral country .
I shall support the amendment tabled by the Green Group , and I shall vote against the report in its entirety in the final vote .
Of course it is a good idea to strengthen the aerospace industry .
However it is difficult , if not downright impossible , for neutral and non-aligned countries to participate in any activity which links together the aerospace industry , Member States ' defence industries and the CFSP .
Nowadays , there is no longer any direct threat to the security of the European Union and its Member States .
Against this background , they should be striving to reduce arms production , which not only deploys large amounts of resources that could be allocated to other important activities in the Member States , but also generates exports which deprive underdeveloped countries of vital resources that are needed above all to build up their social infrastructures .
Thus the continuing manufacture of armaments in itself constitutes a potential threat , since the existence of more weapons only increases the likelihood of their being used .
If , despite all this , the situation in the world develops in such a way in the future that the Member States democratically decide to increase their arms production , then I can see nothing to prevent the military aircraft industry from becoming a monopoly market , as is pointed out in the report .
Nevertheless , it is of the utmost importance for the Union and its Member States to strive to reduce the aircraft industry 's heavy dependence on military orders , otherwise manufacturing will not be able to develop on its own , regardless of the security situation .
As the rapporteur on a related Commission communication on defence related industries , I warmly welcome Mr Hoppenstedt 's Report on the aerospace sector .
These two sectors of EU industry are so vital to the future economic success of us all that national and party political differences should be put aside as far as is possible when we discuss them .
I share the report 's desire to see strong EU wide industrial groups in aerospace manufacturing , not only to secure the many jobs and high skill levels they employ but also to maintain the EU 's ability to choose when to compete with and when to cooperate with the USA in this field .
If we do not give the companies concerned a clear green light to get on with the job of restructuring their operations to this end , we will have only ourselves to blame for the Hobson 's Choice which would be ours - to buy American aircraft or to buy nothing .
I am glad that British companies are belying the now inaccurate stereotype of my country as a nation of Eurosceptics by playing a leading role in cooperation - the managers and staff of Westland and British Aerospace are cooperating with EU partners for sound business reasons , rather than following the isolationist dogma of the Tory Party which once claimed to speak for British business .
As this report points out , in the one sector of satellites alone , the world can expect 1500 launches in the next decade - as politicians we need to give our companies every chance to compete for those contracts , not tie them in red tape on the launchpad .
I would like to begin by congratulating our rapporteur , Mr Hoppenstedt , on his excellent work .
The communication from the European Commission analyses the current situation of the aerospace industry .
It provides an overview without highlighting the specific problems of any given sector within this European industry .
This is an interesting approach .
However , the European aerospace market has evolved since this communication was published and Parliament 's report has emphasised that change .
Europe has genuine potential for the future .
To take full advantage of this potential , the European industry must benefit from favourable conditions to enable it , in particular , to establish joint enterprise strategies .
Such strategies will enable this high-tech sector to compete under equal conditions with the American industry . For its part , the US industry has the advantage of not having to contend with national divisions of the market and benefits from substantial national aid to research and development .
I fully agree with our rapporteur 's opinion on the statement by Germany , France and the United Kingdom of 9 December 1997 , and on the letter of intent from the German , Spanish , French , Italian , Swedish and British Ministers for Defence .
Indeed , their commitment to promoting the consolidation of defence industries is an essential political factor and a positive sign for European manufacturers .
The proposed coordination of activities in the aerospace industry is commendable , but there should be no linkage with military activities as proposed in paragraph 6 , which mentions the need to develop the next generation of military aircraft .
Instead , we should be focusing on the importance of developing the aerospace industry entirely independently of the military sector .
The FPÖ supports the political statements and the declarations of intent in this motion for a resolution , but is abstaining from the vote on the text as a whole , because the additional increase in financial and economic aid to this region , as called for in the motion , does not appear to be adequately structured or guaranteed to be efficient .
Displaced persons ( continuation )
The next item is the continuation of the debate on the report by Mr Wiebenga .
Madam President , to add to what other speakers have been saying , I would like to begin by congratulating Mr Wiebenga on the work he has carried out over several months that has been both efficient and courteous .
Having said that , Madam President , my first comment relates to certain speeches that have been made that amount to nothing short of dangerous popularity seeking .
Their only effect is to endanger and , of course , threaten the cause of those whom we are dealing with . And , indeed , all of us , when faced with the problem of offering adequate protection to those who need it at a given moment due to the unrest in their countries , must give a response that is appropriate , effective and balanced .
In short , we must give a response that is in line with the area of freedom , security and justice we are in the process of building with the third pillar .
Madam President , those who say that the Structural Funds or the Cohesion Fund should be restricted for those Member States that are allegedly hindering these measures are not helping matters either .
This is true , firstly , because it amounts to a statement of intent and secondly , because although those countries advocate unanimity in decision-making , establishing this type of statement of intent would make no sense from either a political or legal point of view , because , as I said , in the final analysis , it would greatly hinder this report 's progress .
In relation to the two proposals put forward by the Commission , Madam President , I would like to congratulate the Commissioner .
They are both very interesting and balanced proposals . I believe that they will make progress and I hope that we will see evidence of their results in the near future .
And now , Madam President , allow me to fly the flag of those of us who maintain that decisions in this respect should be taken unanimously and explain why we are of this opinion .
It is certainly not out of any desire to boost our popularity , less still because we do not wish these measures to be taken .
It is simply that Mrs Gradin based the proposal on Article K.3 ( 2 ) ( b ) and did so correctly , because that is the law currently in force .
But we must obviously bear in mind that the Amsterdam Treaty - which has still not entered into force , but which represents a political decision of great importance - establishes that unanimity is required for this issue .
It therefore cannot be ignored .
I fully understand the stance taken by the Commissioner , but it should not be presumed that those who advocate unanimity do so because they are not prepared to go further .
Those in favour of unanimity are merely showing that they are aware of the fact that , through hard work , 15 Member States reached a pact in Amsterdam that states that , for five years , decisions in this area must be taken unanimously .
It is because we are keen to see this idea progress that we have put forward this proposal . This is something that needs to be achieved .
My second remark is of a political nature .
Clearly , the 15 Member States have to agree and this proposal will only progress if that happens .
In this respect , Mr Nassauer is right .
If one section of the proposal is agreed on by a qualified majority - as permitted by Article K.3 - yet the other section is agreed on unanimously , we will be left with a situation that is totally unbalanced and disproportionate from both a political and legal point of view .
Therefore , Madam President , I repeat : we have tabled amendments in favour of unanimity and , realistically speaking , we want this proposal to move forward .
We will politically support this proposal through our governments , but we believe that it will only move forward if we respect what was agreed at Amsterdam , and this requires the 15 Member States to reach an agreement rather than a qualified majority .
Madam President , the Socialist side of the House is currently undergoing a very interesting process of change .
This began with the governments , firstly with New Labour 's new realistic attitude towards the issue of asylum , which admittedly does not yet go far enough , but the first signs of which are visible .
It was followed by the discussion paper presented by the Austrian Home Affairs Minister , Mr Schlögl - also a Socialist - and now we have the German Home Affairs Minister , Mr Schily , all of a sudden saying that immigration into Germany and the influx of asylum seekers and refugees of civil war have exceeded both reasonable and manageable levels .
He does not even say ' have reached ' ; he says ' have exceeded ' .
It is certainly interesting to see this , standing as it does in stark contrast to the point of view consistently represented by the left side of this House .
This shows precisely the difference between ideology and practice .
The practice is , of course , due to two points .
Firstly , the figures , which Mr Pirker has already explained so impressively here .
I really should like to say that Germany , for example , has , over a period of ten years , admitted an average of 50 % of all asylum seekers , and at times up to two thirds of all refugees of civil war .
That really is an extreme situation .
Secondly , this new attitude on the part of some ministers is of course also due to public opinion , and in politics we have to be realistic and take public opinion into account .
We want to give shelter to the persecuted .
We want to give them protection and security , but it is precisely when I want to do this that I need acceptance , and I can only win this acceptance if the burden of admitting the people is shared , so that quite rightly the burden falls equally on each of the Member States .
We cannot content ourselves with a few set phrases on this , as this proposal - or pseudo-proposal - does ; we need real burden-sharing based on definite quotas of people .
The Bavarian Minister of the Interior , Günther Beckstein , has proposed to you , Commissioner , that a central European office should be established to set these definite quotas and allocate them .
We are still a very long way from this ; we would be happy if at least a first step were taken here towards more Europe , but this pseudo-proposal is a step towards less Europe .
You see , it tries to avoid solidarity and at the same time to patch up this gap with words .
That is why we must also reject both these proposals , because we believe that they would be more suitably entitled : missing the point .
I really do believe that it is possible for any Member State to be faced with a disproportionate share of the burden , and I should like to say this to our Spanish Members , amongst others : it is actually not the case that this issue only concerns Germany , Austria , the Netherlands and one or two other countries .
Something might blow up tomorrow in the Mediterranean area which then affects Spain , for example , in just the same way , and here too there will be calls for solidarity .
Solidarity is reciprocal , though , and this problem can affect all Member States to different degrees and at different times .
That is why , before the catastrophe overtakes us , before problems arise , a set of burdensharing instruments need to be created , and here I must add - and I am grateful to Mr Pradier for what he said on this subject today - that this would of course include prevention .
We must not stand by and watch until the influxes of refugees descend upon us ; instead , we must intervene in good time - as for example in Kosovo - to ensure that the conditions are created on the ground to enable people to live in safety in their homes .
Thank you , Mrs Gradin .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 9 a.m.
Visas / Airport transit
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , this is certainly not the most important report of the week .
It is , therefore , all the more intriguing that seven minutes ' speaking time should have been allocated for such a relatively insignificant report , when at other times there is not enough speaking time .
Quite honestly , I do not know what I can tell you about this report that would fill seven minutes . Allow me , therefore , to be somewhat more brief .
You can already tell from the title , which the President read out , that this is essentially to do with technical problems , although these technical problems are not quite without their difficulties either , if you take a look at what the Council has asked us to decide on .
The problems start with the part of the report concerning this uniform form for a visa , where the Council is obviously trying - in a departure from the provisions of the Treaty - to make its legal position more favourable for the individual Member States . It deals with the issues relating to the format of the form and the format of this visa under Article K.3 of the Treaty , despite there actually being a special provision in the Treaty , in Article 100c .
The latter legal base also means that this is no longer a joint action and would in principle need to be implemented in the form of a directive . That is precisely what we have stated in the opinion of the Committee on Civil Liberties and Internal Affairs .
The further problem with the Council 's ideas is the fact that in a whole series of articles in the joint action , it defines itself as the executive authority .
Here we have ensured that either the Commission or the Member States are named as the executive authority instead , at least in our report .
This is simply because we believe this to be more correct than for the Council - which is in fact after all the co-legislator , or in this case the Community legislator - to assume that role itself , thus also , as it were , calling into question certain principles of the separation of powers .
In the second part of the report , the airport transit visas , the same problem occurs , amongst others .
At least the right legal base has , in our opinion , been selected here .
It is , however , mainly about harmonising technical rules to combat illegal immigration and about better checks at airports .
I should like to ask you to vote in favour , here in the plenary , of the corrections decided on by the Committee on Civil Liberties and Internal Affairs , and on that note I would conclude my statement on this not especially important , but perhaps also not wholly insignificant report .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , as far as the uniform format for the form is concerned , I agree with the rapporteur that this can actually be adopted as it stands following our vote in the committee .
Since this is a form which is produced solely for the purpose of having a visa issued on it , Article 100c of the EC Treaty is the right legal base , even though the jurists were again unable to agree on whether this assessment was correct .
We did actually have two reports on the subject .
I think it is necessary , from a political point of view , for the uniform format for the form to be implemented on the basis of Article 100c .
Parliament has always given priority to procedures which allow decisions to be taken by a qualified majority .
With the entry into force of the Treaty of Amsterdam , unanimity will , unfortunately , be the rule in the case of visa arrangements for a further five years , before decisions are taken by a qualified majority .
However , it is clear which direction we are going in .
In the field of , ' visas , asylum , immigration and other policies related to free movement of persons ' , the Council will act by a qualified majority in the foreseeable future .
I do not believe , however , that after another five years of unanimity , the Council will find it any easier to act by a qualified majority than it does now .
I also support the rapporteur 's view that we are in the business of adopting uniform arrangements in Europe in the fields covered by Title IV of the Amsterdam Treaty .
In that sense , the European Commission 's role will in any case need to be increased accordingly .
That means that it is incumbent upon it , and not the Council , to present technical specifications for this form , and it is for the Member States to be available to discuss production centres .
On the airport transit visa , the European Court of Justice has in fact delivered a very clear ruling to Parliament .
The legal base of Article K.3 only provides for cooperation with the Member States in this field .
That was already clear to us in the committee .
We do , however , want to make the Council stronger than the Member States and thus help it to take common action , including on visas and illegal immigration .
In the committee , we have already made both the arrangements applicable to statutory stateless persons and refugees and the exceptions to the requirement for a visa dependent on a joint decision in the Council .
We wish to achieve the same thing for amendments to the joint list .
I therefore also urge you to support the corresponding amendment to delete Article 4 .
Article 9 gives each individual Member State the possibility of suspending the positive lists .
I believe , however , that given that we have common external borders , we need to have common rules on visas and visa stamps .
That includes these transit visas .
I think that if the main purpose of these visas is to combat illegal immigration , then it would be appropriate to have a uniform procedure .
That is what is provided for in the Amsterdam Treaty .
I would therefore urge you to continue on the path which Parliament has already chosen , and also to delete Article 9 .
Madam President , I would firstly like to say that I am speaking on behalf of the Group of the European People 's Party , and I would like to congratulate the rapporteur and say that the PPE will follow his advice and broadly support his report .
Secondly , I would like to comment on these two proposals for joint action . Although they are not at the very heart of third pillar policies or generally part of the policy to build an area of freedom , security and justice , they are extremely interesting because they represent a very small step forward , a point of departure and , as such , a situation that will be repeated with other texts .
Why am I referring to this ?
I do so because it is basically an issue involving how we interpret our texts , general rules and exceptions to limited interpretations .
We have the example of the ruling of 12 May , which has already been quoted , in which the Court of Justice of the European Communities strictly but - I believe - correctly interpreted Article 100c of the EC Treaty .
It pointed out that this Treaty refers to entry visas and not transit visas .
Given that this Article is an exception to Article K.1 ( 3 ) , it has to be interpreted separately .
Why do we therefore want the other proposal - that on the visa format for exceptional cases when the person travelling has no documents - to be based on Article 100c ?
We support this because it is Parliament 's responsibility to do so .
In the same way as I said before that we need to adapt to what was agreed in the Amsterdam Treaty in order to determine the rules relating to the issue we discussed a few moments ago , here Parliament 's role is to go as far as the texts will allow .
And it is evident that this visa , given to those who do not possess the correct , legal and legitimate documents , goes further than a visa itself . But there is no doubt that it is an incidental part of an identification document and one that therefore acts as a visa in terms of Regulation No 1683 / 95 .

Parliament must therefore vote in favour of interpreting Article 100c to include something that is not expressly stated in the text . But we are referring here to the particular case of entry visas and , in general terms , it is correct to take Article 100c as the legal basis for this .
Therefore , Madam President , in my opinion - and here I am speaking from a purely personal point of view - , Parliament must act consistently . It must take legal texts to the limits of their interpretation , without of course resorting to sterile intransigence that simply means that proposals do not meet with success .
Madam President , today we are examining two draft joint actions put forward by the Council aimed at harmonising some specific aspects of visa policy and airport transit policy .
Although we are dealing with very formal issues , for example the uniform format of the forms for affixing visas , we should not forget that behind such formal issues lie some of the characteristics that are rapidly setting the tone of the immigration and asylum policy implemented recently by the Community authorities and Member States in the European Union .
As regards the joint action concerning the uniform format of visas and , in particular , the analysis of the legal basis , we agree with the view of the rapporteur and the European Parliament 's Committee on Legal Affairs , which has studied the relevant legal basis for this action , that the proposal should come from the European Commission and not the Council .
It should be a proposal for a directive rather than for joint action and thus come under the Community 's immigration and asylum policy , as recommended in the Amsterdam Treaty , instead of within the context of a cooperation policy of the Member States .
What is more - and here we are focusing on the content of the proposal - , it is no use giving a general description of a uniform format for visas at European level so that , ultimately , Member States can decide on the technical procedures they wish to use .
In the same way , the form must be valid for all the countries of the European Union without the possibility of any exceptions .
Would this not be an appropriate way of formulating a genuine Community policy on visas ?
Apart from these legal and political issues , I should like to stress the fact that harmonising these aspects of Community visa policy must not lead to greater restrictions and limitations for the immigration and asylum policy , which are hidden behind the demands for increased bureaucracy and complex visa requests .
We cannot allow this to make it more difficult for refugees and asylumseekers to reach a safe country .
To sum up , the provisions being adopted in relation to a uniform visa format and airport transit must form part of a genuine Community policy on immigration and asylum . Within this policy , we must ensure that the various actions are subject to legal and democratic control and that the main principles involved are solidarity and respect for human rights , against the constant backdrop of the provisions of the Geneva Convention and the European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms .
Madam President , the visa issue is a constant topic of debate in Parliament , a state of affairs which is attributable , amongst other things , to an inability to reach agreement on a way out of the problem .
The question of visas for citizens of third countries , as well as the report on the same topic , are the product of the legal problems arising in committee .
The Court of Justice has set aside the Council 's decision on such matters as the grey list , naming the countries that are required to have visas .
Despite this , the list is still in use and has been for nearly five years .
In practical terms , this means that Romania , for example , has to arrange a visa for its negotiators to participate in top-level meetings in Brussels , since Romania is still on a list which , despite having been annulled , is still in operation .
Such a situation is absurd !
Consequently , the overriding and all-important issue with regard to visas is still unresolved .
At the same time , we now have to decide on the wording and appearance of the documents themselves , so that their format can be agreed and harmonised .
I think this is the wrong approach .
However , the main purpose of the report is to change the legal basis from the third pillar and intergovernmental cooperation to the first pillar and supranational control .
The Swedish members of the Green Group do not agree with such a proposal , and support intergovernmental cooperation . However , the rest of the group view matters differently .
I should like to recall yet again that Scandinavia has 40 years of expertise and experience in operating the Nordic Passport Union . Without centralisation , directives and harmonisation we have achieved a functioning passport union and a successful international visa policy .
It is a pity that more outside attention has not been paid to this , since our experience could have been of value in developing the approach in this area .
Finally , I should like to remind the House that the Amsterdam Treaty has still not come into force and therefore cannot be used as a reference in this context .
Madam President , Mr Lehne was quite right when he told us earlier that his report was very technical , but other problems can be seen behind the technical considerations .
Allow me to begin with the technical aspects of the document .
I do not share his views on the legal basis .
I believe that article K.3 of the Treaty on European Union was perfectly sound .
Nor do I share his view that the Commission should play the role that was initially assigned to the Council with regard to a joint action .
However , this purely technical matter does , in fact , raise another that is of an institutional nature and that must one day be tackled , that is , deciding what the respective powers of the Council and the Commission are and what they should be .
I have the greatest respect for the Commission , for the Commissioners and for the 15 000 officials who work under them .
But the fact remains that the Commissioners are appointed , and their democratic legitimacy is , shall I say , far from evident .
In contrast , the Council , which is made up of the representatives of the governments , does have a certain democratic legitimacy .
And this is the real problem in terms of the institutional evolution of the European Union .
There is a desire to attach the traditional parliamentary relationships that exist in our nations to the European institutions and make the Commission a pseudo-government .
However , the Commission is not a government .
The Commission is not the choice of a majority .
The Commission is not supported by a majority in the European Parliament .
The Commission is an institution that is half political and half technocratic .
And , therefore , I cannot agree with Mr Lehne , nor indeed the majority of this House , when they insist in , may I say , contesting the Council 's powers , which are perfectly legitimate in democratic terms , for the benefit of a Commission that would be the future government of the future European State , on the basis of a hypothetical European people .
In fact , Europe has not one but several peoples ; it has several traditions , several histories and several languages .
Therefore , where the institutional evolution of the European Union is concerned , it is essential that we should , on the one hand , restore greater political authority to the Council and , on the other , involve national parliaments in the European Parliament 's work by extending its powers .
That is how we will achieve a truly democratic Europe .
Madam President , I wish to thank Mr Lehne for his valuable report on the two proposals for joint action relating to air transit and to a uniform format for documents for affixing visas .
These two proposals form part of an ongoing process .
The aim is to harmonise the rules governing the visa policy of the Member States .
Not all aspects of visa policy are covered by Article 100c of the present Treaty .
Some are adopted on the basis of Title VI .
However , when the Amsterdam Treaty enters into force it will regroup all aspects of visa policy in the first pillar under Title IV .
Let me outline to you the Commission 's view on these two draft actions .
Firstly , we have the new proposal from the Council for a joint action relating to air transit arrangements based on Article K.3.
This proposal is an extension and an evolution of the existing one from 1996 .
The Court of Justice has confirmed in 1998 that this action falls under Article K.3.
This new proposal for a joint action aims at incorporating two additional elements .
Firstly , the common short list of countries is extended to include Bangladesh and Pakistan .
Secondly , the proposal provides for an exception from the obligation of an air visa for nationals of countries who are holders of residence documents from certain other third countries , for example the United States and Switzerland .
The Commission has no specific comment to make at the present stage .
We will , however , look into the possibility of formulating a further proposal once the Amsterdam Treaty enters into force .
We have to take into account the integration of Schengen arrangements into the Union acquis .
The second proposal from the Council concerns a joint action for a uniform format for forms for affixing visas .
The aim is to reach a certain level of harmonisation in order to upgrade security standards in two exceptional cases .
One is when the visa sticker cannot be affixed in passports which are not recognised as a valid travel document ; the other is when persons are not in possession of a valid travel document at all .
The Commission has some concerns about the legal basis , which has been chosen for this proposal .
There is no clear competence within the EC Treaty concerning when this form has to be delivered to persons holding no travel documents at all .
However , it might also be argued that such a form constitutes an integral part of the uniform visa format itself .
In that case Article 100c of the EC Treaty might apply .
The discussion within the Council will be decisive for the final position of the Commission .
It may be that the Commission will be called upon to make a declaration in the Council and , of course , then the Commission will convey the views expressed by the European Parliament to the Council .
Thank you , Mrs Gradin .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 9 a.m.
( The sitting was closed at 6.55 p.m. )
Approval of the Minutes
The Minutes of yesterday 's sitting have been distributed .
Are there any comments ?
Madam President , a point of order was raised on Tuesday .
In it Mr Janssen van Raay commented on the voluntary pension system .
He said : ' very briefly , unfortunately a number of Dutch people have indicated through their representative that they are happy with the system .
That is what I wanted recorded in the Minutes yesterday . '
Madam President , I asked Mr Dankert if that was correct .
He is the most senior of the 31 Dutch Members and he tells me that it is definitely not true .
So I wanted to refute what Mr Janssen van Raay said here on Tuesday at the start of the day 's proceedings .
We take note of that , Mrs Maij-Weggen .
Madam President , I should like to ask you to make sure that a copy of the complaint made by the Dutch authorities against the directive on patents is made available to Members of Parliament .
We have discussed transparency at great length this week . However , it is not acceptable that proceedings are taken against the European Parliament and yet the individual Members are not allowed to obtain a copy of the complaint .
I therefore cordially request you to ensure that Members who want a copy - and I think many Members are interested in this - are sent one as soon as possible , especially as the Parliament 's Legal Service is already preparing an answer .
I think we must also prove our own credibility in matters of transparency .
I note that too , Mrs Breyer .
We shall see what can be done .
Madam President , I refer to Amendment No 49 on the McCarthy report .
I am registered as voting against that amendment when , in fact , I wanted to vote in favour .
Can that be put into the record .
That will be corrected , Mr Hallam .
Madam President , I just wanted to point out the fact that I voted in favour of Amendment No 7 of the McCarthy report by mistake .
I wanted to vote against it .
I informed the Bureau of this but I note that it has not been changed in the Minutes and I would like this to be rectified .
That too will be corrected .
( The Minutes were approved )
VOTES
Madam President , I must point out that there is a textual error which distorts the meaning in various documents and in various language versions .
In the report itself , Amendment No 5 relating to Article 3 ( 2 ) reads accurately as follows : ' shall not exceed three years on aggregate and may be extended for no more than three years following a further decision . '
These three years appear as five years in some versions and other documents .
Extending five years to five years naturally distorts the meaning , as everyone recognises .
We ask for this to be duly corrected . This error also appears , for instance , in the collection of proposed amendments to Amendment No 5 ; there it is incorrect .
It is correct under Amendment No 5 in Mr Wiebenga 's original .
I should be grateful if this could be taken into account by the appropriate services .
Thank you for pointing that out , Mr Nassauer .
We shall take it into account .
( In successive votes , Parliament adopted the two legislative resolutions )
The organisation of the external borders of the Union is an absolute necessity .
They cannot be like open doors .
The provisions adopted must , however , be in line with the spirit and the letter of the Geneva Convention and European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms .

A third pillar is to be added to these two existing ones in the form of the additional measure provided for by the Treaty of Amsterdam , which will be implemented within five years of its entry into force and which authorises temporary stays within the Union for humanitarian reasons . This applies not only to individuals , but also to groups , who , strictly speaking , do not meet the terms of the aforementioned conventions , but whose physical or mental wellbeing can only be preserved through temporary protection in the Union .
This measure is urgently needed , particularly because of the Union 's inability to implement a genuine common foreign and security policy , even at its own borders !
That being the case , we must be clear on the need to share the burden of each influx of refugees .
We must put an end to the complicated disputes that divide the Member States , which assure us that they have done all in their power to take in as many refugees as possible and more often than not lead us to believe that the other countries are still doing too little in this respect .
Precise evaluation criteria must be defined .
It should be pointed out once again that the temporary protection regime must , by its very nature , go hand in hand with an early examination of the conditions and resources needed to prepare for the decent return and successful reintegration of the refugees when they go back to their country of origin .
We must ensure this when implementing this statute .
The Danish Social Democrats have voted in favour of common rules for granting temporary refugee status , minimum rights for such refugees and more solidarity in distributing them among the Member States .
The problem is that many displaced persons , such as the refugees from the war in former Yugoslavia , do not meet the conditions for refugee status laid down in the Geneva Convention , and that such refugees are being very unevenly distributed among the Member States .
We need common rules on who should have refugee status , how long they will be allowed to stay in the Union and what conditions they are to live in while they are here .
We have voted in favour of a temporary protection regime that will be invoked only in emergencies involving a sudden mass flight of refugees .
The Geneva Convention should continue to be the starting-point , and human rights must be respected .
This proposal is an excellent and much-needed one .
There should be more sharing of responsibility when it comes to dealing with refugee crises in Europe .
The proposal should be seen as complementing the Geneva Convention , which should always be respected .
Solidarity with regard to refugees is not something that can be achieved through legislation or compulsion .
Neither rules nor an enforced decision by a qualified majority are therefore to be recommended .
Sharing the refugee burden has to be based on voluntarily agreed mutual responsibility .
It is important to settle , in the most rational way possible , the question of procedures relating to access to countries for those holding no travel documents or those holding travel documents that are not recognised by the Member State asked for access authorisation .
From this point of view , the use of a standard model form on which to affix visas might prove beneficial .
But I can still only see this being of any real use if the introduction of such documents actually contributes to the emergence of a uniform European policy on visas .
The introduction of a standard form is only one stage in this .
Along with the members of our Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights , I am prepared to believe that the introduction of a standard form for visas is in line with Community law , on the basis of Article 100c of the Treaty establishing the European Community rather than Article K.3 ( 2 ) of the Treaty on European Union .
In the case of airport transit , the Court of Justice settled the legal debate that set the Commission , supported by Parliament , against the Council in favour of the latter , since it judged that this issue was well and truly a matter for the third pillar .
We can only hope that it does not do the same in the case of the standard form .
Parliament 's credibility in this area depends on it .
I would like to state clearly that the organisation of our external borders is an absolute necessity and that it is out of the question to allow just anyone to enter the Union in whatever way they please .
I also want to say that I agree with the rapporteur 's belief that the necessary standardisation of the system cannot de facto override the provisions contained in the Geneva Convention and the European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms .
Having made these observations , I support the two proposals as amended .
The Danish Social Democrats have voted in favour of a joint action concerning a uniform format for forms for affixing visas and on airport transit arrangements .
However , we have voted against the committee 's recommendation that these joint actions should be replaced by a directive and a regulation under the first pillar .
We believe that proposals such as these should form part of intergovernmental cooperation under the third pillar .
The northern countries have nearly half a century 's experience of operating the Nordic Passport Union , which functions at international level .
It ought to serve as an example for the EU , since the Amsterdam Treaty has still not entered into force and therefore cannot be used as a reference .
The legal base should not be changed to allow a qualified majority decision in the Council .
I cannot support the Commission 's ambition to become a kind of EU ' government ' .
It would be better to give more authority to Member States and to the Council .
Madam President , yesterday I made a point regarding the camera crew in the Chamber .
I asked whether that camera crew was here by permission and could it be investigated .
Your secretariat said it would investigate it .
Could you advise me if they had authority to film in the manner in which they did ?
According to my information , a Member of the House had obtained permission to be filmed from the public gallery .
It used to be that filming was not allowed in the Chamber area and in the gallery .
I am at a loss to understand how this individual got permission .
I should like to ask you , as a member of the Bureau , to raise it in the Bureau , because it is very important to treat this House with some kind of dignity .
Cameramen are running all over the place outside the Chamber and if we start to allow them to come into the Chamber this place will soon be flooded with television cameras .
I should like to ask you to refer this matter to the Bureau for investigation .
I do not think your concern is really justified , Mr Falconer , but I will have the matter looked into once again .
Madam President , on a not dissimilar point , when I left this Chamber , together with other Members , yesterday lunchtime at the time of the vote , people wearing T-shirts advertising the cause they were supporting were standing at the door thrusting pieces of paper into our hands .
Some Members nearly tripped over as they left the Chamber .
They were being invited to sign what I regard as a perfectly acceptable declaration , but that sort of demonstration has no place within Parliament 's precincts .
I would certainly ask you and the President to investigate what rules and regulations we have to stop manifestations of that nature operating within the precincts and indeed at the very doors of Parliament 's Chamber .
Those people yesterday caused me no particular offence in terms of the cause they were pursuing but the next time it might very well be people to whom I and other elected Members of this House would have very great objections .
I have noted that , and we shall consider how to proceed in such cases .
Illicit manufacture of drugs
The next item is the report ( A4-0367 / 98 ) by Mr Pirker , on behalf of the Committee on Civil Liberties and Internal Affairs , on the proposal for a European Parliament and Council Directive amending Council Directive 92 / 109 / EEC relating to the manufacturing and placing on the market of certain substances used in the illicit manufacture of narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances ( COM ( 98 ) 0022 - C4-0081 / 98-98 / 0017 ( COD ) ) .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , this is an instrument for combatting drugs which is intended to help us make the illicit diversion of precursors as difficult as possible and if possible to prevent it .
These precursors are required for the manufacture of drugs , such as heroin and cocaine , but in particular for the manufacture of synthetic drugs , such as Ecstasy , ICE , LSD and amphetamines , because these drugs are manufactured exclusively from precursors .
The reason why we need such an instrument is that consumption of drugs , particularly synthetic drugs , is increasing not only across Europe , but throughout the world .
I have obtained a copy of the most recent figures , which indicate that around 2.5 million Ecstasy tablets were seized in 1997 in Europe alone , half of which were seized in the Netherlands .
In the same year , 267 000 doses of LSD were seized , half of which again were seized in the Netherlands .
The amounts seized show that drug use is currently on the increase .
However , they also show that anti-drug strategies are taking effect , and that police measures are effective , namely because more synthetic drugs are being seized .
These synthetic drugs are now being consumed by more than 5 million young people in Europe according to conservative estimates .
The situation is therefore a dramatic one , particularly because these young people never know what substances the synthetic drugs they are consuming actually contain .
That is to say , the mixture of substances varies constantly , in terms both of precursors and the strength of the dose .
This means young people are exposed to extreme danger , and are therefore guinea-pigs for unscrupulous businessmen .
We must do everything possible to find the best instruments for combatting drugs precisely for this reason , that is , to protect young people .
A Council proposal is now available on amending a directive which dates from 1992 . It contains a very practical proposal which may also be promising , particularly if we incorporate the amendments from the Committee on Civil Liberties and Internal Affairs which is what I am requesting .
The proposal was drawn up on the basis of expert hearings .
We had representatives from the chemicals industry here , as well as representatives from the authorities , in order to sound out the most practical model and to draw conclusions from this .
The Committee on Civil Liberties and Internal Affairs also shares the Council 's view on nearly all issues , because its proposal is simply very consistent and very comprehensive , as well as very practical .
What are the important points then ?
I should like to single out the five most important points made in this proposal .
Firstly , we had to decide between two possibilities : one was to draw up a fixed list , in which all precursors that are used to produce drugs are broken down into categories and monitored .
At present , there are 22 of these . However , we would have to make the list much longer in order to introduce realistic checks because the substances used have changed , and there is a large number of them .
If we had a fixed list , carrying out a check would be more or less impossible , with the result that we decided to take the other option .
In reality , we have key substances which are fixed , and we can make the list longer and change it according to the substances that are currently being used to produce drugs .
This means that we have a list of key substances which can be made longer and updated .
We can use this to react to the present situation in the most effective way .
The second point is that this list must not be made public . Otherwise , it would be quite possible for the producers to simply avoid the checks , because what is monitored is in any case well-known .
The third point concerns the opportunity given to the Member States to prohibit trade in precursors where there is reason to assume that these precursors are being diverted for the production of drugs .
The fourth point is quite an important one , because the system would probably not work otherwise ; this system involves cooperation between the economic players - that is , the chemicals industry - and the authorities on a voluntary basis , but the Member States must prepare for this possible voluntary cooperation .
That is to say , the economic players , or the chemicals industry , should provide information voluntarily when unusual transactions or orders are received , whilst the authorities are naturally given powers to obtain information , as well as to carry out spot checks on business premises .
This system of voluntary cooperation is already in operation in some Member States , such as Austria , Germany , the Netherlands , the United Kingdom and Ireland , where it is extremely successful .
In Germany alone there were 6 000 notifications in the last year alone , and these were successfully investigated , in order to prevent the illicit diversion of precursors , and therefore the production of drugs as well .
The fifth and very important point is that we must build up monitoring systems and integrate the countries of Central and Eastern Europe through the Phare programme when controlling precursors in the fight against drugs .
The proposal provides that workers from the chemicals industry and the employees of the authorities be invited to Europe for training .
This firstly guarantees that the money is not misused , as quite often happens , and also that we train people in the way we want and , at the same time , have contacts in these Member States as well .
This constitutes a monitoring system that makes it practically impossible to shift procurement elsewhere , and enables cooperation to prevent the illicit diversion of precursors .
With this package , we hope to successfully control the illicit diversion of precursors not only across Europe but , because this has been possible for two years , throughout the world as well , and to get our hands on an instrument that is essential in allowing us to successfully combat drugs , thereby protecting young people .
I urge you to fully endorse and implement this proposal .
Madam President , if you can brave the unrelenting noise of rave parties and the hordes of young people with apparently endless supplies of energy who attend them , you can detect a sign of the new era of synthetic drugs .
It is now fashionable to go crazy , enter a frenzy , explode , drift into a trance , to show that you are in the blossom of youth .
There are techno and house-music tribes looking for new rituals led by strangely charismatic nocturnal animals known as DJs .
Their religion is based on the myth that the new electronic forms of music can only be appreciated under the effect of drugs .
Sudden alterations of behaviour in apparently normal people - some of them familiarly normal , professional people - demonstrate the effects of these miraculous capsules of instantaneous performance , the key to voluptuous physical states and mental capacities .
Although we have yet to say a final goodbye to the traditional heroin , cocaine or marijuana , we are facing a new reality that is about to erupt like a volcano .
It has in its hold a planetary audience in the quest for new sensations , new radical experiences and new ways of coming to terms with a paradoxical world of opulence and poverty , culture and illiteracy , masters and slaves , privileged and marginal lifestyles .
It is on this new danger and the widespread production of synthetic drugs that we are holding a debate today .
It is not enough to control the old trade routes from South America , North Africa or the Far East .
The factories producing Ecstasy and their substitutes are right next to consumers , cropping up like new arts and crafts shops .
Even the Internet offers recipes for producing these super-drugs with potentially lethal effects .
That is why we must control trade in the so-called precursors , or chemical substances used in the illicit manufacture of these types of narcotics .
That is why we must step up voluntary cooperation between the authorities and the chemical and pharmaceutical companies to detect any suspicious acquisitions of substances on the list of products that are possible ingredients for these psychotropic substances .
These lists should not be made public and they should be flexible , since the compounds used are changing so often and it is impossible to list all the latest precursors .
Ecstasy has now existed for 10 years .
Everyone is aware of the irreversible brain damage it can cause .
In the meantime , the market novelties are called DOB , Golden Eagle , 4MTA , and flatliners , which are 33 times stronger than Ecstasy .
The countries of Central and Eastern Europe should be included in the scope of this joint action so that they do not turn into alternative markets beyond our control .
The European Parliament should take part in assessing voluntary cooperation .
This is a matter endangering the future wellbeing of our society and we should be neither distracted nor tranquillised , and nor should we have hallucinations .
Madam President , it is of course very important to monitor drug precursors and trafficking in them where new synthetic drugs are concerned ; but only , of course , where necessary , because there are also synthetic drugs which are not dangerous .
However , if they contain adulterating substances these must be identified .
So we must not give too much weight to the problem , only where it is dangerous .
Naturally , young people also need to be properly informed so that they know what they are getting .
I think it would be a good idea to extend the voluntary cooperation we already have in our country and a number of other countries between the authorities and those in the market to other countries in Europe .
We shall be voting for the amendments .
But I do not think it is all that realistic to insist that the list of substances cannot be made public .
I think that is too much to hope for .
Lastly , Madam President , I think it is most important to achieve close cooperation with Central and Eastern Europe here .
Otherwise we shall just be shifting the problem from Western to Eastern Europe .
Mr President , I should like to offer my congratulations to Mr Pirker on his excellent report .
The battle against drugs and drug abuse must be constant and far-reaching .
To no less a degree , the problem of synthetic drugs is constantly increasing , since their chemical components , the so-called precursors , are quicker and simpler to change and thus evade legislation .
The Commission 's proposal to amend the present directive is not a solution , but it is an important step in combating the manufacture , and hence reducing the availability , of narcotic substances .
The proposal is also in line with the decision taken by the UN General Assembly in New York last summer .
Because of the nature of the problem , a flexible drugs list cannot be made official if it is to work .
Constructive and voluntary cooperation between Member States and the chemical industry is especially welcome .
The experience of countries where such a procedure exists has shown that it works very well .
Mr President , I must firstly congratulate Mr Pirker on his excellent report .
It has become a habit of his to present us with serious texts that are the fruit of meticulous work .
The issue involved is of key importance for the future of the young people of Europe .
As the rapporteur pointed out , synthetic drugs are used by five million young people and this gives us an idea of the extent of the danger .
The risks are even greater because the chemical composition of these drugs constantly varies and because young people risk becoming guinea pigs and being used for experiments by particularly unscrupulous drug traffickers .
A recent survey on the use of hashish among students in French schools shows that only 16 % of users are still at school at the age of 18 , compared with 75 % of the rest of students , and that 60 % of them do not progress beyond secondary education .
This is what calls into question the dubious distinction between supposedly soft drugs and other drugs , which also applies , of course , to synthetic drugs .
The dangers of these drugs are recognised but they are played down , and even denied , by certain showbiz personalities or politicians in an extremely irresponsible manner .
I also call on those who support the cause of individual freedom in order to justify the free consumption of drugs to consider that true freedom is responsible and that it begins with freeing us from the influence of alienating substances .
The principles set out by the Commission and in the report by Mr Pirker do seem to be realistic .
The principle of promoting voluntary cooperation between operators , producers and distributors seems to be a step in the right direction , based as it is on the desire to give a sense of responsibility to all those involved , and all policies aimed at giving us a sense of responsibility are good policies .
I would like to say , in conclusion , that in this debate we must put the welfare of young people first . They are the main victims of these synthetic drugs and suffer because of a corrupt idea of supposedly recreational or communal pleasures .
This is all due to reasons that I would call - without beating around the bush - base mercenary reasons , which treat the real welfare of young people with disdain . We must therefore appeal to the sense of responsibility of young people , but also to the sense of responsibility of those who , in the name of a false idea of freedom , lead them to play down the fact that the consumption of drugs is alienating and degrading .
This is all about defending the dignity of our young people . For us , as responsible politicians , this fight is an urgent obligation .
Mr President , we have followed the work here in Parliament of the Committee on Civil Liberties and Internal Affairs and we have noted that its attitude as expressed in Hedy d 'Ancona 's report is very liberal .
This is a more serious issue than soft drugs ; it is a matter of synthetic drugs and their precursors , which are chemical substances .
Voluntary monitoring is a very soft option .
I would like to turn your attention , however , to the fact that the rapporteur has recommended cooperation with non-member countries , but only with regard to central and eastern European countries .
Finland 's neighbour is Russia .
Russia belongs to the Confederation of Independent States , and cooperation with that country is at least as important as with the central and eastern European states .
A great deal of traffic , some of it in transit , enters the European Union area from Russia .
I would hope that the rapporteur takes this into account next time .
Mr President , today we are once again discussing suggestions for improvements in the fight against synthetic drugs .
I have repeatedly pointed out why these drugs are particularly dangerous .
The report 's proposals , particularly to make the lists more flexible , constitute one step further along a difficult path .
Probably as a result of the very clear opinions formulated in the expert hearing , the debate in committee revealed a rare consensus of opinion , with which I would also identify .
However , this consensus must not be allowed to give a false sense of security or draw attention away from actual developments .
I have followed with great concern the new German Government 's intention to start experiments to control the sale of hard drugs in Hamburg and Frankfurt , and to decide on a legal framework for the sale of heroin at national level .
We should really have learnt more from pilot projects that came to nothing .
Drugs constitute a dangerous threat to the health of our children , and liberalisation of these drugs increases this further .
Mr President , Mr Pirker 's report now under discussion touches on a very timely subject , that of drugs .
There has been an explosive growth in their trade , due among other things to the relaxation of border controls .
It is easier than before to smuggle illicit substances across borders .
Presumably only a small proportion of drugs is ever seized .
The European Union has always championed the free movement of people internationally .
For that reason it has an immense responsibility to prevent any adverse effects which might ensue .
The second pillar of the EU , cooperation in internal and legal affairs , owes its greatest justification perhaps to the fight against drugs .
The traffic and sale of narcotic and psychotropic precursors is also an indication of how important it is to develop a common ID system in the EU .
Apart from reducing the avoidance of customs tariffs and taxes , it would promote better monitoring and control of drug precursors .
For this reason the system should be introduced as soon as possible .
Mr President , the use of synthetic drugs such as ecstasy has spread rapidly , especially among young people .
This is confirmed by the fact that apart from marijuana they are the most consumed drugs in the European Union .
I welcome the intention of the Commission to extend the scope of the 1992 directive on the control of illicit narcotics to include precursors used in the manufacture of these new drugs .
I recognise that it is not an easy task because chemical precursors have a legal use as well as being a key part of illicit drug production .
Cooperation to tackle this problem is imperative .
The action plan agreed at the General Assembly of the United Nations in June of this year is a step in the right direction .
We in the European Union must build upon this .
The rapporteur correctly underlines the importance of international cooperation , especially in relation to Central and Eastern Europe where we can exert significant influence .
The manufacture of synthetic drugs is a growth business in Central and Eastern Europe .
We can use the PHARE programme , as he suggests , to build up an appropriate monitoring system .
However , we can take it one step further by making it clear to those countries which hope to become members of the European Union that we expect their full cooperation and commitment to take firm and decisive action .
A failure to do so would effect our attitude to their eventual accession .
I support this report and the proposals contained therein .
I hope that it makes an important contribution to addressing the drugs problem which shatters so many of the lives of our young citizens .
Mr President , on behalf of the Commission , allow me to firstly thank Mr Pirker very sincerely for his excellent report and for what seems to me to be his very convincing support for our proposal for a directive .
It is thanks to his efforts , and others , that this proposal has rapidly been brought before the European Parliament for a first reading .
The development of synthetic drugs is an extremely serious problem , not only for the European Community but also for the rest of the world .
Current Community legislation on precursors for synthetic drugs only allows us to monitor 22 chemical substances that are classified by UN conventions .
Moreover , the illegal manufacture of these drugs makes increasing use of other products that can be easily substituted and that are not scheduled .
However , it would be counterproductive to extend the strict measures that are currently applied to the 22 scheduled precursors to other possible precursors because of the widespread commercial use of these chemical products .
Only an appropriate system is feasible .
The aim of the amendment proposed by the Commission is therefore to make the Member States establish a system of cooperation . This system would mean that economic operators would voluntarily notify the competent authorities of transactions that they suspect involve substances that are not currently covered by the directive but that are , nonetheless , used on a large scale in the illegal manufacture of synthetic drugs .
Although the number of substances involved is very high , only a targeted approach is conceivable .
A ' precursors ' committee that already assists the Commission with existing legislation will be given the task of establishing and updating lists of the products to be monitored .
The work of this committee is , of course , confidential .
Let us now look at the amendments tabled by the European Parliament .
The Commission welcomes , and therefore accepts , Amendments Nos 1 and 3 because it shares Parliament 's wish to strive for greater security in terms of monitoring precursors and drugs .
As regards Amendment No 4 , the Commission understands Parliament 's desire to have a tool for assessing the monitoring measures for drugs precursors .
At the moment , the Commission is already preparing an annual report for the International Narcotics Control Board - which is , as you know , a UN body - on the basis of the information it receives from the Member States .
The Commission therefore has doubts as to the validity of the request for an additional report and as to how this special European Parliament report would differ from that drawn up or to be drawn up for the INCB .
We must also be aware that the information currently provided by the Member States is unfortunately patchy and does not allow us to assess the effectiveness of the system currently in place within the framework of the existing directive .
The assessment of a system that is not as yet operational will only be even more risky .
Therefore , the Commission cannot undertake to produce such a special report , but it is naturally happy to provide the European Parliament with the annual report for the INCB .
The rapporteur has already been sent this information this year .
Parliament 's desire in Amendment No 5 to ensure that the lists of products to be monitored are not made public is already implicitly included in the Commission 's proposal .
In fact , given that these lists are to be drawn up by the precursors committee , whose work is not published , this addition seems unnecessary .
The second part of the amendment relating to the continuous adaptation of Community and national legislation does seem , however , to be very useful .
For the Commission , accepting the amendment authorising the optional introduction of the monitoring measures would be tantamount to negating the substance of the Commission 's proposal .
In addition , a system where certain Member States applied the directive and others did not would inevitably lead to a distortion of competition within the single market .
Therefore , the Commission cannot accept this final amendment .
As for the rest , I must once again congratulate the rapporteur wholeheartedly , along with those who helped him , on the report that he presented to us today in such an extremely convincing manner .
Thank you , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
Before we proceed to the vote on the report by Mr Pirker , ladies and gentlemen , allow me to inform you of something I am sure you will be pleased to hear .
On Monday , 16 November , the Bureau adopted a decision to take the technical and budgetary measures to also allow the Friday morning sittings to be filmed .
This is something that many of you had repeatedly called for and I think that the Bureau was right to give a positive response to your request .
We shall now proceed to the vote .
( Parliament adopted the legislative resolution )
WTO : financial services
The next item is the report ( A4-0420 / 98 ) by Mr Kittelmann , on behalf of the Committee on External Economic Relations , on the proposal for a Council Decision concerning the conclusion on behalf of the European Community , as regards matters within its competence , of the results of the World Trade Organisation negotiations on financial services ( COM ( 98 ) 0440 - C4-0489 / 98-98 / 0239 ( CNS ) ) .
I give the floor first to Mr Habsburg-Lothringen , who is deputising for Mr Kittelmann .

Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I am deputising for the rapporteur , Mr Kittelmann , who has put a great deal of work into this report in the Committee on External Economic Relations , finally securing unanimous support for it , a point which is very important .
When we examine the report and look at how the WTO negotiations on this have been delayed , we should really assume that a happy outcome is also worth waiting for , at least in this case , thank goodness !
Once again it was the United States that was strongly opposed to this area of competence at the start , but then adopted a more flexible position following the 1995 interim agreement .
We have seen that , as soon as Parliament and the Commission exerted enough pressure on the USA , it gave way , and did not play the international policeman , as is otherwise usually the case in many areas of the WTO , but recognised this to be the sensible solution .
What is this report about ?
It is mainly a question of dismantling barriers to trade and also allowing financial services to be offered worldwide without being subject to discrimination .
We have referred to this area of competence in various reports several times in Parliament , and not least this week in Mrs Mann 's report on transatlantic relations .
This also concluded that a situation which is better for the economy on the whole , and therefore for jobs too , of course , can only be created by dismantling barriers to trade .
In the last month , for instance , we have also closely examined Mrs Mosiek-Urbahn 's report on the insurance directive , and it came to similar conclusions against discrimination on another Community problem .
I believe that it is very important for us to not only apply this to countries in the European Union , but also to particularly endeavour to raise this at the WTO negotiations .
The report deals exclusively with how the WTO Agreement is to be implemented from a purely technical point of view .
Perhaps then I could say a few words on the procedure : alongside the general negotiations , specific market access was negotiated for individual services which are recognised in addition to the GATS Agreement .
These are , in particular , the areas of basic telecommunications and financial services .
Even before expiry of this deadline , it emerged that the USA viewed as inadequate the offers submitted by the approximately 30 WTO members - with the 15 Member States of the European Union counting as one - , stating that it was not prepared to extend its offer in accordance with the most-favoured nation status to all WTO members .
The USA practically baulked and jibbed at it .
The negotiations on the agreement were then successfully concluded on 12 December 1997 .
70 member countries submitted improved lists of offers concerning market access and national treatment .
The whole agreement in its present form is a considerable improvement on the 1995 interim agreement .
In addition to the inclusion of the USA , many WTO members are involved in the agreement , and its scope is considerable .
It guarantees substantially free market access and national treatment for foreign financial institutions in more than 95 % of all worldwide trade in financial services .
Equity trading covered by liberalisation alone represents an enormous market .
The basis of the agreement is the 1996 data , which show that equity trading alone covers USD 14.8 trillion , and total banking assets amount to USD 41.2 trillion .
At the same time , the agreement also ensures that EU financial institutions can operate on similarly favourable conditions in third country markets , as is possible for third countries on the territory of the European Union .
The procedure proposed by the Commission , involving consultation of the European Parliament under Article 228 ( 3 ) , first subparagraph , of the EC Treaty , is certainly something Parliament can accept .
I do not want to add much more here , because the reasoning behind these decisions is contained in the explanatory statements .
I would like to explain one more point .
I consider it to be particularly important that Parliament is successfully tackling this today so that we simply keep to our timetable .
It must be concluded promptly so that the date of 1 March 1999 set for its entry into force can be adhered to .
Mr President , the world economy has changed fundamentally over the last decade .
Market forces have become increasingly liberated from the political decision-making process .
The agreement on financial services that we are discussing today is , in our view , basically a sound agreement .
It is important that the other agreements concluded between the EU and the WTO do not work to the detriment of European consumers .
That would jeopardise the public 's understanding of these agreements .
And I think it is important to emphasise precisely that point - public understanding .
Moreover , this agreement comes at a good time .
The financial crises which have recently been affecting the Asian countries have made it even more important to send out a signal that economic stability is crucial to our ability to create fresh growth throughout the world .
It is therefore particularly welcome that a large number of countries have subscribed to this agreement .
It cannot be stressed often enough that international cooperation is essential .
There are many examples of challenges which are best resolved by the international community : green taxes and duties , eco-labelling , trade instruments with an environmental aim , facilitating market access for the developing countries , protecting intellectual property rights and the fight against technical barriers to trade .
Our responsibility as politicians is to ensure that there is no giving way on the rights of individual consumers .
We must therefore work together to see that the democratic control over the WTO is as strict as that applied to the EU .
That is our task for the future .
Mr President , I think that today we have seen how without the EU we should have not reached this binding agreement .
We should also remember the work of the cross-border ' financial leaders group ' in bringing it about .
It is a tactic that we need to consider for future WTO negotiations .
It could be the case that economic interests facilitated cooperation , while political prestige did not play so large a part .
Like Mr Iversen , I think this is important for achieving stability .
The market is in a strange mood at present , partly on account of closed domestic markets and partly because of the large flows of capital that move around the world and lead to speculation .
Achieving stability and transparency is an important means of putting an end to speculation , for example by creating a climate that stimulates domestic saving in South-East Asia .
The agreement also comes at an important moment for Europe , for instance enabling us to invest in Japan 's pensions market , and in view of all the infrastructure investment that is being made in many different fields .
It is also clear that this agreement has significant implications for developing countries that have achieved a certain level of development , enabling them to increase their savings .
Nevertheless , there are some problems .
I think it would also be extremely worthwhile to tie in the money-laundering issue and ensure that the BIS international rules are rigorously enforced .
The problem with Japan was that we did not know what the rules were and how they were being applied .
That is also one of the aims of increased competition .
Now we will have a way of knowing which rules are applicable .
I also hope that we make real progress on a new negotiating mandate when Finland takes over the presidency next autumn .
Mr President , politicians would appear to have an easy job today .
It seems as if we are only needed to liberalise the trade in goods and services .
We have to disentangle as much as possible as rapidly as possible from the protective structures that different countries set up for the protection of people and the environment .
Thus it would seem that today policy controls only people , but not goods or capital , and as a result , policy has lost its credibility .
Free citizens cannot trust in a policy that casts everyone in the same mould and turns the electorate into mere consumers .
The liberalisation of goods and services is being discussed in the WTO , and that is the right place for international agreements .
For that reason , we naturally have no other option than to approve the agreement now being discussed just as Mr Kittelmann suggests in his report .
However , I would like to address another aspect of the issue .
It is not at all self-evident that market forces operating blindly in a free financial market will comply with the generally accepted rules of the game .
In the present true capitalist system , which is global and electronic , the methods of monitoring financial institutions have not kept pace with the freeing-up of markets .
For that reason , the markets are not free .
The money market is a dictator of market forces , as it is not really monitored openly .
This is a problem that has not been mentioned in any of the international conferences and there is not one UN organisation which deals with it .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , imagine you are asked for your opinion as Members of Parliament , and it is an important matter .
To put it more precisely , it involves nothing less than the GATS , the General Agreement on Trade in Services under the umbrella of the WTO , the World Trade Organisation , and therefore once again , the financial services .
Imagine then that your role is purely to applaud .
I am certain you would not be satisfied with this .
However , this is precisely the case today .
This is a turnkey agreement which guarantees free market access and national treatment in more than 95 % of worldwide trade in financial services .
Significant progress has therefore been made once again through the unhindered and uncontrolled activity of banks and other financial institutions , and indeed , in exactly 102 countries throughout the world .
Not only that , but shares can also be rotated even more quickly .
As Mr Kittelmann so beautifully puts it in his report , and I quote : ' The volume of equity trading covered by liberalisation commitments alone represented USD 14.8 trillion in 1996 .
Total banking assets in the countries that are parties to the agreement amounted to USD 41.2 trillion in 1995 . ' Entire countries are therefore being driven into ruin because uncontrolled financial flows cause the national budget to collapse .
We are therefore calling for urgent reforms in the international financial system .
And we are talking about wanting to incorporate safety nets , set up early-warning systems , take accompanying measures , or even promote development policy .
At the same time , we are supposed to applaud because the Commission has once again made a successful attempt at liberalisation , without asking our opinion .
There is an urgent need for reform here .
In the European Union we need Parliament to exert an influence in issuing mandates and following approval procedures in all agreements of global economic importance .
The WTO must also be reformed .
Its sole commitment to liberalisation at all costs is a mistake .
The financial crises of recent months speak volumes about this .
For this reason we do not endorse the report that was submitted .

Mr President , I would like to congratulate Mr Kittelmann for his excellent report and also for the very convincing presentation by Mr Habsburg-Lothringen .
The successful conclusion of GATT negotiations on financial services on 12 December last year was indeed a major achievement which reinforced the World Trade Organisation as a framework for multilateral service negotiations .
Today we can see the benefits of having this sort of environment where things can be settled and be discussed instead of having to cope with unilateral action .
By including financial services on a permanent , most favoured nation and non-discriminatory basis between WTO countries , which is the basis here , and by securing effective market access to some 96 % of the WTO financial markets , the EC 's main negotiating objective has been achieved .
Ratification and subsequent entry into force of the agreement is now the EU 's main priority .
We are taking all the steps necessary to ensure that the agreement is ratified promptly both by the EEC and by its Member States so that it can enter into force by the agreed date of 1 March next year .
We also expect other countries who participated in the negotiations to complete their internal procedures before the deadline of 29 January next year .
Financial service liberalisation will remain an essential element in the development of efficient financial services world-wide which is the prerequisite for sound economic development .
We are therefore confident that the economic crisis affecting certain countries will not result either now or in the future , impede future negotiations starting in the year 2000 , nor will it lead to moves towards more protectionism .
I was listening very carefully to what some of the Members of Parliament said .
We should make a distinction between having free markets designed to function well and efficiently and rules which need to be there and need to be enforced .
Part of the problem in Asia and elsewhere lies in the fact that there are no adequate rules .
If there are rules they are not properly enforced .
There is a lack of rules even in states like Japan and hitherto the international institutions have not been given sufficient powers to ensure that rules , if they exist , are enforced efficiently .
That is a major challenge but that should not lead to the conclusion that we should not continue to liberalise financial services .
That is a different story .
I would readily accept the need , as some of you said , for more efficient rules world-wide or on a national basis and authorities - sufficiently independent authorities - to impose the rules of the game .
That is the price that has to be paid for having a stable system and taking full advantage of liberalisation which has been discussed and has been agreed to .
Thanks to all Members of Parliament for their contributions and I would like to wind up by saying that I take it for granted that all Member States and the European Union will ratify the text in due course .
Thank you , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
We shall now proceed to the vote .
( Parliament adopted the legislative resolution )
Ladies and gentlemen , I would just like to have your attention again briefly .
I would like to ask Mr HabsburgLothringen to convey our congratulations to Mr Kittelmann on the quality of his report .
And , as I am mentioning the name Habsburg , I would like to remind you all that this Friday , Mr Otto von Habsburg , quite unusually , is not here with us .
We know that he is unable to attend due to illness but we also know that he is now on the road to recovery .
However , today is a very special day for Mr Otto von Habsburg because it is his birthday .
Today , he celebrates 86 wonderful and fruitful years .
Therefore , on behalf of everyone , allow me to send him our congratulations and our best wishes for a speedy recovery because we do indeed need him here with us on Fridays .
Mr Van Miert , you have the floor .
Mr President , I would like to say on behalf of the Commission that I agree with what you said .
I am sure that my colleagues fully appreciate the true value of your words and , on their behalf , I would also like to echo them .
Book pricing in Germany and Austria
The next item is the joint debate on the following oral questions to the Commission :
B4-0704 / 98 by Mrs Hawlicek , Mrs Junker and Mr Tannert , on behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists , on the complaint procedure against the cross-border net price system for books between Germany and Austria ; -B4-0706 / 98 by Mr Ebner , Mrs Günther , Mrs Pack and Mr Habsburg-Lothringen , on behalf of the Group of the European People 's Party , on the complaint by the Commission against the cross-border fixed price agreement for books between Austria and Germany ; -B4-0707 / 98 by Mr Frischenschlager , on behalf of the Group of the European Liberal , Democrat and Reform Party , on the complaint concerning the cross-border fixing of the prices of books between Austria and Germany ; -B4-0708 / 98 by Mrs Pailler , on behalf of the Confederal Group of the European United Left - Nordic Green Left , on retail price controls on books ; -B4-0709 / 98 by Mr Kerr , Mrs Soltwedel-Schäfer , Mr Voggenhuber , Mr Cohn-Bendit , Mr Lagendijk and Mr Wolf , on behalf of the Green Group in the European Parliament , on the infringement procedure involving the cross-border net price system for books between Germany and Austria.I have received three motions for resolutions tabled pursuant to Rule 40 ( 5 ) .
I give the floor first to Mr Elchlepp , who has four minutes to move his question .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , at a first glance , the system of fixed book prices in the Germanspeaking area of Europe may appear antiquated .
However , if you consider the far-reaching consequences it would have if it were discontinued , then you should be far more sensitive towards this pressing matter of cultural policy .
I would on principle have expected the Commission , as an advocate of cultural diversity and also a promoter of jobs in Europe , to take into account all the objectives of the European Treaties in its examination of the book pricing system from the point of view of competition law .
Freedom of competition is neither an absolute asset nor an objective in itself .
In my opinion the preservation of cultural diversity , laid down in Article 128 ( 4 ) , is in this case a more valuable asset .
Did the Commission think when carrying out its competition law analysis that in labour-intensive small businesses in the book trade possibly up to 200 000 jobs and also thousands of training places could be lost by abolishing fixed prices ?
Finally , many scientific studies fear that the number of bookshops would drop from 4 000 to just 800 in the event of this regulation being abolished .
Commissioner , in the village where I live in the Black Forest , it would certainly no longer be possible to run a bookshop .
The number of publishing houses could also decrease sharply because greater proceeds from best-sellers sold at fixed prices reduce the commercial risk of promoting cultural goods .
The example of the USA should serve as a warning to us ; prices for reference books and for fiction and poetry are higher there than in Germany , and the book trade there is limited to a small number of traders who belong to chains of shops , which themselves depend on the big publishing houses .
Books should therefore not be subject to the laws of uncontrolled competition !
Surely the main aim cannot be to sell culture more cheaply but to protect its diversity .
The consumers want good advice and a wide range of titles , and this is guaranteed by fixed book prices .
In my country alone , 75 000 new books are published every year compared with only 55 000 in the much larger US market .
The readers also want rapid availability of books , and our system guarantees this .
I should just like to say , Commissioner , in order to make myself quite clear , that I am not against EU competition law or the completion of the internal market in Europe .
However , it is precisely because of this that we need to maintain the price-fixing system for books .
Fixed prices allow a wide range of suppliers and titles and protect against competition .
They guarantee cultural and literary diversity on a market economy basis , and without subsidies .
I repeat : the issues are also the cultural identity of linguistic areas and cultural diversity in Europe .
Furthermore , there remains considerable doubt as to whether the Commission should refer to a report when how it came about raises more questions than it has given answers .
The Commission must also state why it did not want to be monitored by a Permanent Advisory Committee on Books , as it actually wanted to ten years ago .
Mr President , Commissioner , if a few chains of shops and unfortunately also the European Commission have their way , the book pricing system is to be abolished .
At present , publishing houses in Austria and in some other countries of the Union have the possibility of selling their products at a fixed minimum price .
This is said to contradict the spirit of the European Treaties because it can lead to cartel-like structures .
This argument is probably right from a purely economic point of view .
In spite of lower prices , so-called best-sellers make a significant turnover for the publishing houses because of the large number of copies published .
Even at a lower price hardly any specialist books would be sold .
Certainly , a book is not a commodity like other household goods and appliances .
Books are part of a country 's culture .
Workers ' educational associations , municipal libraries , school libraries , book clubs , and so on , have been trying since the last century to motivate people to educate themselves more by reading quality literature .
Many books would not be published if publishing houses could not make a profit with best-sellers , which subsidise the publishers ' other products .
The diversity in literature is a sign of intellectual independence .
Just as every residential area needs its local supply of everyday things , the bookshop is part of the local supply of intellectual commodities .
It is the intellectual ' grocer 's shop ' , as we would say in Austria , or in Germany , the ' corner shop ' for the mind .
I apologise to the translators for using these peculiar expressions .
Unlike the big stationer 's shops , the bookshop also provides services , such as specialist advice or ordering books that are not really among the top sellers .
However , it could not survive without fixed prices , since it cannot buy at such good prices as the big chains of shops , and can therefore only sell at higher prices .
Apart from this , the book pricing system does not involve any obligations .
There are books that come onto the market with no fixed price .
In many cases , a considerably cheaper paperback edition is already available after one year ; there are the special-offer book weeks and the second-hand trade in modern books .
There are therefore many opportunities for making fixed prices drop very quickly in reality .
If I hold up a book , such as this book here , then what I have in my hand is , of course , first and foremost a commodity .
However , as soon as I leaf through the book and start reading its contents , then I am no longer using just any household good or appliance , but I am using reading as a means to find out about culture .
This particular one is a book about telecommunications which belongs to my colleague , Mr Rübig , and it is quite heavy going .
I am reading it due to circumstances , but also for enjoyment , to broaden my mind , sometimes it makes me angry as well , of course , but I am reading it to acquire knowledge at any rate .
As long as we regard a book only as a commodity , it is completely justified to curb or abolish fixed prices , no matter whether nationally or internationally .
This would certainly be a very restricted way of looking at things and would not do justice to the true value of books .
The packaging , which represents the true character of a book , is not particularly crucial , but the contents are , and these clearly belong in the field of culture and science .
We do not necessarily , or rather we do not always , buy books because of a pretty picture on the cover , but first and foremost because we would like to read the print .
The diversity of the book market shows that the culture of a country , and of a linguistic area , has developed .
However , in order to have this diversity we also need to have a variety of publishing houses and bookshops .
Not every book becomes a best-seller .
There are books that are aimed only at a specialist audience or a special interest group .
Money cannot be made from a small number of copies .
It must be made from those works which also sell well .
These best-sellers subsidise from within the system the diversity necessary in cultural policy .
If an entrepreneur today manages to sell a square soup dish by means of a very good marketing strategy , and then all manufacturers of round soup dishes have to close down , this will have no effect on culinary diversity .
However , every publishing house that has to close down means a loss of books , books that are then no longer printed because other publishing houses follow different agendas .
Every bookshop that has to close down because it cannot keep up with the cheap goods supplied by a big stationer 's shop , is a loss for the region 's local supply of intellectual commodities .
Commissioner , you will understand that we are asking you - and I know we are certain of the support of virtually the whole of Parliament - to really take Parliament 's observations on this into consideration so that this cultural dimension of our continent is really taken into account .
Mr President , it sometimes seems that only one thing counts in Europe - our economy .
If the euro is a success , integration will soon follow .
Yet there are so many other things in Europe which make Europe unique to our citizens .
The article on culture in the Treaty , Article 128 , also stresses that Europe is about more than just the economy .
The debate on book pricing drags on .
So far the European Commission has very one-sidedly applied the economic criterion in determining its position .
The Commission is currently very much attacking book pricing between Germany and Austria and pricing within the Netherlands itself .
It is alleged to contravene the Treaty rules on competition .
For years now , I and many other honourable Members too have been arguing in written questions , articles , letters and resolutions that a review of book pricing should be based in a balanced way on a range of both economic and cultural arguments .
The advantages of this have been broadly summarised by the two speakers before me .
But think too of the minority language regions , where the range of titles available in bookshops is also very important and has to be large , in order to guarantee cultural diversity through specialist books being available , and not just the best-sellers which sell easily .
Think of the lip-service paid , as well as the actual practice of stimulating small and medium-sized enterprises .
Once we scrap book pricing , as another Member has already said , the small booksellers will disappear .
Just look at the United Kingdom .
In short , book pricing promotes cultural development in Europe without the need for subsidies .
That is an argument which the Commissioner will have to address .
We do not want mergers and concentration , which damages cultural diversity .
As for disadvantages , studies have shown that the existence or otherwise of book pricing has no economic impact on the book market .
So if it has these cultural advantages , why scrap it ?
Happily , and we are pleased about this , the Commission decided to wait before pronouncing definitively on the Austro-German and Dutch cases until the results of this study were forthcoming .
I have made a point of asking the Commission in written questions to do that .
Perhaps , ladies and gentlemen , we have now reached a turning point .
I say perhaps , because no final decisions have been taken yet .
Commissioners Van Miert and Oreja have indicated in a letter to the culture ministers , following a study , that for demonstrable cultural reasons it might be possible to retain book pricing , including for cross-border agreements in the same linguistic region .
The Commission will not interfere with national arrangements of the kind we have in the Netherlands if it can be shown that there is no discernible effect on trade between the Member States .
We wholeheartedly welcome this development .
I hope Commissioner Van Miert will continue with this line in the decisions he takes at the beginning of next year .
My group too favours an advisory committee on the book trade .
A standing consultative body made up of interested parties from all sectors to advise the Commission will be a useful thing .
I very much hope that the Commission will listen to the tenor of the joint resolution tabled by five of our groups including , of course , the European Liberals .
It is not the first time .
We are clear on this and always have been .
Book pricing , including pricing across borders within the same linguistic region , must be possible under a derogation to Article 85 ( 3 ) of the Treaty , in the interests of our citizens .
The interpreters will not need to translate my closing sentence . Why do we only support agriculture and don 't want to do anything for culture ?
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Commissioner van Miert , I know , of course , that the market 's invisible hand which controls and resolves everything finds no more faithful a group of followers than the Commission .
In a manner of speaking , it is the Vatican of free competition , and I know , of course , that you are the Grand Inquisitor of this free market economy .
I also know , of course , that this inquisitor scrutinises the European market every day in order to find heretics of all kinds , trends towards the formation of cartels , and distortions of sacred competition , and as soon as his scrutinising eyes fall on anything confusing , or on anyone wishing to obstruct this invisible market force , the process of the Holy Inquisition is initiated .
Commissioner , I would sometimes like matters pertaining to environmental protection , social affairs or civil rights to be scrutinised in this way .
Unfortunately , the Commission does not regard itself as the Grand Inquisitor of this Union for these matters .
Its eyes have therefore now fallen on a small matter under the heading of books .
The Commission has now discovered for certain that underhand dealings are going on in this area .
You have this in common with the Vatican 's history .
You are now placing this book on the index of free competition because people do not know how to handle it properly .
They do not sell it like drawing pins or computers but have a complex , inscrutable , and even precariously erotic relationship with it .
Commissioner , when Beckett received the Nobel prize for ' Waiting for Godot ' , all 300 copies of this book were sold in the German-speaking area of Europe .
I understand that you believe that it is not worth the expense and that it would probably have been better not to publish these 300 copies , since there is obviously no demand for them .
You are right to say that a book has something in common with a good , and that is supply , but it is not subject to demand .
A book 's search for its readers is involved and mysterious .
Sometimes it lasts decades , and I think that it lacks culture to reduce this complex search simply to the way the market works , and what lacks culture quickly becomes barbaric .
Forgive me if I speak in the language of my own culture .
It is indeed an advantage to be able to speak several languages .
It sits well with the European ideal too , there is a cultural dimension to knowing more than just one language .
It is indeed a matter of culture .
I say that for the benefit of those who think one only needs to speak one language to be cultured .
I am of course flattered that you compare me with the pope .
Unfortunately , there is another candidate .
I gather that Oskar Lafontaine wants to be pope too .
I would not wish to measure myself against him , to fight him for the job .
Let us leave it at that .
I just wanted to say exactly what the issues are here .
Firstly , the attitude which the Commission and I have adopted is absolutely the same as the one the Commission adopted previously and which was also confirmed by a judgment of the Court .
The primary function of the Commission is indeed to ensure that the judgment of the Court is respected in such cases .
It is somewhat facile to ask us under the cloak of culture not to respect the law .
The first point , then , is that it is our duty to ensure that the pronouncements of the Court , as made on several occasions , are respected .
The second point is that I would remind you that my benevolent eye did not just happen to light upon the subject of books one day ; we took action because we were receiving complaints , more specifically from Austria : complaints from Libero , complaints from a number of universities which were having real problems over the rapidly rising cost of the books they had to buy .
So the complaints were coming from academic circles too , as well as from other bookshops .
If complaints are made , the Commission has to investigate them .
That too is part of our job and our remit .
What kind of system of justice would that be if I were able to say : I 'll push that to one side , we won 't deal with that .
So what do you want ?
Let us be honest , we live in a legally constituted state , in a community based on the rule of law .
Secondly , there is not one case - and I have been responsible for competition policy for six years now - where we have taken so much time and shown so much willingness to talk to the parties concerned .
I have even done something which was perhaps not right in legal terms .
I once wrote a letter of comfort to allow us a period of time - enough time , a few years - to discuss the matter and find solutions which were legally watertight .
And what thanks did the Commission get for this goodwill gesture ?
Firstly , a number of conditions attached to it were not respected by publishers and , secondly , over a period of two or three years , I think it was three years , instead of seeking a solution all people did was exert political pressure and lobby people left , right and centre .
They lobbied people , because the Commission was supposedly ignoring the situation and ignoring the judgments of the Court of Justice .
Well , I will not accept that .
Let us be quite clear about it .
What we do want , and we have always said so , is to see account taken of the cultural dimension but also the true facts , not as they are constantly projected but as they are , the reality .
Well , what the Court of Justice said at the time was this , and I am quoting Advocate-General Lenz :
' The same is true as regards the references made to the fact that , when the decision was being adopted , the Commission should have taken account of the cultural aspects of this issue .
The obligation to take these aspects into consideration was already provided for by the case-law of the Court in accordance with the Treaty on European Union .
This obligation is henceforth expressly included in the EC Treaty .
However , given that this comes under paragraph 75 of its decision , the Commission has in no way disregarded these cultural aspects . '
( NL ) That is what the Court says .
Let us just look at the facts .
To start with : we are told that if the system is not preserved , the publishing of quality books and literature will suffer greatly as a result .
That surprises me , because there are plenty of countries in the world which do not have book price fixing - the United States , the United Kingdom too now and a number of European countries as well .
In others , the system is in the process of being dismantled .
Is there no great literary production in those countries , may I ask ?
I would remind you that 40 to 45 % of the literary works published in Germany are translations , mostly from the English-speaking world .
Those are facts .
And then I would ask why , if the system is so good , there is no obligation on publishers to do that ?
There is no obligation of any kind .
There is one publisher who never ever publishes books to do with literature or quality subjects , and he too benefits from book price fixing ..
There is no obligation of any kind .
We should start by placing an obligation on publishers who benefit from price fixing to publish quality works .
There is no such obligation at the moment .
We are also told that only book price fixing allows there to be enough variety in titles .
I am sorry , but the facts do not bear that out .
With or without price fixing , happily , more and more titles are being published .
The reason is technology .
Nowadays it is easier to produce books and in smaller editions than before .
Whether you have book price fixing everywhere or not , that is the trend .
You do not need book price fixing for that .
That too is a general trend .
Once again , I have to live with the facts , because before we can grant a derogation , we must have arguments and facts which warrant a challenge to the judgments of the Court , if there are new facts which enable us to prove that .
Otherwise it cannot be done .
Then too we are told that , without book price fixing , a lot of smaller bookshops will go under .
Ladies and gentlemen , look at the facts in all countries .
Even where there is book price fixing , the small bookshops are in decline , everywhere , in the Netherlands too , in France too , everywhere .
That is the trend .
To my surprise , I even found - rather to my surprise I have to say - that a recent report by Francis Fishwick on the situation in the United Kingdom reaches the following conclusion .
For what it is worth I will read it out , rather than have you take it on trust , just so we understand one another .
What this very recent report says is this : ' The main gain from abandonment of retail price maintenance in the UK has been an improvement in distribution , particularly through smaller booksellers who are now able to replenish stocks and fulfil special orders in a very short time through an expanded and revitalised wholesale system . '
Ladies and gentlemen , the small booksellers have been tied hand and foot .
Why , if a book really is selling badly , can they not offer it at a cut price ?
Why not ?
Why do they have to stockpile it ?
Why not give them that freedom ?
In the case of small booksellers , why not allow them bigger discounts rather than the bigger shop ?
It is all very well starting to introduce a policy which favours the small bookseller .
But it is not happening .
May I point out that in countries which have book price fixing , such as France , 25 % of books sold are currently sold in department stores .
In Spain , which also has price fixing , cheaper books - and the market share of these is increasing - are sold at newsagents ' kiosks .
Because the longer it goes on , the more this strict system leads to practices which in any case look for a way round the problem .
You spoke of company mergers .
Well , in the Netherlands the Commission blocked a large-scale merger .
True or not ?
The big merger which was in the balance between the big companies , you all know them - Elsevier , Wolters , Kluwer - well , it was the Commission 's ruling which stopped it from going through .
We shall probably have to turn our attention shortly to the new move by Bertelsmann and Springer .
This process of mergers , in book price fixing too , is happening anyway .
Only the Commission is in a position to stop it .
Pope or Vatican , that is the reality .
Ladies and gentlemen , have you thought about what will happen soon with the Internet ?
I hear Bertelsmann , a firm which benefits from book price fixing in Germany , saying that it wants to be number one in the world in selling books on the Internet .
I have no objection to that .
But can we at least have the honesty to give some thought to the consequences of what is developing ?
You regularly approve resolutions aimed at promoting that .
Here we are trying to do something against it , but companies in the countries themselves are hard at work trying to penetrate and conquer that market .
Can we for once face up to the reality of what is happening ?
I am keen to have that debate .
I have advocated it for years and it has not come about .
People have fixed ideas .
They defend sacred cows .
They shy away from a debate based on facts .
I remain willing , not least in the light of the Treaty article on culture - and I have repeatedly said so - to look for solutions which can also work across borders , because there is no question of interfering with national systems .
The Commission accepted that long ago .
That is not what it is about .
It is about cross-border effects or practices which , as in the Dutch case , were totally unacceptable .
That is an altogether protectionist system favouring Dutch companies .
How do you expect the Commission to sympathise with that , as if it were not a question of economic interest .
That is the reality .
If you want to have that debate , I am at your disposal , just as I have been available to the publishers to discuss it for five years already .
But all we get is political pressure because the Commission is supposedly ignoring both the judgments of the Court and the facts .
I am sorry , but I will not accept that !
Mr President , Commissioner van Miert , ladies and gentlemen , Mr Voggenhuber has just called Commissioner van Miert the Grand Inquisitor of competition .
This is naturally a very nice image for Karel van Miert .
I believe that it does not quite do justice to the reality , because I believe what Karel van Miert does is a service for the people in the European Union .
What purpose does competition actually serve ?
Competition serves to break the power of monopolies , to ensure a variety of suppliers of goods and services , and thus to provide people with these goods and services under favourable conditions , and books are also amongst these .
In this respect , I agree with Karel van Miert .
I therefore would not call him the Grand Inquisitor , but a type of arbitrator who has our approval particularly when he fights against monopolies in the service of the people , against there only being one supplier for certain goods and services because this renders us powerless against that supplier as citizens and consumers .
As chairman of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy , I should therefore also like particularly to express my appreciation to Karel van Miert for his work .
We discuss these issues a great deal in the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs .
Occasionally , we agree , and occasionally we disagree .
That is part of democracy .
I should like to take this opportunity to say that my opinion differs to that of Karel van Miert with regard to fixed book prices .
Personally , I am in favour of fixed book prices .
It has involved a great deal of discussion .
We have repeatedly asked ourselves whether we should treat cultural objects in the same way as goods and services .
This was a very difficult question to answer in the case of television , for example .
Television is regarded as a cultural object .
This is the prevailing opinion , although when I switch on the television I occasionally have my doubts about whether it can be called a cultural object .
However , there is no doubt that books are cultural objects , and that they are an inherent part of our European culture .
I would say that this applies not only to books but also to small bookshops .
I must also declare a personal interest in this .
The only shops in which I like to spend considerable time are small bookshops .
I also consider them to be a completely essential part of our culture .
I believe these small bookshops depend very strongly on this issue of fixed book prices .
I believe that fixed prices do indeed offer these small bookshops a certain degree of protection .
I therefore believe that we should maintain the book pricing system .
As chairman of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy , I would be very pleased if Karel van Miert would consider this issue carefully once again .
I hope that you and the Commissioner , after yesterday evening with all the political excitement of amendments and voting , ended the day with a nice glass of French , German , Spanish , Portuguese or Italian wine , a little bit of agriculture .
I do not suppose that afterwards , legs outstretched , you seriously thought of sitting at your computer and surfing the Internet .
Maybe you picked up a book , a piece of literary beauty which you only find in quality publications .
If you did not , I will bring that beauty to mind in the form of a quotation , and I would ask the interpreters to follow me faithfully .
Mr President , tears of nostalgia for my grandfather clouded my eyes .
I rose from the big empty chair and began to wander through the rooms of my house .
It was the big villa I had bought after I had grown up , had buried grandfather and his comrades in the orchard , become rich and left the village .
The one sentence ' but you and Baruch still have each other ' kept surfacing in my mind and refused to sink down to the floor of my memory .
I heard the murmur of the waves , ran outside and lay down on the freshly mown meadow , my face turned to the sea .
That is a translation from the Russian novel by Meir Shalev .
There has been much talk in the transatlantic partnership this week about the need to safeguard our culture .
In other debates , on employment for example , lip-service is paid to protecting small businesses because of their importance for jobs .
Well , it seems to me , and following everything you have said , that abandoning book price fixing sounds the death knell for the small bookseller , for quality books and for jobs .
Large retail chains are taking over the sector by means of price wars .
In the Netherlands , there is no question of book price fixing of the kind we are discussing here .
But people are worried .
We already have a liberalised market .
Chains such as Bertelsmann and Smith are already in Amsterdam and Alkmaar .
Mr President , Commissioner , we cannot let our children grow up with nothing but cartoon strips , television series , e-mail , Internet , ready-cooked rice and potatoes , without knowing the enriching pleasure of a good book .
I worry about this .
I do not regard you as the grand inquisitor , Commissioner .
I see you more as a judge , as Mr von Wogau said .
You say we must make use of liberalisation , but let us not allow it to go too far .
As the honourable Member on the other side of the House puts it : liberalisation is not an end in itself .
You have said a great deal about the situation in the Netherlands .
Since an investigation is still continuing into book price fixing in the Netherlands , I should like to know what more the Commission intends ?
Are you going to raise the issue of book price fixing in the Netherlands again ?
What is the position ?
You are someone from my own linguistic region , and I hope you will give me a prompt answer .
Mr President , the argument of multilingualism was the only good argument I heard the Commissioner offer .
For the rest , he did not succeed in convincing me .
I am in favour of book price fixing , because I believe that books are primarily a cultural commodity , a cultural product and , in most cases , a vehicle for culture .
There are also some less serious things in the book trade .
Belgium has never had book price fixing , even though it would have been very much in Flanders ' interest , given that it is part of a small linguistic region .
The whole Flemish government which has responsibility for culture was in favour of it .
Just come and see what the results are .
A catastrophic under-provision of services in Flanders as regards specialist booksellers - not just small ones - specialist bookshops and publishers , is the outcome .
Because you will not find the poems of Nolens at a news-stand .
We are moving towards a situation where books are bought at department stores and specialist bookshops are disappearing .
With them goes the chance to bring specialist publications to the man in the street .
The production of less commercial and specialist publications is therefore coming under pressure .
In French-speaking Belgium , the main interest was after all quite different , and the finance minister is French-speaking .
This is part of a large linguistic region where there was a market for cheap books exported from Belgium to France , because France does have book price fixing .
The same thing happened from Flanders , by the way .
Books were imported into the Netherlands , but these were actually phoney imports because Dutch publishers came to Belgium to do their printing and distorted the market .
Culturally speaking , it is in our interest to have book price fixing .
The fact that Belgium does not have it has simply facilitated distortions of competition on the part of the Dutch and French book market .
We hope the Commission will abandon its efforts to attack book price fixing schemes , but rather see them as a way of integrating homogeneous linguistic regions and creating a European cultural area in which the wealth of European culture can find expression in all its diversity and quality .
We hope too that the Council will address the subject , encouraged by a presidency which is now making culture a priority .
The market needs to be put right not only in its social aspects , Mr Van Miert , but in its cultural aspects too .
Book price fixing is an absolute must for linguistic regions like the Dutch-speaking region which are homogeneous , span borders and constitute a market for the sale of books in the language in question .
We shall thus be voting for this resolution , even though it merely repeats what is so often called for by the culture ministers and is also a little bit detached from what is going on in the real decision-making bodies because , Mr President , we are talking here about a resolution whilst the Council meeting of 17 November specifically had book price fixing on its agenda .
But I hope that Parliament will not remain a voice crying in the wilderness .
Mr President , the arguments have been on the debating table for a long time .
The issue of whether a report on the issue of fixed book prices has been drawn up yet has almost become a bon mot in legal circles in Vienna .
Many renowned legal firms have given their expert opinions on this issue , approximately half of which were in favour of it and half against , depending on the client 's point of view .
This alone probably allows us to draw conclusions as to the complexity of the subject matter .
If we therefore assume that the arguments are more or less equally good on both sides , the problem is reduced to judging the book either as a commercial good or a cultural object .
I do not consider myself in any way to be a champion of the book trade , but a champion of books .
In the battle of competition versus culture I have simply decided in favour of culture on the basis of Article 128 ( 4 ) .
This is because I would like to continue to be given informed advice in the bookshop and not to pick from stacks of books like a fast-food service .
I should like to continue to find quality books in the bookshops and not only paperback best-sellers .
Commissioner , you did not manage to convince me that fixed book prices or their abolition would not change anything .
However , perhaps I read the wrong half of the reports .
If we accept that the development of the Union into an integrated economic power requires cultural diversity and cultural differences , we can only oppose the abolition of fixed book prices , which I would consider to be a declaration of the cultural failure of the Union .
Mr President , over the last five years I have sadly found on many occasions that it seems hard to have a sensible discussion .
Whether or not I read a book before I go to bed , Mrs van Bladel , is not your business .
It is my own affair .
I have my library , and in fact I enjoy reading .
But I also find , when I go to a bookshop , any bookshop , that the range of quality books on offer is usually limited , even in Europe .
You are making it sound here as if all books are quality books .
What kind of misrepresentation is that ?
Let us just take a closer look at what exactly the issues are .
Am I to understand from the many speeches which have been made here that where there is no book price fixing there is no culture , no quality range of books on offer ?
Just travel the world a little , and you will see that the reality is quite different .
You will see that with or without book price fixing , mergers are occurring everywhere , that the small booksellers have their backs to the wall , and I wanted to say something more on that .
I am sorry , Mr von Wogau , but it is indeed one of life 's pleasures to have time to walk around , browse through a few books , buy something and then read them , either on the way to Strasbourg in the car - I am lucky enough to have a chauffeur so I can read in the car and do not have to leave it until bedtime .
It is a pleasure , it is an indulgence , it enriches you culturally .
But you can do that just as well in a country which has no book price fixing .
Are you saying it cannot be done in Sweden or Finland , in the United Kingdom or the United States ?
Let us talk seriously now .
So yes , what about these proposals in favour of the small bookseller ?
Apart from the fact that it is high time , Mrs Maes , to desist from these practices which so distort competition and are spilling over from the Netherlands to other countries too .
Because the Netherlands had a powerful machinery of protectionism .
It was not just book price fixing , it was a kind of inbreeding .
Because you had to belong to the club or you did not get a look in .
However good your books were , if you did not accept the club rules , so to speak , you were nowhere and you could not sell your quality books .
That was how it worked .
Happily , this has now been recognised and it is beginning to change .
Why ?
Because the Commission is indeed studying the matter .
That is why , that is the reality .
A start has been made on changing things , on clearing out a few things , that is the reality .
I am more than happy to explain to anyone why that was necessary and why the Dutch , the organisations concerned , also shifted ground in the end .
They were not concerned with books , they were not concerned with culture , they were concerned with their economic interest .
That is a fact .
That is how the system was .
And now , as far as the small bookseller is concerned , I have been urging the book fairs for years to do something for the small bookseller , to give him more flexibility , to let him tailor his services more to his clients and , if it suits him , to sell his books at slightly lower prices .
Have you ever checked with public opinion how hard it is for a lot of people to pay those high prices ?
Can we just think a bit about the circumstances of those buying ?
Or whether they would like to buy books ?
Can we bear that in mind ?
Is that perhaps what was meant by the references to the Vatican ?
Can we at least think of the people who have to buy the books ?
That too is a dimension which has to be borne in mind and which , Mrs Maes , is all too often overlooked when you talk to culture ministers .
Thought is given to publishers , thought is given to authors , but too little thought is given to those who have to read the books .
That is my experience .
Once again , I would invite you to draft a resolution which seeks to strengthen the position of the small bookseller in a meaningful way .
Give him more flexibility instead of placing obligations on him .
Give him greater discounts than you give to the bigger bookseller .
May I ask you to do that ?
If you are serious about helping small booksellers , do something instead of coming here complaining and attacking the Commission .
I suggest you do that , Mr von Wogau , and I shall be happy to accept your invitation to discuss it further but meanwhile , Mrs Maes , we have lawsuits pendi