Resumption of the session
I declare resumed the session of the European Parliament adjourned on Thursday , 2 July 1998 .
Tribute
I would now ask the Members of the European Parliament to join me in a minute 's silence in memory of the three children , Richard , Mark and Jason Quinn , who lost their lives in the horrendous attack on their home in Northern Ireland on Saturday night .
There are no words strong enough to express our sorrow and condemnation .
We stand shoulder to shoulder with the people of Northern Ireland in resisting terrorism and in showing our solidarity with the spirit of reconciliation and the search for peace .
( The House rose and observed a minute 's silence )
Approval of the Minutes
The Minutes of Thursday , 2 July 1998 have been distributed .
Are there any comments ?
( The Minutes were approved )
Now that the Minutes have been approved , I want to mention something rather less formal but which I dare say is on everybody 's mind : I have sent a telegram to both Mr Muscovici and Mr Platini congratulating them on the French team 's success yesterday , since it is a European team .

Order of business
Mr Schulz has the floor .
Mr President , thank you very much for giving me the opportunity , very commendably and notwithstanding the rules , to table a motion pursuant to Rule 129 of the Rules of Procedure , relating to the report by our colleague , Maria Berger ; with strong support from our group she produced an excellent report on an extremely sensitive and difficult topic and submitted it for today 's sitting .
However , following all the talks which Mrs Berger and I myself , as coordinator of our group , held in this House on the subject of the report , we do not see how we could achieve a majority vote for this report outside the Socialist Group .
Therefore , pursuant to Rule 129 , I request that you hold a vote on whether this report should be referred back to committee so that a discussion can take place there on how to proceed .
I would justify this briefly by saying that for such a sensitive topic every effort should be made to sound out the possibilities of reaching a consensus .
That is not possible today .
Perhaps we will have this opportunity once again .
Please ensure that Mrs Berger has this opportunity for her magnificent work .
Mr President , I second the motion tabled by Mr Schulz .
I will not add any justification to this , but further discussion could not harm the report , and for this reason it is appropriate to refer it back to committee .
Fine .
Since nobody wishes to speak against , I put Mr Schulz ' request to the vote .
( Parliament agreed to refer the Berger report back to committee )
Mrs Aelvoet requests to speak .
Mr President , no doubt you will remember that there was a problem when discussing voting on Mrs van Dijk 's report last Thursday .
Her report was to be tabled on Friday morning but the majority of the group chairmen considered that votes should not be cast on this sensitive report on a Friday .
Everyone knows that Mrs van Dijk leaves Parliament at the end of the month and we would therefore request that her report be dealt with today .
Her report appears on the agenda , so it should not come as a surprise and we would be able to vote on Tuesday .
Furthermore , Mr Gahrton 's report cannot be dealt with on Tuesday , due to his illness .
We heard this morning that he has a serious heart problem and that he will certainly be absent for the rest of the week .
This would offer a second opportunity , if required , to place Mrs van Dijk 's report on the agenda .
I leave it to you to decide , Mr President .
Mrs Lulling is asking for the floor .
Do you wish to speak for or against ?
I am against this .
Mr President , it is impossible to consider the van Dijk report today .
It will even be very difficult to deal with the report on Friday , given the number of amendments - that in fact we do not actually have , for they have still not been translated .
It is therefore impossible to consider it , and I would ask you to leave the agenda as it is .
Mrs Hautala has the floor , to speak in favour .
Mr President , I would like to speak in favour of Mrs van Dijk 's report being switched , for example , to Tuesday , as it would be most regrettable if it were not discussed until Friday and the voting did not take place until September , when Mrs van Dijk will no longer be a member of this Parliament .
I have received an official proposal from Mrs Aelvoet : that Mrs van Dijk 's report be dealt with tomorrow , Tuesday , in place of Mr Gahrton 's report , which was planned for then .
So I put to the vote the official proposal from the Green Group in the European Parliament , suggesting that Mrs van Dijk 's report be dealt with tomorrow .
( Parliament approved the proposal )
The Group of the European People 's Party requests that Mr Anastassopoulos ' report , on behalf of the Committee on Institutional Affairs , on the election of MEPs , be brought forward and taken immediately after Mr Tappin 's report on public contracts , keeping the other reports in the same order .
Mrs Oomen-Ruijten has the floor , to justify the request .
Mr President , as we stated last Thursday , we do not consider it sensible for an important report on the uniform electoral procedure to be the last item on the agenda . This report has been discussed extensively in all the groups , in particular as to the method and the reasons why we should offer proposals .
This report is the subject of great interest , not only within the group but also outside Parliament . Mr President , the fact that a number of amendments to the report have been tabled only underlines my argument .
In my opinion , we should offer the rapporteur the opportunity to consult on any compromises , in view of the importance of the report .
It could be fitted in after the Tappin report , at the beginning of the afternoon session or at the end of the morning session .
I would be very grateful to you and the Members if they would agree to this .
Mrs Green has the floor , to speak against .
Mr President , this issue has been debated two or three times in the Conference of Presidents and a very clear decision was taken that we wanted this report to be debated on Tuesday in its present position on the draft agenda .
It is an important issue and many of us are sympathetic to some of the arguments in the report .
However , it was the general view of the Conference of Presidents , on the two occasions at least in the last fortnight when we discussed it , that this is a very sensitive issue .
In many Member States electoral reforms or systems are at present being developed so this is an inopportune moment for this report .
In fact , we would have wished that , despite the good work - and I pay tribute to Mr Anastassopoulos - we could have had this report later .
I have to say that it was not only my group but many others that took this view .
That is why we had a majority to have it on at that time .
So I would ask that it be retained in its present position which has twice been confirmed by the Conference of Presidents .
Mrs Green is half right .
She is right that a majority in the Conference of Presidents voted to have the report on during the night sitting ; she is wrong to suggest that the majority of groups shared her view that it was somehow inopportune for the subject to be discussed in view of certain changes in Member States .
There is a Treaty and since 1957 that Treaty has said that there is to be a common electoral system and that the European Parliament should make a proposal .
That is our job .
Let us deal with it during this part-session .
That was what the majority of groups also felt .
Mrs Green , as we are at the end of the debate , you may make a personal statement .
Mr de Vries came back on what I said , but he should also remember that at one point in a vote taken in the Conference of Presidents , we agreed to remove the report from this part-session .
Out of respect for the work of Mr Anastassopoulos , we then decided to put it back on , but at a late sitting .
It may be that others have different views about why it was taken off , but there was a clear decision : firstly , to take it off , and then we agreed that it should go on but at a late sitting .
To bring it back now is not in the spirit of the decision that was taken and discussed three times in the Conference of Presidents .
The spirit that prevails in the Conference of Presidents may differ from that of the plenary .
I am going to put the matter to the vote .
( Parliament approved the proposal )
Mrs Oomen-Ruijten requests the floor on a point of order .
Mr President , other people are allowed to speak twice in this House , so I am entitled to do so too . However , for the record , I wish to state that what Mrs Green says is not true .
Her report was placed on the draft agenda in May , Mr President ; it was moved later .
This should put the record straight .
Mrs Oomen-Ruijten , it was not quite like that .
This report has had various ups and downs in the Conference of Presidents .
That is not what matters now .
The House has made its decision and what we must now do is abide by it .
I do not think we have anything to gain by repeating all the discussions which took place in the Conference of Presidents .
Mr de Vries mentioned Mrs Green by name , which is why I was able to give her the floor .
If anybody else had been mentioned by name I would have given them the floor , but that was not the case .
Wednesday , Thursday and Friday : no changes
Mr President , I would ask you to allow the Commission to speak tomorrow on a subject which is not provided for in the agenda , and in this respect to add it to the agenda .
In the coming week we will be travelling to Bosnia with a delegation from this House .
In the meantime , at the weekend , we learned that subsidies for the former Yugoslavia were misappropriated by ECHO and , in addition , the Commission staff involved obviously had the opportunity - as I understand it from the press , as UCLAF was not in a position to provide the Committee on Budgetary Control with sufficient information regarding this - to allow files to disappear , with the result that it is extremely difficult to investigate the case in detail .
I consider it important - Mrs Gradin is here among us today - that we be allowed at least a brief explanation of this issue from the Commission itself , so that the delegation can travel next week in possession of all the facts .
Mrs Müller , as you know , that sort of request has to be made either to the committee a week in advance and presented to the Conference of Presidents or , at least , one hour before the start of the sitting .
Neither of those requisites has been met .
This is the first time you have made this request , which means that neither of the channels for such requests is possible in this instance .
Your group did not make the request last week at the Conference of Presidents .
I am sorry , but that means it will not be put to the vote .
Mr President , I received a letter from my colleague Nuala Ahern , in which she states that she submitted an article to The Parliament 's Magazine .
This article , which is about Sellafield , was not printed in the magazine .
I would like to hear the President 's comments as to why it was not printed , and whether it may be printed in the next issue of the magazine .
I have read the article .
It is strictly factual and I , for one , found the information very useful , so I would like to hear why the article in question was not published in the magazine .
Mrs Sandbæk , this issue was dealt with during the last Strasbourg part-session .
I had the opportunity then to explain to your colleague that this is not an official publication of this Parliament . So since it is a private publication rather than an official one , it publishes as it sees fit , and we cannot tell it whether to publish something or not .
Since your colleague has conveyed her request to you , ask her also to pass on to you the written reply I sent her . Ask her to give you all the relevant information .
Mr President , as you are aware , an extremely important international conference on the setting up of a permanent international criminal court is currently being held in Rome , as this Parliament sits .
Because this House has several times almost unanimously declared itself in favour of the setting up of this court and because the conference is due to finish about now , I would like to ask you , Mr President , to ensure that the relevant departments keep the Members of this Parliament informed of events at the conference , and if necessary add the backing of this House to the conclusions of the conference in order to help achieve this very important result .
Any information we may receive - and we shall seek it - will be passed on to the honourable Members .
Mr President , I have two items of information .
First of all I would like to thank my colleague for her response to my letter about the Parliament magazine and to say that the article was in fact subsequently printed in full : I am satisfied with that .
I am not satisfied with what happened , but I also thank you for your letter , Mr President .
We should be very careful to maintain a balance : the magazine did subsequently print my article , although not in the special nuclear edition .
I would also like to draw the House 's attention to the fact that I asked the Director of the UK Neurofibromatosis Association to provide Members of Parliament with information during the patenting directive debate , and that she was subsequently censured by the Charities Commission for this action .
This is absolutely bizarre and I would like you to inquire into this , Mr President .
I will give you further information about this .
I would ask you to send me a written note and we will find out all the necessary information .
Mr President , I would ask you to put to the vote the motion tabled by Mrs Müller .
We have only been aware of events in Bosnia-Herzegovina since the end of the week and it would be very important for our delegation to be given official Commission information regarding the course of events before travelling there .
This should be done this week .
Mr Schwaiger , you can request that the subject be included in the topical and urgent debate .
The precise purpose of urgent procedure is to deal with urgent matters and receive the relevant information .
If the groups think it is really urgent , that is the route to take : the urgencies route , which also allows resolutions to be made .
Urgent procedure should not be used for less urgent matters .
What I cannot do at the moment is allow a vote on something which contravenes the Rules of Procedure .
Mr President , the issue here is that the delegation is going to Bosnia in order to evaluate the situation prior to the discharge which has already been postponed .
We want to see , in September , whether a discharge can then be proposed to the House .
The visit by this delegation was decided by the House , and the composition of the delegation was arranged and approved .
But at the weekend all imaginable information regarding ECHO was in the newspapers .
I believe we should investigate this thoroughly , and I do not believe that an explanation to the House is sufficient .
This would render the investigations invalid .
For this reason I think we should discuss this issue with Mrs Gradin , the members of the delegation and the members of the Committee on Budgetary Control .
I propose that we appoint a day , if possible this week and that , due to the urgency of the matter , we approve a sitting during this part-session .
However , I will continue to seek a hearing with you , if the House is in agreement , as we require exact documentation and information which we can rely upon .
This certainly cannot be done within two or three days on the basis of articles from the press .
Mr President , on a point of order .
It is very important that Mrs Müller 's request be voted on by the House .
I know there are rules governing such a situation but nonetheless , because of the scandalous reports coming from Bosnia and because of the visit and the fact that Parliament will be in recess for the month of August , it is of vital importance that the Commission give some account of the circumstances which appear to have occurred in Bosnia .
The whole issue of ECHO should be looked at seriously .
This House will eventually have to take a very hard look at what is happening with ECHO - quite frankly it has got out of control and Bosnia is an example of it .
I would urge you , Mr President , to show some flexibility and to allow the House to vote on the request by Mrs Müller .
Mr Andrews , I have already explained why it is not a question of flexibility . The reason is that this could have been presented up to an hour ago , and no group did so - neither yours nor Mrs Müller 's .
Mrs Theato has indicated one route to you , and I described another one to Mr Schwaiger , but I cannot do anything else .
I have to stick to the Rules of Procedure in these matters .
These questions cannot be brought up at the start of the part-session , when it could have been done up to an hour beforehand . And of course , people knew what had happened at the weekend .
Mr President , I would like to draw the attention of the European Commission to Article 37 ( 1 ) of our Rules of Procedure .
According to Article 37 ( 1 ) , members of the Commission are entitled at any time to request the opportunity to ask for a clarification .
I consider it in the interest of the control function of this House , as emphasized by Mrs Müller just now , that the European Commission observes transparency and ensures clarity on the commitment of its public servants in the case of the possible disappearance of aid funds in Bosnia .
The Commissioner is here ; it is her portfolio .
She should be able to ask you , Mr President , to be allowed to make a statement on this subject during this part-session .
That does not conflict with Mrs Theato 's view .
Of course , a more extensive investigation may still be undertaken by the Committee on Budgets but we as Parliament , and also public opinion , would benefit from the Commission making a statement during this part-session , and Article 37 entitles the Commission to request this .
( Applause )
As you know , Mr de Vries , the Commission has that right and can choose whether or not to exercise it .
The moment the question may arise , at any time , the debate will be held .
So it is at the discretion of the Commission whether to do it or not .
Mr Hallam has the floor on a point of order .
Mr President , on a point of order .
I would like to support the comments made by Mrs Ahern about the apparent harassment by the genetic engineering lobby of a British charity concerned with medical research .
It seems they are saying that if an organization has charitable status it cannot give evidence to this Parliament or to its Members .
That would mean that British animal charities , children 's charities , churches , educational foundations , research foundations and universities would not be able to speak to us as Members of this House .
I regard that as a gross breach of the privileges of this House .
I also believe it is a suppression of democracy .
I would certainly hope that we take Mrs Ahern 's point very seriously and make it clear to the British Charities Commission and the genetic engineering lobby that we in this House will not be bullied in this way .
Thank you very much , Mr Hallam .
I have already said what we shall do as soon as I am informed of the facts .
Mr President , we need to come to a decision on the Bosnia issue for three reasons .
Firstly , we had set appropriations aside and we have released them .
Secondly , none of the three proposals made are mutually exclusive .
Either Mrs Gradin proposes that we ask her a question , or she does not .
If she does not , we then have the possibility of including the issue under the urgent heading .
Thirdly , and in any case , the Committee on Budgetary Control must meet to discuss it .
Consequently , it seems to me , Mr President , that you must ask this House , which has this right , to approve these three possibilities according to the Commission 's position .
Excuse me , Mr Giansily , but this House does not have the authority to approve things that are already contained in the Rules of Procedure .
Mrs Gradin will tell us whether she wants to reply today .
I will contact her to ask her whether she intends to exercise this right or not .
If the Commission does not want to reply today , it has until tomorrow to do so .
Secondly , the Committee on Budgetary Control can at any stage , precisely because it is not incompatible , seek authorization for a meeting , and I will grant it .
Thirdly , it is up to you , the groups , and failing that , the House , to decide , not today , but tomorrow , whether or not you wish to table an amendment .
( The President asked Mrs Gradin to clarify the Commission 's intentions ) The Commission does not wish to reply today .
It is fully within its rights .
It will do so when it judges it appropriate and you will make your decisions .
( The order of business was adopted thus amended )
Admission of third-country nationals
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the report which we are discussing today concerns an area which will gain considerable importance for this Parliament in future .
You know that , according to the Treaty of Amsterdam , the issue of policy regarding third-country nationals will in future be subject to Community law , and that this issue was moved from the third pillar to the first pillar .
It is therefore of crucial importance that when we , the European Parliament , have to deliver opinions on draft conventions or , in future , on proper drafts , we deal with these proposals with the necessary respect , and in principle come to decisions in the manner of responsible legislators .
Only by doing this can we really justify our request , in accordance with the Treaty of Amsterdam , to be involved in decision-making within the third pillar after the 5-year transitional period has expired .
The European Parliament 's Committee on Civil Liberties and Internal Affairs has proposed a series of amendments on the basis of the text proposed by the Commission .
The Commission proposes that European law relating to foreign nationals , European law on third-country nationals , should be harmonized in accordance with certain minimum standards , certain common requirements .
The Committee on Civil Liberties and Internal Affairs thus made a series of decisions which - and I would like to make this quite clear - are not in accordance with my personal opinion as rapporteur , even if I say this here .
It decided , for example , to authorize admission , for purposes of family reunification , of partners of the same sex , that is to include lesbian and gay relationships , and it also proposed including not only children but also relatives in the ascending line .
According to what we have heard , this will lead to considerable changes in terms of admission for purposes of family reunification , that is , to a drastic increase in the number of relatives admitted to the Member States of the European Union .
In addition , the committee also decided that all third-country nationals who have settled on a long-term basis should have the right to vote in municipal elections within the European Union .
I would remind you that in the Maastricht Treaty we introduced the right to vote in municipal elections for citizens of the EU .
In my estimation , this law has not been satisfactorily transposed .
There are countries which have not transposed this to a sufficient degree .
Therefore , a proposal by the committee which aims to give third-country nationals more rights than EU citizens is , in my view , unacceptable .
The committee rejected a motion tabled by myself which would have given the Member States the opportunity to expel thirdcountry nationals who have committed serious offences ; that is , those who have received sentences of three years or more .
This was not the opinion of the majority in the Committee on Civil Liberties and Internal Affairs .
In addition , a series of motions was tabled by the Group of the Party of European Socialists which I also consider to be problematic , but which , thankfully , were not approved by the majority of the Committee on Civil Liberties and Internal Affairs .
Thus it is proposed in Amendment No 49 that even the offer of a job can suffice to justify third-country nationals ' legal claim to immigrate .
I do not need to explain what this would mean for our Member States ' social insurance systems .
It would lead to the possibility of importing cheap labour for low-paid jobs , thereby undermining all our social insurance systems .
The same danger exists in Amendment No 48 .
This text offers the possibility of employing seasonal workers for a longer period in another area , after the end of the season .
I wonder what will become of the term " seasonal worker ' if all seasonal workers have the option of becoming employees with long-term rights .
I would therefore make a quite specific appeal to my colleagues in the Group of the Party of European Socialists , asking them to consider once again whether these amendments are actually reasonable and do justice to the interests of this House and of the European Union .
Tomorrow we will have the pleasure of receiving here as our guest the President of the Bundesrat , the second chamber of the German Parliament .
I have here the position of the Bundesrat on this draft legislation .
The Bundesrat is controlled by an SPD majority in Germany , and it has declared itself quite clearly - I could quote it but due to constraints of time I will not do so - against liberalizing further the migration rights of third-country nationals , simply due to the backdrop of huge immigration pressure with which the Member States of the European Union , in particular Germany , are already faced .
In view of the proposals relating to the authorization of admission for relatives , the Bundesrat says quite simply that the current figure of 200 000 immigrants per year would easily double according to existing proposals .
This shows clearly how problematic these proposals are .
I therefore appeal to this House to make a wise decision tomorrow regarding this issue , to support serious proposals and to conclude by recommending to the Council of Ministers a convention on third-country nationals which does not allow the burden on our states to grow incessantly and which is thus , in my opinion , much more in the interests of third-country nationals than the proposals made by the left side of this House in the Committee on Civil Liberties and Internal Affairs , and again here in this part-session .
Mr President , first of all I want to say that I am in favour of harmonization , or a certain degree of harmonization , in immigration and asylum policies .
I also think - and I want to stress this because I would like this House and its Members to be responsible legislators , as Mr Lehne said - that harmonization should have been and must be accompanied by a real European debate , in which the involved parties can participate , as has happened in some of our Member States , because this really is a very important matter .
In some Member States , as a result of such debates , it has been possible to come up with some imaginative and very worthwhile proposals .
In the case of Italy , for example , an agreement has been reached whereby a guarantee can be given for an immigrant in search of work , something which is not envisaged at all in this draft convention .
We are not trying to move towards a free-and-easy open door policy ; we are trying to help legislate coherently , without going further than what has been established in previous resolutions adopted by this Parliament .
What are we trying to achieve with this convention ?
We should be aiming for a European immigration law which can effectively regulate migratory flows , but also permit the dual objective of necessary control and the regulation of the presence of immigrants in the European Union as far as possible or , in other words , combat illegal immigration , not just by police methods .
I now want to talk about some of the measures proposed in this convention , because I think they make this objective more difficult to achieve .
Some of the measures would be virtually impossible to comply with and do not help to achieve that objective .
With respect to residence authorizations and their renewal , for example , I think the effects are counterproductive .
I do not think it would improve matters to ask people to return to their country of origin if they wish to apply for a residence authorization for reasons other than those giving rise to the previous authorization . Quite the contrary !
As regards the measure to regulate the presence of persons in paid employment , which Mr Lehne mentioned , I detect a sort of Community preference in this convention or - if you will allow me to say so - a demand for the perfect functioning of the single market , to be applied first and foremost to third-country citizens .
These people , or their employer , would have to prove that no Community citizen or legal resident from a third country could do the job being aspired to by a third-country national seeking admission .
I really do not see how that could be achieved .
I cannot see a shopkeeper in my city managing to demonstrate that no Finnish citizen wants to work in his or her shop , in order to be able to employ a Moroccan .
As the draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Security and Defence Policy , I think it is essential to avoid this illegal presence , which is only illegal because we make it so .
I think we should increase cooperation and dialogue with third countries , but we should also send them a clear signal that it is possible to live among us in a legal and perfectly established manner .
If we do not act to ensure that the necessary control of flow is accompanied by this accessibility , with no Utopias or discrimination against the potential presence of a third-country national within the European Union , we are going to make matters worse , with a new outbreak of racism and increasing xenophobia , which is exactly what we want to avoid .
Mr President , the Commission proposal to establish common rules for the admission of thirdcountry nationals to the Member States of the Union is an initiative which in my opinion can only be welcomed by us all , provided two conditions are met .
Firstly , this migration must finally be approached in an open and positive fashion in all its aspects , not as a reflex by the frightened European white man , and indeed new legal openings must be created which do not push people towards the margins .
Secondly , in addition to common conditions for access , sound European minimum standards for fundamental rights of third-country nationals must also be formulated .
Despite the good intentions of the Commissioner , I have a general problem with this proposal , and my group agrees .
Surely European legislation was not intended to formulate a policy at the most repressive level .
The proposal does not formulate the right to residence , to work or the right to study .
Although it harmonizes the conditions , it does not leave a possibility open for Member States to formulate improved rules .
In this respect we are particularly pleased about Amendment No 80 which our colleagues Mr Nassauer and Mr Pirker have tabled .
The proposal imposes particularly strict conditions on third-country nationals who wish to work or study in the European Union .
I am seriously worried about the restriction of the right to family reunification , as is my group .
Family reunion , the right to a family life , is a fundamental human right which should be respected in relation to third-country nationals too . Excessively strict conditions should not be imposed here .
In conclusion , I would state that the agreement , rightly in my view , contains a chapter relating to the rights of long-term , established third-country nationals .
This also raises concerns .
It is increasingly less acceptable to distinguish between Union citizens and nationals of third countries who have been here legally for years .
They should be entitled to the same rights , Mr Lehne - not better rights but at least the same rights - including the right to free movement , the right to work and the right to a family life .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , we are discussing a proposal for a convention which anticipates regulations which , on the basis of the Treaty of Amsterdam , will apply in the Union in other legal forms , namely in the form of Community law .
For this reason this debate is also considerably more important than it may have been in the past .
The European Parliament is getting ready to formulate legislation relating to one of the most essential areas of domestic policy , that of migration into Europe .
There is no doubt that all Member States will look critically at the way in which Parliament deals with this procedure .
With respect , Commissioner Gradin , I personally am convinced that your proposal will have considerable difficulty in obtaining a majority in the Council .
I believe that it must also be the task of the Commission to consider whether its proposals are capable of obtaining a majority .
It cannot be the case that Commissioners ' own political convictions hold sway .
It is appeal to the majority which is crucial .
This means that we must state clearly to what extent we wish to have migration into Europe and to what extent we do not .
Europe is not an immigration region in the classical sense , as the United States was in the last century or as New Zealand and Australia are today .
Access must be regulated .
In this respect , the existing proposals offer no grounds for great satisfaction or even approval .
I will give you an example to make this clear . Family reunification is a point of controversy , and I say this because , for example in Germany , the concept of family reunification in particular is used as an argument for immigration , as are asylum and , for example , the admission of refugees from civil war .
It is not acceptable for someone situated within the European Union to have the right to bring his entire family with him , but it would be appropriate for someone living outside the European Union , in a third country , to apply for entry to the European Union for reasons of family reunification .
Otherwise , all those who are here can bring their entire family , that is any number of relatives , while in the other case decisions are made on a case-by-case basis as to who has the right , on these grounds , to immigrate into the European Union .
This is an essential principle which , in my opinion , is unfortunately not dealt with appropriately in the Commission 's proposal .
For this reason we must ask that we use not only the criterion of maximum conceivable generosity but also the criterion of reality .
We must be able to take responsibility for and justify everything relating to the field of immigration .
In this respect , Europe will have to seek acceptance .
Mr President , I would like to talk about the crux of the matter , which is neither political refugees nor family reunification .
Let us not bury our heads in the sand .
The crux of the matter is economic immigrants .
The report attempts to lay down certain rules , but they are inadequate to address the problem of economic immigrants , whose unregulated admission into the European Union has endangered our social fabric .
Of course , the immigrants themselves , who see in the European Union the lost paradise , the paradise that they cannot find in their own countries , are not to blame .
We are to blame , and especially those of us who have made a profession of democracy , for not having as yet instituted uniform binding rules for all Member States .
And in this sense I congratulate the Commission on having the courage to tackle the problem .
We must make rules to allow us to admit as many economic immigrants as we can economically absorb and integrate .
Let us stop burying our heads in the sand .
Unemployment , which is currently blighting the lives of the citizens of Europe , especially the young of our nations , makes it imperative that measures be taken to halt the flow of illegal immigrants .
If today there is racism in the European Union , it is due to the lack of a European immigration policy .
It is essential , therefore , that we institute rules , having regard first and foremost to the citizens of Europe and then to third-country nationals .
Mr President , the only interesting thing about this convention is that it foreshadows the content of a Community policy on immigration and the right of asylum .
Unfortunately , there is no cause for rejoicing , but there may be cause for concern .
That is how I feel as regards this restrictive text . In fact , it is more restrictive than many national laws , which are themselves not exactly outstanding in this field .
This text is the symbol of a fortress Europe , inward-looking and deaf to the distress calls of the victims of war , repression or misery .
If this convention had been applied a few years ago , there is a strong possibility that Zidane and Djorkaeff , whom you applauded today at the opening of this sitting , would not have been members of the French team .
So I hope you will be as enthusiastic and passionate when building a Europe which promotes solidarity and fraternity .
Once again , in this convention , immigration is wrongly linked to unemployment .
It thus prolongs the scandalous 1994 Council recommendation which advocated Community preference - and I think that must strike a chord with some people , particularly the French - that is , Community preference in the field of employment .
It must be stated and repeated - because the worst kind of deaf person is someone who does not want to hear - that the OECD has recognized that there is no close correlation between the influxes of foreigners into a country and changes in the level of unemployment .
We must put an end to this scapegoat strategy , for it is dangerous to manipulate immigration .
This helps to strengthen the credibility of all those people - and there are many of them - who encourage a demagogic policy of exclusion and xenophobia .
But some people have followed the European examples ; this is unfortunately the path currently being taken by the French Minister for Home Affairs , Mr Chevènement , who continues to refuse to make provision for the tens of thousands of illegal immigrants whom he has urged to come forward .
He ridicules or threatens the people who support them in their struggle .
I am proud to be one of them ; I am not a Trotskyist - if I were , I would also be proud and free to be so - and I am not , as far as I know , manipulated by Great Britain , although I am seated here close to its representatives .
Tomorrow , 14 July , I will be in Paris to participate in promoting once again the rights of illegal immigrants and to support the action of the hunger strikers .
A film will be previewed there , a film by Jacques Kébadian about a Malian family in St Bernard , despite the lack of authorization from the Minister for Home Affairs who is trying to censor it .
If I dare to present this French case here , it is because the issue of human rights is universal and because the Commission , in its draft , in anticipation of the Treaty of Amsterdam , already considers it to be a European responsibility .
Many of us have sat next to members of the French Government who were , at that time , Members here of the European Parliament .
I ask you to show such solidarity .
Today , people are perhaps going to die in France .
This is not a call to your sensitivity , but to your responsibility , in the face of those laws which make illegal citizens .
So I call on you to reject this text here tomorrow , to vote for all the articles which could , however , improve it , and to show your solidarity - in other words , your responsibility .
The future of Europe and its peoples depends on it .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , this debate concerns first and foremost an important discovery : the Member States of the European Union are not closed , isolated societies but societies to which people migrate .
This immigration is a completely normal and very desirable occurrence which distinguishes immigration countries .
This is based on a very important right , namely the right to migrate to the Member States of the European Union , for which , under certain circumstances , rules must be laid down .
The first point is the principle , the second the rules of implementation .
I greatly regret the very restrictive approach taken by the rapporteur , who on almost all points surpassed the Commission as regards restrictions , impediments and conditions which are obviously intended to make the immigration process as difficult as possible .
I would have wished for an approach , Mr Lehne , which gave priority to migration according to democratic criteria and guaranteed rights for migrants , as is imperative for all democracies - for example , the unrestricted rights of the family , which should also be reflected in the regulations on family reunification .
In these terms - and , unlike you , I am pleased about this - the report was improved considerably by the committee .
A step towards realism and democracy is being taken in that now , for purposes of family reunification , the notion of family has been extended to include partnerships regardless of sex .
This should make us all proud as we are remaining true to ourselves , as Parliament , and ensuring that long-term partnerships and gay and lesbian couples are not the subject of discrimination .
Migration is not a threat for which we must prepare and arm ourselves .
Migration has made our societies richer , even in the truest sense of the word .
Those who continue to claim the opposite and repeatedly say that , for example , Germany - and particularly Bavaria - is not an immigration country , and accuse our foreigners of not integrating , are doing everything to ensure that this is rendered impossible .
However , it is these very politicians who are not integrated into the society of the 1990s , into the German European society of the 1990s , because they do not grasp the fact that we are no longer living in 1955 .
They are living in the past .
But people who live in the past have no hopes for the future .
Unfortunately , Mr Nassauer is not here now .
However , I will still say it to him : dear Mr Nassauer , without these new residents , democracy , for example in our country , is not democracy but Germanocracy .
I would like to live in a democracy .
That is why it is important , Mr Lehne , that in this report such essential requirements are to be set regarding immigration , and that care is taken to ensure that the status of third-country nationals is adjusted to that of the Union 's citizens in terms of freedom of movement , the right of establishment and the right to vote .
Had Germany had a different law , the German national team would have done better in the World Cup !
Mr President , each one of us is of course aware of the major importance of this issue : it is an extremely sensitive issue in many countries of the Union .
In this text , consideration is given to employment , independent economic activities , study , professional training and family reunification .
Nevertheless , this text does not consider - and it is entirely wrong to ignore this point - the naturalization of immigrant football players , a topic which is in fact very important , particularly for my country .
Regardless of the situation , the Commission is right to call on the Member States of the Union to ratify this convention before 1 January 1999 .
We must note , in passing , that it is in no way a question of imposing a constraint on countries and on governments , but is rather a question of establishing minimum rules .
The issue of admission conditions for studies and professional training is looked at carefully and , in any event , the convention would allow us to set up a common reference point which would be extremely useful for candidates and for national authorities .
The criticisms made against the text voted on by the Committee on Civil Liberties and Internal Affairs blaming it for its laxness are unfounded .
The act of settling down in an EU country still represents a real obstacle course .
Some people dream of much more restrictive attitudes .
Let us say to them clearly that overly restrictive measures have perverse effects , and often have the opposite effect because they encourage illegal behaviour - the source of all sorts of personal dramas and political difficulties .
Subject to the approval of the most important amendments , the Group of the European Radical Alliance will possibly be able to vote in favour of this text , since it looks at family reunification and , in particular , dependent relatives in the ascending line , and this encourages entirely commendable behaviour .
Without directing this at anyone here , honouring your father and mother is an element which Christians should hold dear , even if they are democrats .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Mr Lehne 's report concerns an extremely sensitive subject , as my colleague , Mr Pradier , pointed out : the subject of rules for the admission of third-country nationals to the Member States of the European Union .
In fact , the demographic situation , the level of unemployment , the problems faced in certain areas of large European cities , and the difficulties involved in the assimilation of people from outside Europe mean that the action taken by national governments is very delicate , and that the consequences can be important for the social balance of the countries involved .
The criteria proposed by the Commission would actually seem to be relatively lenient .
It is important that the Member States can adapt their policies according to the specific reality of each country involved .
Happily , Article 39 seems to allow for this .
Having said that , certain amendments approved by the Committee on Civil Liberties and Internal Affairs seem to be characterized by views which are somewhat unrealistic , even demagogic which , far from promoting the situation of thirdcountry nationals , would risk causing rejection by the people of the host nations .
The amendments mentioned by Mr Lehne seem to us , in fact , to be totally unacceptable .
Thus family reunification cannot be used for a different object to the benefit of types of cohabitation which do not have very much to do with the family .
Similarly , Amendment No 29 , which does away with the provisions allowing us to avoid fraud and the false use of family reunification , is irresponsible .
In the same way , a simple offer of a work contract would not be sufficient automatically to authorize the admission of third-country nationals .
In the field of immigration , as in other fields , the road to hell is paved with good intentions .
Leniency and irresponsibility in this field can only be extremely harmful for third-country nationals who are properly admitted , as well as for those who would like to come and work in the Member States of the European Union .
A real immigration policy , which is truly generous , must be based on four pillars : a policy on development aid , to allow nationals from developing countries to live and thrive , at home , and to contribute to the economic and social recovery of their country ; voluntarist family policies , to help the countries of Europe get back on the right path in terms of their demography ; a law on nationality based not on chance but on the will of those involved ; and public order measures which respect people 's rights but which are applied resolutely .
Mr President , the point at issue is whether a uniform European law on migration is currently required , whether the time is right for it .
The controversial dispute in committee about this very issue underlines its importance .
We believe that the variation in immigration pressure on the individual Member States is not mainly due to the different national rules but to the economic and also topographic situations of the individual Member States , which determine their attractiveness to potential immigrants .
Therefore , in our opinion , the individual Member States must continue to have the power to adjust their immigration laws according to the situation , and thus respond to the situation with different immigration regulations .
From this point of view , harmonization would not , in our opinion , be the correct solution .
Thus , for example , in Member States with long external EU borders , such as Austria , the consequences of a common regulation for frontier workers would be very different from those in the other Member States .
What is almost incomprehensible , in view of the increase in crime caused by foreigners and the intensified fight against crime which forms the focal point of a European Union programme , is the request that convicted foreigners should no longer be expelled .
The same applies to the proposal to widen the conditions for family reunification , as the rapporteur explained .
Bearing in mind that , instead of the planned convention , a directly applicable regulation or at least a directive could come into force in the Member States immediately after the Treaty of Amsterdam has taken effect , we reject the report .
We are also rejecting it because the planned rule makes a regionally adjusted reaction to migratory flows impossible and , in contrast to the rules currently applicable in Austria , would significantly facilitate immigration , without justifying it objectively , and thus lead to a loss of security .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Mrs Gradin , the Commission has recognized that with the creation of the single market , the removal of border controls and progressive liberalization , common rules must be drawn up relating to migration and the rights of third-country nationals .
We are all aware of the difficult nature of this topic , as the Member States of the Union find it difficult to formulate a common policy in the field of law as it relates to foreigners .
We must take account of the reservations of the Member States if we want the voice of the European Parliament to be heard .
However , in order to avoid injustice , we must also clarify where the weak points of the proposed convention lie .
I will therefore discuss three points .
The first is the right of residence for students .
If we want to help third-country nationals improve their education we should promote this work attitude and remove obstacles .
This is also a type of development aid .
So we must allow them the same freedoms as all other students , and we cannot discriminate against them or treat them as third-class students .
In the case of family reunification also , we cannot cease in our efforts and set the level of legal protection too low .
Many states grant special protection to the family .
German Basic Law even grants special protection to the family and to family unity , in its Article 6 .
We , the European Parliament , must strengthen this protection .
Thus the concept of the family is to be understood in a broad sense .
What counts is the de facto partnership , not the marriage certificate .
The welfare of the children is also important , not the sex of the partner or the marriage relationship .
What is right is family reunification involving dependent relatives for purposes of their protection and to maintain the family unit , rather than their exclusion or arbitrary admission by the relevant state .
A third-country national will invest in the education of his children , learn the language of the host country and build a secure existence if the countries are really prepared to regard the integration of these people positively and consciously .
Therefore we must ensure that concessions are made to people who come to us as third-country nationals , in terms of the right of residence , the right to vote and social law .
Mr President , we now know why large sectors of the population are afraid , are afraid of immigration , of non-existing rules .
What we need is rules relating to employment and also to the immigration of foreign workers into the Union .
Mr Lehne addresses both in his report , and we must consider both together .
The population expects politicians to tackle such problems and present solutions , that is , to create a system of laws or rules and undertake harmonization .
I am pleased that the Treaty of Amsterdam supports us in this .
We need common rules for the migration of workers , which must be controlled and restricted .
Only when this happens in the interest of the Union will the integration of foreign nationals really be reasonable and possible .
We have experienced problems of this kind in Austria .
We drew up rules , with the result that a quota system currently exists whereby no further immigrants are admitted until those already admitted have become integrated .
I consider this to be an absolutely essential system .
So the aim must be to draw up Community rules on migration and establishment .
In the Union there is no right of immigration and establishment , and it must also be possible to draw up common rules relating to the asylum procedure .
We do not have that yet either , and this leads to abuse .
The Social Democrats , the Greens and the Liberals have , to a certain extent , strayed from the path of reason with their amendments , which have made the Lehne report an irrational one . It has now been presented to Parliament , with the regulations you are aware of , which aim for absolute liberalization .
Migration with open borders is certainly not what we want or what the people expect from us , the European Parliament .
I hope that tomorrow we will return to the path of reason , that is , that the amendments tabled by ourselves and by Mr Lehne obtain a majority in Parliament .
Then we will find a course which will really allow immigration and integration to a limited and controlled extent , as we would wish , and promote a complete system which the public and the people will not be afraid of , but provide a solution for the people who come to Europe , and for us and the Union itself as a whole .
Mr President , I should just like to take up Mr Hager 's point about national rules , as he put it .
When a person is legally resident within the European Union , how , in simple terms , can free movement of citizens of the Union be ensured without infringements of the rights of other EU citizens ?
Let me give a specific example , even though Mr Hager is not listening to me .
A coach party came to visit Parliament in Strasbourg .
Some of the passengers were British passport-holders .
However , there were also two sisters , one of whom held an Indian passport , whereas , for some strange reason , the other , the younger of the two , held a British passport .
The teacher in charge of the group had to decide whether to go to the Black Forest .
She came to see me and said : ' I do not have a visa to go to the Black Forest , what shall I do ?
Shall we keep the school trip back because one of the children does not have the necessary visa or shall we take the risk and go anyway ? ' Advising that teacher was very difficult for me .
I would probably have taken the risk , but then I have the benefit of diplomatic immunity .
The teacher did not .
Therefore she was placed in the invidious position of saying : ' No , I must comply with what apparently is the law and I will stop the trip going to the Black Forest ' .
Is that not wrong ?
When you translate the rights of third-country nationals into a situation like that you can see the iniquity of what is being proposed by those in the PPE .
What we in the PSE , the Liberals and the Greens are proposing makes a great deal of sense and will not cause the kind of heartache that was caused on that coach trip on that particular day .
Mr President , a lot of things have already been said during this debate , but I would like to go back to a general observation and make a few other points about certain amendments .
Undoubtedly , the European Union has an important responsibility towards the phenomenon of immigration .
Various aspects of the issue have been mentioned , from development cooperation to birth rate policies .
I am not going to comment on them , except for two aspects which I think are fundamental : the legal certainty and integration of immigrants .
From the point of view of legal certainty , we have to bear in mind that legal certainty should apply not just to immigrants but to the citizens of the Member States too , and at the moment the Schengen Agreement is being applied .
So the Commission 's initiative is welcome and , in general terms , it is reasonable .
I hope it will be supported , of course .
From the point of view of the integration of third-country nationals , we need to think about how nationality is acquired , but that does not form part of the competences set out in Article K.3 , nor will it be among the matters to be " communitized ' after the Treaty of Amsterdam .
It still comes under the sovereignty of the different Member States .
Nevertheless , we need to think about it , because one of the routes towards the integration of these immigrants into the community receiving them will always remain ineffective if there is not at least a joint reflection about how people can acquire the nationality of one of the Member States .
Having made that comment , I am going to end by talking about four amendments . The first is Amendment No 66 by the Group of the European People 's Party .
Clearly , its only aim is that the procedure being established , in accordance with Article 36 , should respect Article 10 of Directive 68 / 390 : that is , that the Member States should retain the possibility , for reasons of public order , public health , public security and so on , of refusing to allow that procedure , or of establishing a derogation to it .
That is already provided for in recital 9 , but there is no sense in having a recital which is not reflected in the section containing the legal provisions .
The second amendment , Amendment No 67 , refers to Article 12 ; that is , to immigrants wishing to establish themselves on their own account .
There is also another directive on that - Directive 90 / 365 - and it is only right to demand the same conditions from immigrants as from the citizens of another Member State .
Next we come to family reunification , and bearing in mind the question of legal certainty , I understand the Commission 's approach .
On the other hand , I do not understand the approach taken by the Committee on Civil Liberties and Internal Affairs , because it goes against legal certainty .
Supposing a Member State 's legislation allowed family reunification based on common law relationships , who would be able to verify the existence of such a relationship , and how ?
I do not think this is a reasonable solution .
Finally , as regards Article 34 - voting in municipal elections - let us not lose sight of the fact , ladies and gentlemen , that the European Union project is a political project .
So I agree with the need for integration as regards social rights and the nationality aspect but , in contrast , political rights belong exclusively to the citizens of the Member States .
Mr President , achieving a fair and coordinated approach towards immigration into the European Union is a crucial issue and the Commission 's proposals are a worthy attempt to deal with this , as indeed is Mr Lehne 's report as amended in committee .
It could be improved by some further amendment .
We have to avoid the unreasonable fears that seem to be floating around in some people 's minds .
Of course , we do not want a totally open door .
There must be some organization , planning and control of the levels of immigration that we can sustain .
However , I equally reject the concept of a fortress Europe .
We do not want to live in a Community which unreasonably restricts the entry of outsiders .
The countries of Europe have benefited from and been revitalized over the centuries by the waves of immigrants who have come in and stimulated the development of our societies .
Many of them have contributed much to our countries ' development and to providing increased wealth and prosperity .
Some people in Britain were worried some years ago by the level of immigration from the Indian sub-continent .
We have overcome those problems to a large degree and last year Indian-owned businesses contributed 5 billion to the British economy .
That is just one way of looking at it though it is not the most important .
One of the key issues is that of family reunification .
We must be humane , fair and reasonable .
Of course people cannot be allowed to bring in anyone they wish , but reunification of close family is important .
I represent an area where a third of the population are of non-English origin and many are not UK citizens . I deal with many of their problems .
One example is an Indian lady who wishes to bring her son from India . He has been taken seriously ill and has no one to care for him .
Another was a family whose elderly father from India was originally refused entry by the Entry Clearance Office on the grounds that he gave contradictory answers to his reasons for entering .
No one thought to make inquiries and discover that he was partially deaf , which was why he gave contradictory answers .
These things need to be dealt with on a fair and humane basis .
Mr President , I believe we are all aware of the need to maintain an objective distance from this topic .
We must reconcile a need to impose control with democratic requirements .
For this reason , the proposals we are about to make with a view to the coming Amsterdam Treaty must fulfil certain requirements , which I will run through quickly .
Firstly , the proposals must all be far-sighted . We must take the near future into account .
Everything is able to circulate in our global world ; do we really wish to restrict - sometimes for absurd reasons - only people who are forced into their situation ?
This cannot be allowed to happen and we must therefore introduce measures to ensure integration .
Voting rights are essential in this context .
Secondly , we must be strict . But in order to be strict , to combat lawlessness and secrecy , we must also be able to open up controlled immigration channels .
This control over the flow of immigration will be possible only if - and this is my third point - we act efficiently without too much bureaucracy .
On the matter of immigration for work , I cannot understand why the Group of the European People 's Party has proposed such a bureaucratic and inefficient mechanism in certain amendments .
Lastly , we must also be able to work without discrimination .
Our new Treaty rejects discrimination very clearly .
As far as family reunification is concerned , the new convention will have to be extremely consistent if we are to prevent our policies spreading selfish attitudes and national fears throughout the community instead of looking to the future .
Mr President , I think I am going to be repeating a lot of what has been said by colleagues in this debate . The debate is actually on two separate issues : firstly , the rules on admission of third-country nationals into the European Union and , secondly , the rules on admission of third-country nationals into Member States .
With respect to the first , what the Commission is trying to do here is to deal with the issues of paid employment , seasonal workers , people who want to come in on the basis of an independent economic activity , study and vocational training , nongainful activities and family reunification .
Of course , we all agree that entry into the European Union needs to be managed in some way and we are not in favour - at least not in the PSE Group or , for that matter , in the British Labour Party - of allowing free entry .
What we need to counter the unreasonable and reasonable fears that exist in our society are reasonable controls .
We need sensible controls to manage admissions .
Unfortunately , as the legislation stands , the admission requirements are almost impossible to fulfil and lay down conditions which clearly are not going to be met .
For example , under the original proposals , if you wish to reapply , changing your category of entry , you must return to your country of origin in order to apply and must remain there until you get an answer .
There does not seem to be any indication of how long you may have to wait until you receive an answer to your request .
At the moment , it is also stated that bilateral arrangements may be more favourable than those laid down in the legislation .
But it is also provided that in future , once this proposal is enacted , more favourable arrangements must have the prior approval of the Council of Ministers and that , if a country wants to negotiate bilateral arrangements , it must inform the other Member States and the Commission in advance that it is negotiating more favourable bilateral arrangements .
Many countries in the European Union have special relationships with various parts of the Third World , and it seems to me that aspect of the proposal needs looking at again .
Secondly , with respect to free movement of citizens inside the European Union , Mr White was very eloquent .
I have similar examples to the one he gave , which I will not repeat .
But to suggest that when school parties travel around the European Union , legally resident third-country nationals who are ten years of age may have to get visas seems to me to be an absurdity .
On many occasions in the past the European Parliament has argued that legally resident third-country nationals residing in the European Union should have the same rights and the same duties as everybody else .
It is very important that we maintain that position , because as the Schengen Agreement and free movement provisions stand at the moment , it is very clear that this is going to happen anyway .
We need to ensure it can happen legally .
I understand the work Mr Lehne has done on this report : it is very difficult and very controversial .
I have to say to him that I realize it is a difficult subject , but at the moment we are a long way away from something that members of the British Labour Party and the PSE Group are capable of supporting .

Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , we have heard some points made here today by Mr Pirker and Mr Nassauer which I would have liked to reply to in person , but these gentlemen preferred to move on to other activities , following their vigorous words .
This is often the case , by the way .
As the previous speaker pointed out , Mr Lehne put a lot of work into this report , and I would like to make two points regarding what he said , as rapporteur .
Mr Lehne , we will certainly give further consideration to your requests in the votes .
In the amendments submitted by the committee , there are two possible versions to which we must indeed give further consideration .
I thank you , as rapporteur , for drawing our attention to this .
I would like to ask , however , what is actually at issue here .
We must try to distinguish between what we want to achieve and what the current reality is .
Here Mr Nassauer says , in well-chosen words , that the European Union is not an immigration country or an immigration region .
A few weeks ago we all complained about having so much illegal immigration in Europe .
So what is going on ?
Of course we have illegal immigration in the European Union .
Why do we have it ?
Because we are an immigration zone .
We cannot create a world of our own choosing .
So Mr Nassauer must be honest and say that we do not want to be an immigration area .
That is something else , but that we actually are one is indisputable .
That we do not want this to happen in a disorganized way , on the other hand , on this point - and on this point only - I concede that Mr Pirker is right .
So , if we want to organize it we must proceed relatively objectively and not in a controversial manner , even if we are in the middle of an election campaign in Germany and it is , of course , fun to stir things up a little .
However , what are we actually talking about , Mr Lehne ?
Amendment No 48 states : " .. may request ... an extension ' .
People who can apply for an extension - yes , at least this is still possible - can also be rejected .
So it is by no means a guarantee , but merely a recommendation .
According to Amendment No 49 , admission " may be granted ... for the purposes of paid employment in order to fill a job vacancy " .
" Granted ' does not mean that it is guaranteed , but that this is at the discretion of the Member State in question .
According to Amendment No 51 , the right to exercise family reunification may be exercise subject to application , which in Germany means following detailed examination .
You know this as well as I do from experience at local authority level .
In Amendment No 52 the difference is that you want to admit children below the age of legal majority and we want to admit children in the immediate family .
Well , we can argue whether this concerns only children who have not reached full legal age or the grandmother of the person in question .
The European Union will not fall apart as a result of this .

Because you know this , Mr Lehne : in your own Amendment No 80 on students and other applications for purposes of taking up employment , you have very nicely written that this chapter , as strict as you would like it to be in your recommendation , does not prevent Member States from having rules which are more favourable to applicants .
On this point we are in agreement again , after you made quite a radical change .
I therefore propose that if we can agree to try to reach agreement tomorrow on what we should allow , and to avoid controversy , then we will be serving the European Union , its citizens and those who wish to come here .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I greatly appreciate the time and energy which the rapporteur and other Members have devoted to familiarizing themselves with this proposal .
Today 's debate was very worthwhile and showed at least two things .
Firstly , it showed that the immigration issues are and remain priority political issues .
In certain Member States immigration has for many years contributed to political , social and economic development .
In other Member States this is relatively new .
What we need to do now is to examine jointly how the challenges in the area of immigration policy should be handled in future .
Secondly , today 's debate shows that the issues are complicated and cover a broad political field .
There are a lot of questions . What can we do to create the conditions for people to remain in their home countries ?
How do we control the flows of immigration which arise ?
How do we explain to the outside world that we cannot offer room for everyone ?
What do we do about the trafficking in people which is taking place ?
How do we ensure that immigrants are integrated into society ?
How do we justify alienation and social exclusion ?
These are controversial questions .
The solutions which we propose must therefore be well thought out , clear and consistent .
Migrants are going to continue to try to come to Europe for the foreseeable future .
The basic reasons are largely the same as in earlier migrations .
People are looking for a better life for themselves or for their children .
Today there are no unpopulated continents , which is why these people are trying to get to places which can be physically reached .
We must accept this as a permanent and normal state of affairs and not see it as something temporary and dramatic .
The solutions we propose must therefore also be long-term and , above all , lasting .
In addition , we have come to a point where the answer must be sought in cooperation with other countries .
The citizens also expect the European Union and its institutions to help .
Mr President , that is the main reason why I drew up the proposal we are discussing today .
The conditions for immigration are broadly the same in all the Member States of the Union .
But we still have different rules .
This creates uncertainty and confusion among the citizens of third countries .
It also undermines the trust which there needs to be between the EU 's Member States in order to be able to build up a practical working cooperation on these issues .
This initiative has already set in motion a debate on how Europe 's future immigration policy should be shaped , which is also what I had hoped for .
Not least , today 's lively debate here in Parliament shows what strong differences of opinion exist .
I have also closely followed the various rounds of the committee 's discussion of the proposal .
I recognize many of the arguments , both from the internal discussions in the Commission and from the reactions in our Member States .
A very large number of amendments have been submitted . Some of them concern the more central points of the proposal .
A very important part of this proposal concerns the rules for family reunification .
This is a fundamental right and all the EU 's Member States have both a collective responsibility and collective commitments by virtue of a number of international agreements .
The chances of agreeing on a common policy should therefore be good .
However , the question is how far we should go .
The concept of the family varies from one Member State to another . The same is true of age limits .
On both these points my proposal represents a considerable step forward compared with the current fragmented situation .
Now the discussions in the Council of Ministers will show whether there is further room so that we can move the positions forward .
Another issue concerns citizens of third countries who have lived legally in our Member States for a long time .
Experience shows that stability and length of stay are a prerequisite for integration .
My view is that a third-country national who has legally lived and resided in Europe for a long time should be able to live on more or less equal terms with EU citizens .
For example , it is reasonable under certain circumstances for immigrants also to be able to look for a job in another Member State .
The alternative is a segregated Europe , with everything that entails in terms of discrimination , social unrest and instability .
I am sometimes asked if this was really the right time to submit this proposal .
I sometimes hear that it would have been better to wait until the new Amsterdam Treaty had entered into force .
I do not agree with that .
I have submitted the proposal to start a debate both here in Parliament and in the Council of Ministers about the factual issues of immigration policy .
When the proposal was presented there was not a single concrete initiative in the Council in this area .
I see it as the Commission 's clear duty in such a situation to use its right of initiative .
It is of course true that the new Treaty will give me the opportunity to use other , more effective tools , but the issues will remain the same nonetheless .
I do not see any reason to delay a debate on the substance of immigration until we can give it another form .
Obviously , the Commission will submit a new initiative once it is able to use the new instruments .
The negotiations on this proposal will intensify under the Austrian presidency .
I expect the first reading to be ready some time during the autumn .
After that , the work will move on to finding compromise solutions where opinions differ .
There are already a large number of opinions on the proposal .
I expect the thoughts and ideas put forward in the Lehne report , and the amendments being presented , to be taken into consideration too when the negotiations continue .
Hard work , goodwill and , above all , a lot of patience will doubtless be needed before the efforts bear fruit .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12.00 noon .
Fundamentalism and the European legal order
The next item is the report ( A4-0328 / 97 ) by Mr Oostlander , on behalf of the Committee on Civil Liberties and Internal Affairs , containing a draft European Parliament recommendation to the Council on fundamentalism and the challenge to the European legal order .
Mr President , the initiative to compile a report on fundamentalism originates from the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Security and Defence Policy .
They proposed to speak on the dangers of fundamentalism under the original title .
Fundamentalism which exists in all sorts of religions internationally has been referred to , and rightly so - as Mr Colajanni rightly says , as a sort of misunderstanding .
It shows up in Christian religions , Hindu religion , Jewish religion and Islam .
Generally speaking this does not involve government , as government should be neutral and positive in respect of religions , or in any case neutral .
Problems are only created if there are conflicts with public order or with legislation , in particular systematic problems .
These are not problems concerning religion , but problems concerning an excess of , or - to use Mr Colajanni 's expression - a misunderstanding about religion .
The Presidency of Parliament considered this subject to fall within the competence of the Committee on Civil Liberties and Internal Affairs .
While working on this I arrived at the conclusion that the word ' dangers ' in the title was wrong in any case , and it was better to speak of a ' challenge ' .
Because there are many dangerous terrorist or violent movements in Europe and the politically-engaged ' Islamic ' fundamentalist orientation is one of the smallest amongst them , as well as one of the least significant .
I think it is important to state that religious fundamentalism and its excesses refer , in fact , to a rather insignificant phenomenon .
It is important to establish this .
Hence my preference for ' challenge ' .
I intend to use my report to refute the alarming coverage this issue currently receives .
It is more attractive to portray someone with an unusual appearance , an unusual mode of dress and an unusual pronunciation in the western European media .
That makes it interesting for the viewer .
But it is far from representative of the European Muslim citizen .
In fact , there is a certain danger in this extreme presentation of everything connected with Islam .
Very recently , the scandal feature of one of the Dutch television stations presented a Dutch Government internal security service report , which in fact is characterized by striking parallels with the resolution I propose , as an indication of how dangerous Islam is in the Netherlands , whereas the report - entitled ' Political Islam in the Netherlands ' - does not remotely give cause for that view .
It is therefore important to make the title represent the contents , and to refute any prejudices .
Moreover , it is important to propose a policy which can prevent the creation of any problems or difficult challenges .
That is what my report and my resolution purport to do .
I advocate that a positive policy be conducted in the whole of Europe , in particular so as to prevent trouble , and to ensure that Muslims know that they are completely integrated and accepted .
A lot remains to be done , as there is discrimination in the religious area in fulfilling Muslim obligations to a certain extent , in particular where the training of their own leaders is concerned .
I am therefore strongly in favour of the creation of training opportunities for Muslims in Europe , particularly in theology , and I advocate this in the report .
I believe that scientific study centres should become available for them , in order to educate leaders who have full knowledge of the European culture and are not foreign to it , and who will be able to provide the second and third generation Muslims in Europe with appropriate pastoral care .
So I consider it very important that we make everybody in Europe , including the Dutch Government , understand that comparisons are useful , as regards what we do with the Muslims in our society , and to take stock .
I advocate a comparative study into the different kinds of policies which exist , so that this study can form the basis for tracing the shortcomings in certain countries .
Governments will then be able to modify their policies based on experience from their colleagues in other countries .
But it is important for Muslims to know European culture well too , as is true for many Europeans .
It is very important to know how the constitutions and legal systems of Europe function .
It is important to know that we in Europe are generally of the opinion that the competencies of various institutions , such as those of religious communities and public authorities , must not be confused .
A religious community which appropriates the competencies and means which really belong to the state is on the wrong track , and vice versa .
I think this is at the heart of the so-called fundamentalist issue .
In my opinion , people who have a different view in the world of Muslims or in fundamentalist circles are not really a problem for the European Union .
To repeat , a problem only arises if there are gross violations of the law and conflicts with public order .
I appreciate the fact that we speak our mind clearly in this Parliament , including where the media and our own citizens are concerned : that we have a positive policy , and that we give a clear signal that we take the Muslim citizens in Europe - who contribute greatly to our culture and economy - seriously , and that we accept them as citizens too .
Mr President , Mr Oostlander 's report contains a number of positive points and proposals , particularly where it calls for tolerance towards different religions and cultures , where it warns us against mixtures of religions and fundamentalist deviations of these religions , and where it recommends measures to deprive religious extremists of favourable ground in Europe .
However , I regret the fact that Mr Oostlander chose to look solely at Islamic fundamentalism , and the speech he has just given has not convinced me .
Of course , this type of fundamentalism was tragically illustrated by the wave of attacks in France .
However , does this mean to say that no other type of religious extremism constitutes a threat ?
In fact , the tragedy which we deplored today shows that in Northern Ireland , where the Orange Order does not accept being deprived of its annual provocations , the fundamentalists are not prepared to mark time .
Certainly , the rapporteur deliberately omitted this problem which , I admit , goes beyond a purely religious problem , but other Christian forms of fundamentalism are at work in Europe .
Europeans value their security , yet they also value their freedom , particularly their freedom to lead their personal and private lives as they wish .
The anti-abortion commandos , guided by Catholic fundamentalists , have not killed as yet in Europe as their American counterparts have done . However , they clearly demonstrate this movement 's determination to impose its objectives and values , even by force : the return to an imposed moral order and the intrusion of religious issues into the public sphere , as well as threats to the status of women , the rights of homosexuals and secularity , and all this accompanied by violently xenophobic and anti-Semitic statements .
This struggle by Catholic fundamentalists for a regression of society , for interference in the private sphere , is laden with threats and violence towards the rule of democratic law and freedoms .
We should have been worrying about this , starting from today .
I know the rapporteur intentionally avoided this aspect of things and I regret that .
As regards Islamic fundamentalism , it seems to me that the opportunity has been missed to remind certain Member States of their responsibilities - Member States which , for honourable reasons of tolerance , but also for other reasons which are perhaps less worthy , welcome into their territory and tolerate core activities of Islamic terrorism .
The struggle to be carried out must be collective , loyal and free from ulterior motives .
I would have thought it useful to remind the Member States of that with this report .
Mr President , on behalf of the Group of the European People 's Party , it is a real pleasure for me to take the floor to talk about this report by Mr Oostlander .
I think it is a magnificent report , both in its original drafting and in its present form , rounded off with the amendments we have all signed .
Obviously , this report confines itself to a limited scope - as Mrs Lindeperg has pointed out - but there can be little doubt that its conclusions can be extrapolated to any form of fundamentalism .
What is included within the scope of this report ?
Well , it points out once again , loud and clear , that we live in an open society based , in the last analysis , on democracy , the rule of law , the defence of human rights and the separation of powers .
In particular , as Mr Oostlander underlined very well , it is based on religion being a private matter for each and every one of us , of no significance to the state .
As a result , people can hold any view they like , as long as they keep within the law , the legal framework and the legal order .
What this report reveals is how complicated and dangerous it can be when ideas which should remain in that private sphere begin to be used to recruit people to commit violence , and cause real problems for social coexistence .
Undeniably , Mrs Lindeperg , you said this report has shortcomings , which I do not see as such .
We have said that this report voluntarily restricts itself to these aspects .
There are other very serious forms of fundamentalism , and I come from a country which suffers from them : the fundamentalism of people who set up their political ideas , or any other sort of idea , and constantly kill , commit violence and restrict everybody 's freedom .
It is true that all those sorts of fundamentalism are excluded from this report , but Mr Oostlander 's conclusions - which I hope will be approved by an ample majority of this Parliament tomorrow - can be fully extrapolated , in order to proclaim once again that we are an open society , that we want to be an open society , and that an open society is a lawful society , governed by the rule of law and not protected on any other basis , in this case religious , mentioned in Mr Oostlander 's report .

Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Oostlander report calls for the following remarks from my group . The report entitled " Fundamentalism and the challenge to the European legal order ' presupposes , entirely logically , the existence of a commonly accepted definition .
But this is not the case , as is in fact recognized by the rapporteur himself .
This does not mean that the attacks on human rights , the difficulties as regards public order , and even terrorism , mentioned by Mr Oostlander , do not have their place in our debates .
On the contrary , they must be debated within the appropriate framework .
Moreover , concentrating on Islam in the framework of a study on religious fundamentalism , which could irritate the Islamic community , could adversely affect the general balance of the report .
We must be clear : my group believes that everything that comes under the heading " attacks on human rights , terrorism or other highly reprehensible acts ' must be combatted mercilessly .
Several initiatives taken in the context of the third pillar , concerning police and judicial cooperation , have already allowed our Parliament to express its opinion .
It will be the same in future , for the simple reason that the most important work in this field remains to be done .
It stands to reason that we must agree to all the efforts aimed at imposing the rule of law everywhere and in all circumstances .
The phenomenon of fundamentalism as described by our colleague , Mr Oostlander , raises the question of whether the Member States have at their disposal the necessary means to ensure that our values of tolerance and freedom are triumphant .
If they do , we could do without a Parliamentary resolution .
If they do not , then it is not within the framework of a report on fundamentalism - a notion which is not , in fact , very clear - that we need to find a solution .
Other possibilities are available to us : opinions to be given on Commission or Council initiatives , or own-initiative reports .
Why not ?
These points lead me to conclude that my group will not be able to support the Oostlander report .
Mr President , this is not a matter of any sort of discredit to the rapporteur , but is rather a plea to tackle the threats posed to our rule of law in an appropriate context and manner .
Mr President , like the rest of the speakers I have nothing but the highest respect for Mr Oostlander and the work he does in this House , but I have to say I have great difficulty with this report on fundamentalism .
It is not helpful in my view . It could in fact stir up ill-feeling , resentment and a great deal of trouble quite unnecessarily .
There is no satisfactory definition of fundamentalism , no adequate basis , no common ground .
In committee , a disgraceful amendment was tabled in an attempt to establish a link between what was called Christian fundamentalism and neo-Nazi groups .
The main subject of criticism is Islamic fundamentalism , and the report seems to concentrate too much on that .
Regardless of the rights or wrongs of these two hardline positions , we do not need a report calling on the European Union to pursue a preventive policy against any form of violent religious fundamentalism .
It is up to the Member States to deal with violence , whatever its origins or intent .
It is up to the Member States to formulate the most appropriate and responsible policies aimed at integrating religious minorities into society .
Why isolate and point a finger at Islamic fundamentalism when we do not truly understand the meaning and the philosophy behind Islam anyway ?
What about political fundamentalism , or cultural or environmental fundamentalism ?
Why do we not deal with this subject as a whole ?
The report talks about the need not to fuel religious fundamentalism or provoke any unnecessary anti-Western reactions .
Again I say that this report is not helpful .
Indeed , it is guilty of the very thing it is trying to warn about - fundamentalism itself .
Fundamentalists often try to impose acceptance of their views through legislation .
Finally , Mr President , I feel that I must mention the questions to the Commission and in particular Question 53 by Mr Alf Lomas on racism and fundamentalism in Brussels .
It is very important that we look at this question when it comes up in the House .
Mr President , today we are faced with a report which deals with the important , complex subject of fundamentalism .
Because of the time I have available , I would like to mention a few specific points which I do not think are very clear in the report .
Firstly , I regret the fact that when the report talks about violent religious fundamentalism , it makes particular reference to Islamic fundamentalism , when I do not believe this tendency is the birthright of any one religion or another .
They can all suffer from it to a greater or lesser extent , as Mr Oostlander has just recognized .
Nevertheless , his report reveals a clear imbalance in this respect .
As with all religions , not all the exponents of Islam can be lumped together under the same heading . To do so would be extremely irresponsible .
Bearing in mind the diversity of the different Islamic tendencies , the radical trends must be clearly distinguished from those which do not question the values of freedom and democracy in any way whatsoever .
Based on that distinction , I believe that dialogue with European Muslims should be above any potential intransigence or intolerance from one side or another .
In that sense , I think the European Union should realize that a certain Islamic inspiration is a constant feature of political movements in countries of the Muslim world . We should accept that , as long as respect for human rights and democratic freedoms is considered to be an essential condition which can never be given up .
Furthermore , I would like to say that the stereotypes about some religions - including Islam - generally correspond to a lack of information and understanding of the subject . That should be put right by means of an education policy which offers the chance to get to know all religions and cultures , especially as regards history and social relations , and which promotes a truly cross-cultural education , in keeping with Europe 's multicultural nature .
The media should play a major role in this task , by correcting the sometimes easy and frequent inclination towards the clichés , prejudices and mistaken opinions which people hold about cultures different from their own .
Consequently , cultural exchanges should be seen as a two-way exercise , rather than being limited to a significant " if possible ' or " if necessary ' .
It is absolutely essential that we put an end to policies of inequality .
On that basis , with a greater degree of credibility and objectivity , it is likely that we would be able to help stop certain types of fundamentalism .
Mr President , the basic idea behind democracy - the fundamental freedoms - should not be seen as the birthright of any particular culture or tradition , in excessively clear-cut terms .
All cultures should and do have the ability to adapt to democracy and individual freedoms .
Mr President , as regards the challenges which the fundamentalists have presented us with , we must congratulate the rapporteur on the frame of mind which prevailed in the drawing up of this report . It emphasizes , in particular , the importance of preventing violent fundamentalism , seeks to ensure that the elements of trouble do not sow the seeds of disorder and discord within the European Union , and calls for the adoption of a policy of integration , which is particularly dear to the citizens of my country .
However , this text does demonstrate a very worrying tendency .
We move from fundamentalism to religious fundamentalism and from religious fundamentalism to Islam and Muslim fundamentalism , Islam being specifically mentioned in 19 paragraphs of this text .
This all happens as if Opus Dei Catholic fundamentalism were not at work within this or that government in our very own Union , or as if Jewish fundamentalism were not at work in connection with European policy in the eastern Mediterranean .
The report thus sticks to a description , or rather an indictment of Islam , the countries where it rages , and those who are accused of supporting it ; this means that this text is no longer capable of leading to any serious reflection .
Until such time as all the elements of ideological or religious fundamentalism which were discarded are one day tackled as they should be , we will not vote for Mr Oostlander 's report .
Mr President , Wittgenstein the philosopher once said : " What cannot be spoken about should be kept quiet ' .
You should not pronounce on a subject on which you cannot make any definite comments .
Fundamentalism is a phenomenon which is difficult to put into words , certainly if one tries to give it a political meaning .
The present recommendation creates more confusion than clarity .
Fundamentalism is clearly distinguishable from religion .
Somebody believes on the basis of a personal conviction in which experience , reason and heart play a role .
Human power and compulsion play no part in this .
Under fundamentalism , fear and compulsion are central .
It is a case of perverted religion .
This also occurs in ideological movements such as Communism under Stalin and Mao .
Another example is relativism .
A form of this is the unfortunate pronouncement that not a single religion harbours a germ of hatred .
This would allow for tolerance in respect of and by any religion .
But this ignores the pretension to truth on the part of religions .
I am a convinced Christian ; the Bible is for me the Word of God which guides my life .
I know myself saved in Christ , who said : ' I am the Way , the Truth and the Life ' .
Other religions are idolatrous religions , according to this belief .
They harbour , as it were , the germ of hatred in their bosom because they do not recognize the God of the Bible as the only One .
But this conviction cannot be called fundamentalism .
This is created when we compel others to believe the same .
Europe 's past shows instances where we went wrong .
We always see that this occurred where government usurped religious powers or the Church usurped secular powers .
The Church and the State must be separate .
However , that does not make the state neutral , as the report states .
No state is neutral : take Europe .
Our legal orders and democracies are based on Westernized , Christian values .
We have therefore made a choice .
People who come and live here can be asked to fit in with this legal order . But they will not experience this demand as neutral .
Mr President , firstly I should like to put a question to you .
The report is based on a resolution on the dangers of fundamentalism , yet it appears on our order paper as ' Fundamentalism : the challenge to the European legal order ' .
I have looked through the report . I cannot see anywhere where the change of title was agreed .
I hope that you will ask the President , tomorrow morning , to rule whether this change of title is acceptable .
The resolution on which this report is based talks about the horrors of the war in former Yugoslavia , with Christians oppressing Muslims - at least that is one element of it - the massacres in Rwanda and Burundi , the blind fanaticism of Rabin 's assassins - clearly the intention is to include Jewish fundamentalism - and the suicide bombers in Israel - Muslim fundamentalism .
They are all outside the European Union , but the report appears to be about Islamic fundamentalism inside the European Union .
Two mistakes have been made : firstly , this is not a report which should have been produced by the Committee on Civil Liberties and Internal Affairs ; secondly , Mr Oostlander has treated the subject in a particular way which does not coincide with the original wishes of those who tabled the resolution or , for that matter , its nature .
There are 19 references to Islam , but there are no references to any other religions .
The report presents the stereotypical image of Islam as terrorism .
Five pages out of seven in the explanatory statement are about Islam .
I do not know how Europe 's two to three million Muslim citizens actually feel about this .
There is nothing in the report about churches that style themselves ' Christian ' and the racial hatred that they preach . The report likewise fails to mention the fact that people are trying to import this religious fundamentalism into the European Union from the United States .
It does not mention the anti-abortion terrorists who , in the name of Christianity , have murdered those both offering and seeking legal abortions - again a kind of terrorism that people are trying to import here .
It says nothing about the extreme elements around the Orange Order who burnt three Protestant children to death because their mother was a Catholic .
I agree we must stand together to fight terrorism .
I am concerned about the situation as regards Europol .
We have a duty to see where the real threat is coming from .
The friends of the Taliban pose less danger to Europe than the friends of the Ku Klux Clan who sit in the far corner of this Chamber .
Mr President , unlike the previous speaker , I will not incriminate Mr Oostlander for the title he has chosen to give his report .
It is a real problem determining whether certain religions , through their imperialism on civil life and private life , are compatible with our constituent principles , our European values - in other words , the free choice of the individual , the way in which he intends , in the context of laws , to organize his life .
I believe that what we can indeed blame Mr Oostlander for is the fact that he did not give sufficient consideration to this question , which is a fundamental question and one which leads us to what could be a body of principles common to the various countries , and the embryo of a European constitution .
This body of principles , Mr President , has a name in certain countries : a nice name - " secularism ' .
That represents the best defence against all forms of fundamentalism and the encroachments of religion on public life and the private lives of us all .
Mr President , I too think that religion should not form the basis of the consensus to live in society .
But I would like to stress that I was one of the people who signed the draft recommendation to the Council which led to this report .
And when we signed that recommendation , we wanted to underline why we thought it was important to raise our voice now against intolerance , against extremist and fundamentalist trends within any religion , or even against the extremist secular trends which try to prevent people carrying on their way of life if it includes religion . We also wanted to remind people of the horrors we have seen caused by a conflict between two religions in the former Yugoslavia , and also in Ireland , as mentioned by the previous speaker from my group , Mr Ford .

It was a question of seeing how we could establish a dialogue ; how we could talk to religious leaders and promote all those good practices which could help to overcome such conflicts .
And we did it in the aftermath of the Islamic Conference in Iran , because we thought it was important to draw attention to some of the female voices - which I want to mention specifically - within Islam and certain other religions , which are attempting to make progress towards a better life and peaceful coexistence .
I thought that was an interesting initiative .
On the other hand , I think an initiative which can instead be easily misunderstood as a negative sign by the millions of Muslims living in Europe is dangerous .
I do not have time to go into more details , but I am going to vote against this report .
Mr President , it was with great interest that I read Mr Oostlander 's report .
It concerns a topic which is both sensitive and difficult to manage .
The basic issue is what attitude we should take towards various kinds of religious extremism .
The answer we give is closely related to respect for fundamental human rights and freedoms .
However , it is also necessary to set clear boundaries on the kind of behaviour we can never accept , regardless of the justification .
Tolerance is an obvious starting point .
Within the bounds of religious freedom there is room for quite a number of faiths , even some extreme ones .
However , the boundary has definitely been crossed if there is violence or any kind of compulsion .
Then it is no longer an issue of freedom of expression and freedom of religion .
Our duty then is to protect weak , vulnerable people and to safeguard the basic values of society .
In the Union we have actively participated for several years in the work of creating a safer and more secure Europe .
A large number of initiatives have also been undertaken .
Let me begin with police cooperation . The Europol Convention has now finally been ratified .
The rapporteur complains that Europol will not be able to deal with terrorism for another two years .
However , the Member States and the Commission have both now agreed that the cooperation shall start on 1 January 1999 .
In fact , the first stage of the preparation work started last month when a project group was set up .
In his report , the rapporteur also urges the Union to conduct a consistent and unanimous policy towards governments which in various ways encourage , support or tolerate terrorism .
I think that is already happening .
A large number of both political and practical measures show that the EU 's Member States actively and continuously work to improve the fight against terrorism in Europe .
This is done both through internal coordination , such as through the liaison officers who are put in place , and through continuous dialogue with countries outside the Union .
There is also a worthwhile coordination with the help of various working groups which have been established within both the second and third pillars .
This , too , has made it easier for the Member States to conduct a dialogue on how we can combat terrorism with joined forces .
As far as sanctions against countries suspected of supporting or permitting terrorism are concerned , the Member States clearly prefer to act through international fora such as the United Nations .
Mr President , we also set great store by the work which is being done to prevent the occurrence of various kinds of acts of violence .
A number of initiatives have been undertaken to promote tolerance and increased understanding both inside and outside the Union 's borders .
This has been done within the framework of various cooperation agreements , among other things .
One example is the Euro-Mediterranean Agreement and the Barcelona Declaration which is the basis of this agreement .
This stipulates , for example , regular meetings between representatives of various faiths , religious institutions , theologians , academics and other concerned parties .
In addition , these measures have been followed up by a number of efforts which reached their climax at a seminar on dialogue between cultures and civilizations in Stockholm in April 1988 .
The Commission has also encouraged several other initiatives to increase dialogue between various cultures .
An example of this was the informal meeting in Toledo in 1995 between representatives of various religious and philosophical traditions .
The discussions emphasized the importance of deepening the dialogue between the religions .
The Commission also supported a similar initiative in Copenhagen in 1996 .
We should also not forget the role of the media in increasing understanding between cultures and religions .
That is why the Commission supports the training of journalists from the Union and other countries at the European Journalism Centre in Maastricht .
This has courses which deal with , among other things , non-discrimination , tolerance and minority issues .
There is also a special media programme which the Commission has set up to increase cooperation between the media in the Mediterranean area .
Mr President , a policy of prevention also has to include measures to improve the integration of religious minorities into society .
I fully support Mr Oostlander 's view that active measures are needed to strengthen their position in the labour market .
In addition , their active participation in political life must also be facilitated and encouraged .
It is important to avoid segregation and discrimination and the acts of violence which almost always result from this .
As far as information and research are concerned , the rapporteur would like to see a comparative study of the positions of Islamic and Muslim organizations in the Member States .
A proposal for the formulation of such a study is already being drawn up by the Commission .
A meeting is to be held this autumn at which a decision on the extent and content of this study will be taken together with the Member States .
There are already a large number of activities , both in the Member States and at the European level , to increase understanding between cultures and to prevent and combat terrorism based on religious arguments .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12.00 noon .
Cross-border cooperation ( TACIS programme )
The next item is the report ( A4-0179 / 98 ) by Mrs Karamanou , on behalf of the Committee on Regional Policy , on the communication from the Commission to the Council , the European Parliament , and the Committee of the Regions on cross-border cooperation within the framework of the TACIS programme ( COM ( 97 ) 0239 - C4-0280 / 97 ) .
Mr President , Mrs Karamanou , from a long way away from the Baltic Sea , has produced a well-informed report on the problems of the Baltic region .
I should like to thank her for that .
The biggest problem in the development of the TACIS programme is bureaucracy , and there are two types .
There is the EU bureaucracy in the granting of aid and the bureaucracy that exists in the countries receiving the aid .
EU aid programmes on the one hand often lack cohesion , and on the other hand tend to overlap , and fail to coordinate aid between different Community programmes . There should be coordination and there should be responsible coordinators .
With TACIS we are talking about very small sums of money .
To a certain extent they are earmarked so that the best projects do not always get selected .
TACIS money is an EU policy buffer against countries receiving aid .
For example , the EU committed itself , via the G7 group , to the construction of the reactor shelter at Chernobyl without the committed parties having legally-based funds in the budget for it .
The policy money required is to be taken out of the TACIS programme .
As such , it is a political reserve fund .
This criticism is not necessarily aimed at cross-border cooperation .
There are often two parties involved , who are known to each other .
Because of that it is possible to spend funds more wisely than , for example , extending them to Siberia , where there are no corresponding parties .
Siberia certainly needs the money .
But it is important always to promote those projects we can keep an eye on .
It would seem that TACIS aid is largely monopolized , and funds often go to places where they have an excellent technique in applying for aid .
We should get rid of such favouritism in respect of consultants .
Mr President , I too wish to thank Mrs Karamanou for a report that was both excellent and concrete insofar as content is concerned .
Because I myself am the European Parliament 's easternmost Member , from near the Russian border , I cannot help acknowledging the fact that I am very much in touch with problems connected with cross-border cooperation between Finland and Russia .
I therefore think the ideas contained in this report are excellent , that is , that sustainability must be achieved within the framework of the TACIS programmes , and that the TACIS-CBC programmes must , as well as being long-term , be administratively compatible with the INTERREG programme , to ensure the effective usage of funds .
The report proposes common funding for cross-border cooperation .
That would be an excellent way to solve this problem .
I also think it an excellent and most welcome proposal from the Committee on Regional Policy that coordination between TACIS-CBC and INTERREG should be included in structural fund reforms .
Another important contention is that we try to prioritize cooperation between regional authorities , and that , in the future , when we have got rid of these administrative problems , funds available for the TACIS-CBC programme must be substantially increased , with environment , the narrowing of social inequality , and concrete solutions for border-crossing points as priorities .
The frontier between Finland and Russia is the frontier between the EU and Russia , and the European Union must also bear the responsibility for smooth and contained operations at border-crossing points .
Mr President , my congratulations to the rapporteur , who showed in the Committee on Regional Policy that , with great charm and powers of persuasion , she made a success of this report .
There are a very few points , however , with which I would disagree . The rapporteur requests a single fund for cross-border projects between the EU and third countries .
I think there is a danger here that funds for programmes which are currently separate might get mixed up with these .
At present we know how much the EU Member States receive and how much non-Member States receive .
That should continue to be the case .
The rapporteur also wants small-scale projects to go ahead without a public tendering procedure , and to make the latter unnecessary .
Although we are all against excessive bureaucracy , it is my opinion that even for small-scale projects the relevant rules of public tendering should be followed .
Lastly , even if some neighbouring countries consider a specific Baltic Sea Programme to be reasonable , my view is that we would need several separate budget headings in future if we were to introduce this .
We should not proceed with such a specific programme .
Mr President , I should first like to congratulate Mrs Karamanou because I think she has produced an excellent report on cross-border cooperation within the framework of the TACIS programme .
Obviously , this is one of the longest borders of the European Union - the 1 300 kilometres separating Russia and Finland . There has been persistent confrontation along that border , which has been completely closed for a long time .
Along these borders with the countries of the east , cross-border cooperation is more complicated than within the European Union .
There are economic , social , cultural and organizational differences , and cooperation becomes much more difficult .
It is right that regional and local authorities should participate .
Cross-border cooperation often takes place at municipal level , but in order to be effective , there needs to be more coordination and transparency , and local authorities need to be given information and training on what they can do in the field of cross-border cooperation .
Otherwise the programmes get bogged down in bureaucracy and , in that sense , they end up not being effective .
It is true that infrastructure needs to be built in these projects . It must also be remembered that cross-border projects are not projects in the border zones .
They are projects which pass from one side of the border to the other , and help to bring the people on the two sides closer together .
Mr President , the Green Group in the European Parliament is also very satisfied with Mrs Karamanou 's report on the TACIS programme .
We warmly support the basic proposals it contains , such as the notion of one integrated funding system , and the idea that all activity should be coordinated very visibly in conjunction with other funding instruments , like INTERREG , for example .
It is very important for TACIS to become a flexible instrument in this way , because the problems that exist on the other side of the EU 's eastern border are immense , and it is surely worth reminding everyone once more of the gulf that still exists in standards of living between Russia and Finland .
It is considered to be greater than that between the USA and Mexico .
I believe in future we must lay much more emphasis on problems of the environment , and we think it is right that the report separately identifies the problems of nuclear safety .
Right across the border from the European Union and Finland there are dozens of extremely dangerous nuclear reactors : in the Kola peninsula , in St. Petersburg , and right up in the north of the Kola peninsula in Murmansk there are military reactors , which we should also turn our attention to .
Luckily , the European Union has to some extent supported preliminary efforts now to solve these enormous problems .
But we should also aim to actually shut down these nuclear reactors completely and deal with the problems of nuclear waste in a satisfactory manner .
I would still like to mention that it is terribly important that proper social policy be developed in Russia , exactly because of this huge gap in the standard of living .
If that does not happen , the problems are certain to blow up in our hands .
Mr President , Madam Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to congratulate the rapporteur very warmly on her report .
This report underlines the need for us , the European Parliament , constantly to examine the developments which take place on the periphery of our Union and , particularly , to examine occasionally how the Commission implements policies , particularly in the case of important foreign policy programmes such as MEDA , TACIS and PHARE .
We know - and several speakers have already referred to this - that in the field of TACIS we are concerned with countries whose policies are based on very different traditions from those we are used to .
For this reason , the Commission deserves understanding if it sometimes does not immediately achieve the desired results .
On the other hand , we can and must expect the Commission to state quite clearly what requirements it thinks it must have in order to be able to implement these policies properly , for example in the field of TACIS .
In the end it is only in this way that policies can be accepted .
After all , Parliament exists for the purposes of examining this .
An example of an issue which has not yet been mentioned in this discussion is the fact that the Committee on Budgets , in relation to the use of funds for cross-border cooperation - TACIS - discovered that in 1996 and 1997 a total of ECU 58 000 was used from the estimated sum of ECU 60 million .
I hope that in a later report we will be able to note better execution of the project , and that by then the implementation of the projects you mentioned will have been improved .
Mr President , the TACIS programme is intended to try and ease the switch to democracy and a market economy in certain targeted countries - that is , Russia , other countries once part of the Soviet Union and Mongolia - and promote the integration of these countries into the world economy .
Finnish consultants have succeeded in establishing good projects through the programme particularly in the border regions of Russia , and obviously elsewhere .
Experiences with the TACIS programme have not always been positive however .
It is typical of projects that the foreign firm brings along experts , and local expertise and resources are not used , although they exist and are of high quality .
This has understandably led to rancour , especially in Russia .
Furthermore , the programme lacks a proper investment component .
Although increased opportunities for investment have already been spoken of , there has been no real change in the situation as yet .
What is the point of making technical and economic analyses if no changes can be implemented , even though the records show them to be beneficial ?
Opportunities for funding therefore have to be improved considerably .
I wish to finish by laying emphasis on the importance of the speedy resolution of environmental and nuclear safety problems that exist in the Russian / EU border regions by using the TACIS programme to its best advantage .
Mr President , I too would like to congratulate the honourable Member , Mrs Karamanou , for the report and resolution on TACIS cross-border cooperation . Such cooperation will become increasingly important in the future .
An enlarged EU will have extended frontiers with Russia .
It will have frontiers with Ukraine , Belarus and Moldova as well as direct access to the Black Sea .
TACIS cross-border cooperation will contribute to economic development and stability throughout the whole region .
The report identifies actions in the field of environment and energy efficiency as priorities .
The Commission shares this view . It is reflected in the fact that more than 30 % of the 1996 and 1997 programme budget was allocated to projects in these fields .
Another issue highlighted in the report is the need to support the removal of practical obstacles to border crossing and customs clearance .
A large part of the projects under the TACIS cross-border cooperation programme relates to improvements in these areas .
In the future these activities will not only be concentrated on local transits . Projects will also be directed to border crossings on the main transport corridors linking the newly independent states with central and western Europe .
There have been delays in the implementation of the programme but , as the rapporteur underlines , this is to a large extent a consequence of the cross-border character of the cooperation .
The implementation of projects relating to infrastructure has been shown to be particularly complex . They often involve many ministries as well as various authorities .
However , improvements should be made .
A stronger link to existing administrative structures in other EU cross-border cooperation programmes is one example .
The Commission shares the rapporteur 's view that training and development of local administrations must be another priority for cross-border cooperation .
The Commission has allocated ECU 1 million to regional capacity-building initiatives for 1997 .
The projects are on the way to being implemented .
Finally , I should like to emphasize that cross-border cooperation in central and eastern Europe will become increasingly important .
Parliament 's report and today 's debate have been a useful contribution to the development of the Union 's policy in this field .
The Presidency congratulates the rapporteur , Mrs Karamanou , on the broad acceptance by the House of this important report .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12.00 noon .
( The sitting was closed at 7.50 p.m. )
Approval of the Minutes
The Minutes of the previous sitting have been distributed .
Are there any comments ?
( The Minutes were approved )
Aid for Bosnia
I was asked yesterday at the beginning of the session to make a statement on behalf of the Commission concerning irregularities or possible fraud in connection with a number of contracts in the field of humanitarian aid .
These contracts were signed in 1993 and 1994 to provide humanitarian aid for former Yugoslavia and the Great Lakes region of Africa .
UCLAF has , since the autumn of 1997 , been conducting an inquiry into aspects of these contracts .
In the course of the investigations suspicion arose of the existence of serious irregularities .
During the last week the inquiry led to suspicion being cast on a particular official in the Commission .
These suspicions were strong enough to allow legal proceedings to be initiated .
Last week , in the light of these facts , the Commission handed over the findings to the relevant legal authorities in the Member State concerned .
UCLAF will , of course , give its full cooperation .
In accordance with the agreement on the exchange of information , Parliament 's Committee on Budgetary Control has been informed of these initial findings .
As the President said , I have also agreed with the chairperson to have a meeting on the issue this week .
At the same time the Commission has started disciplinary proceedings against one official suspected of involvement .
In the meantime the official in question has been suspended .
Since legal proceedings have now been initiated , I am sorry that I am not in a position to give you more details at this stage .
Madam Commissioner , I can hear various interjections from Members .
The announcement was very brief and , because of the sensitivity of the matter , I wonder to what extent it satisfied the justified concerns of Members . But I would ask Members to hold a debate tomorrow during the extraordinary sitting of the Committee on Budgetary Control , in order to avoid having this debate now , in an unorganized way , during the part-session .
Competitiveness of the textile and clothing industry
The next item is the report ( A4-0224 / 98 ) by Mr Ribeiro , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy , on a communication from the Commission on a plan of action to increase the competitiveness of the European textile and clothing industry ( COM ( 97 ) 0454 - C40626 / 97 ) .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to start off by applauding the fact that the Commission has drawn up and sent the European Parliament this document entitled ' Plan of action to increase the competitiveness of the European textile and clothing industry ' , which is the reason for my report , quite apart from its contents and guidelines .
This document follows the setting-up of the Bangemann working parties , one of which is concerned with textiles and clothing , and this reflects the importance of the sector .
Although as rapporteur I have much more time than usual , it is still not long enough to give a proper idea of that importance , which in any case is generally acknowledged , and I will therefore make no attempt to reproduce everything the report contains .
I would , however , emphasize that textiles represent over 4 % of value added in EU industry and double that for at least one Member State , in which , with 8 % of the EU 's industrial jobs , that proportion is over 25 % , a third of its exports being dependent on that sector , whereas another Member State , with a very different industrial structure , is simultaneously the biggest exporter and the biggest importer .
The total weight and quality of the percentage represented by textiles and clothing therefore varies throughout the EU , according to quotas and Member States , and even more if we take sectoral peculiarities into account .
It is those very peculiarities , and the possible existence of different attitudes - particularly as regards competitiveness - that create a risk of fragmentation , preventing the industry from being dealt with as a whole , with a minimum of cohesion .
The adoption of a ' production chain ' approach seems to be central to that purpose .
The industry has its own inner cohesion through its ' production chain ' and , if it to be competitive either at Member State level or at EU level , we have to look at it in a balanced way and as a whole .
This position has been approved by the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy .
It could nevertheless have gone further , in my opinion , by including in the textile ' production chain ' certain activities which , while they are essential to the textile / clothing industry , cannot be considered to be included within the intrinsic industrial definition of the sector .
Thus , without prejudice to the importance of upstream and downstream activities , it seems to me essential that we should define the limits of the spinning , weaving and garment-making ' production chain ' .
That is the reason for the two amendments I am tabling , which I hope will be accepted .
This report , which is the result of collective efforts and numerous visits and consultations , has been unanimously approved by the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy .
I would like to thank my fellow Members for the amendments they have suggested with a view to improving it . I think in almost every case that has been the result .
I would only wish to oppose those submitted by Mrs de Rose and Mr des Places , not because I disagree with their contents , but because I think those ideas area already contained in the draft resolution , and it would be overloaded if they were included .
The same applies to Amendments Nos 25 and 30 .
All the others have my support even though they may somewhat overload the draft resolution .
I would also like to emphasize that the other Commissions ' opinions have been extremely helpful in enriching our perspective .
Particularly that of the REX Committee , with its special interest in competitiveness , whose suggestions are presented by Mrs Ferrer , in the form of additions to the motion for a resolution .
These have my total support .
I think this has enhanced the thinking in the Commission 's document .
Against the backdrop of a global ' production chain ' approach , greater importance is attached to labour-intensive activities , rejecting the inevitability of contracting-out or globalization , which will be all the more relevant inasmuch as the sector represents over 2 million jobs , has lost 600 000 jobs in recent years and , unless something is done about it , we can predict that hundreds of thousand more will be lost .
The role of training is highlighted , as is the need to deal with the specific questions of women 's jobs and lack of job security , and even clandestine and child labour , which give the sector a special and highly delicate social relevance .
During the process , this House will have played a decisive role in getting the Commission to confirm that what it had presented as a plan of action was a discussion paper .
The Industry Council of 7 May itself admitted this and , instead of being completed , we might say the process is just beginning in the sense of coming up with a real and necessary plan of action .
It was Parliament 's wish to contribute to that Council with its oral question and resolution as then approved , without prejudice to the preparation of this report .
This is the point of view from which the motion for a resolution has been framed .
Whereas Parliament had been excluded from the process until the Commission 's document came before it , from then on it has wanted to play a full part .
And it wants to go on doing so .
If the plan of action has become a discussion paper , this resolution will contribute to that discussion within the framework it defines .
I would therefore re-emphasize and reinforce point 20 of the motion for a resolution , which calls on the Commission to continue the dialogue launched with the two sides of industry , to coordinate and monitor the measures to be adopted to improve competitiveness in the sector , and to bear in mind that Parliament should participate in that dialogue and that discussion .
Fully participate in them .
To make sure there is and will be a real , meaningful and necessary plan of action .
Mr President , Commissioner , whether liberalization represents an opportunity or a threat to the European textile and clothing industry does not depend solely on the industry 's own efforts .
Therefore , Commissioner , the dialogue you have encouraged between the Commission , the Member States ' authorities and the social partners within the sector ought to be greatly welcomed . The aim of that dialogue is to define strategies , bearing in mind the challenges posed by the globalization of the economy .
As a result of that dialogue , the social partners presented a report in which they specified the measures which , in their view , should be promoted at Community level . That report formed the basis of the Commission communication on measures to increase the competitiveness of this industry that we are now debating .
Well , that communication concentrates more on describing the problems and assessing the policies the Commission has been implementing than on providing concrete proposals in response to the demands put forward by the social partners with a view to improving companies ' competitiveness and profiting from the liberalization of the markets .
At least , that is how we in the Committee on External Economic Relations interpreted the contents of the communication and the impression it gives .

So we think that over and above the proposed measures in the areas of training , research and development , information technologies or implementation of the internal market , much more emphasis should have been placed on questions of access to third-country markets and respect for the rules and obligations arising out of international agreements .
In particular , the Commission should have proposed specific measures to end fraud and combat dumping practices effectively and within a reasonable time-span ; or to get rid of the imbalances caused by the technical and administrative obstacles which continue to hinder the access of European products to foreign markets ; or to protect intellectual property , which is so important given that the European industry specializes in design and fashion ; and to stimulate exports and promote the image of European products - the famous EXPROM line which , unfortunately , is diminishing all the time , because of a lack of legal base , we are told .
That is the precise gist of the amendments which were approved unanimously by the Committee on External Economic Relations and which I have tabled , in agreement with Mr Ribeiro , with the intention of getting them incorporated into the text of the resolution which accompanies his excellent report - on which I wish to congratulate you , Mr Ribeiro .
I hope the House will vote in favour of these amendments , and the whole Ribeiro report .
There is no doubt that these amendments and the whole text of the resolution will make a clear and full contribution to providing the solutions which the textile and clothing industry , and all the social partners , are asking the European Union for .
I want to end by calling upon the Commission to accept the amendments .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Ribeiro report on a ' Plan of Action for the competitiveness of the textile and clothing industry ' , proposed by the Commission , deserves our acceptance to a certain extent .
By stating in the report that the proposal is not specific and lacks cohesion and specific commitments , in terms of both financing and a timetable for implementing it , he gives greater credibility and accuracy both to the conclusions and suggestions contained in the report by the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy and to those produced by the specialist committees that have been asked to give their opinion on the Plan of Action we are now debating .
We think it appropriate to place the main emphasis on the social aspects which necessarily underlie the subject under discussion .
We must therefore take prompt measures to slow the galloping job losses in the sector , which has a high proportion of poorly qualified labour and female employees .
In accordance with the employment policy guidelines , it is important that Member States should reduce indirect labour costs , particularly those arising from poorly qualified labour .
Because of rapid technological advances , professional training schemes never get beyond the experimental stage .
To maintain competitiveness in the sector we shall need to anticipate future developments as early as possible and apply them to training systems immediately .
Small and medium-sized enterprises merit special attention : their limited capacity makes it extremely difficult for them to invest in innovative professional training projects .
The sectoral framework agreement that the two sides of industry are already in the process of negotiating will be welcome ; it is needed to bring renewed and greater hopes of improvement in the employment situation , by concentrating our efforts in the areas of promotion , professional training , competitiveness and quality .
We endorse the code of conduct signed by the two sides of the industry in Europe and the idea of introducing a certificate of quality to be awarded to textile products produced in socially acceptable conditions , so as to prevent social dumping .
By ensuring the observance of internationally accepted labour regulations , this code of conduct has provided an appropriate instrument for promoting minimum standards in the workplace , even in third countries which use child labour and have extremely low pay levels .
It should be borne in mind that in certain Member States , because of the proportion of jobs it provides , the textiles and clothing industry plays a key role in the balance of trade and the economic fabric of some of its regions which depend on the sector .
Despite this , the European Union should specifically enforce the measures its Member States or their most deprived regions are calling for , thus demonstrating true solidarity , and achieving real economic and social cohesion .
Mr President , the Commission has presented a plan of action to increase competitiveness of the European textile industry . Unfortunately , the plan was produced too late , as though this were a marginal or relatively unimportant subject .
Our industry has now been suffering for years from unbridled competition from developing countries - and neither the Member States nor Europe are prepared to come up with an effective political and economic solution .
As a result of this competition , 600 000 jobs were lost in Europe between 1990 and 1996 and textile production fell by 4.9 % .
In the clothing sector alone , 3.7 % of production was lost .
When consulted for its opinion , the Committee on Regional Policy , Regional Planning and Relations with Regional and Local Authorities stated that it considered the proposal to be very willing to diagnose the problems and that it contained useful points but at the same time it lacked firm foundations , consistency and - above all - strategies in terms of financial investment and time frameworks .
I fully agree with the opinion of the Committee on Regional Policy and sincerely hope the entire Parliament will endeavour to ensure this sector is no longer neglected .
Today the European Parliament will be discussing the reform of the Structural Funds - and this reform cannot ignore the textile sector .
It is therefore important to ensure that the Commission 's plan of action includes actions and programmes that will help , motivate and provide training for all the small and medium-sized enterprises ultimately responsible for spearheading change . This must be carried out throughout all regions dependent on textile manufacture , rich and poor alike .
Proper backing and proper financial support must be made available for this training - and also to fund research and development to continue the good work of the RETEX and EXPROM programmes .
I therefore ask the Commission to revise its plans in order to fill the gaps and to include the proposals put forward by the European Parliament .
Mr President , let me first of all say to the Commissioner , that his action plan is very welcome to me as a Member of this Parliament .
I represent a region which is heavily dependent on the textile industry .
In Nottinghamshire and Derbyshire over 48 000 people are employed in clothing and textiles and in one area alone - Ashfield - it represents 24 % of manufacturing .
However , since Christmas 1997 there have been major job losses of 3 000 people , over 5 % of manufacturing .
In the UK nationally we have lost some 25 000 jobs out of 380 000 , partly as a direct result of your decision to impose import duties on grey cotton .
In my region we have an action plan using Objective 2 funding , the European Social Fund and RETEX funds worth some 1.8 million over the next three years .
Yet regional aid for many of our textile areas is under threat .
The Commission 's Agenda 2000 proposal makes no provision to replace the RETEX programme , and Objective 2 areas are to be reduced .
My discussion with local , regional and national companies and organizations representing the textile sector indicates that your action plan is indeed very welcome .
They need access to investment capital for the latest high-tech machinery , support to allow traditional manufacturing to move into specialist niche markets and a branding project to promote EU manufacturing .
And of course there is the other side of the coin , proper labelling of origin .
I do not need to tell you , Commissioner , that competitiveness is the name of the game and I believe that your plan will help deliver the desired competitive gains .
But such plans need resources in order to be effective .
New money may not be necessary , but existing resources will have to be targeted in a coordinated and cohesive manner to underpin the points in your plan .
We believe it is good to set targets and goals to enable the plan to be implemented .
Any company business plan would be toothless if it did not do this and identify the sources of funding .
I hope , Commissioner , that you will reply to these points when you sum up .
I have often listened to debates and spoken to industry , the social partners , who I believe know their own business .
I hope that you will continue to work very closely with the industry , Commissioner , to deliver the competitive gains .
It remains imperative to promote access for EU companies to third country markets and we welcome a programme of coordination and proposals in this area .
Let me finish by saying what the industry does not need .
It does not need old- fashioned protectionism , which you have delivered in the decision on grey cotton imports .
I will be the first to defend Commission anti-dumping duties and quotas where they are justified , but , when they are not in the interests of the industry , I will be the first to defend my textile finishers , not only in my region but also across the EU .
For your bedtime reading , Commissioner - if you would like to look this way - I would therefore recommend that you study this document , in which the finishing industry makes its case for abolition of the provisional duties that you imposed in March .
I hope that you will listen to the industry .
I hope that you will take a decision that respects the common interest of the industry at all levels , including finishers , producers and weavers .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the report before us on the competitiveness of the European textile and clothing industry sends a clear message .
This sector has for a number of years been faced with major changes and challenges , and its competitive position and employment policy measures are matters which will continue to be the subject of intense debate .
In Austria this sector of the economy is the one which pays absolutely the lowest wages .
The industry is a major employer of women and is under increasingly fierce competitive pressure , with the result that many businesses have had to close .
About 2 million people are currently employed in the European textile industry .
Since 1990 , as we have already heard , some 600 000 jobs have been lost .
The Commission has now devised a plan of action to counter this trend .
This is a very welcome initiative , and indeed proposals of a more concrete nature could also be drawn up with a view to providing support for small and medium-sized enterprises and increasing the competitive potential of this sector .
Of course attention must also be paid to promoting innovation and the use of new technologies , which in the long run will provide the key to success .
It seems to me to be particularly important - and my amendments should illustrate this - not to distort competition or to discriminate against businesses operating in the home market .
The textile and clothing industry is in a rapidly changing competitive environment .
This applies especially to third countries , where the circumstances are often quite different .
I also wish to refer to the amendments proposed by Mrs Ferrer , which seek more effective action against unfair practices by deploying every available means of protection laid down by international agreement .
There should be no discrimination against the exports for these markets .
I wish to conclude by saying that training measures are of course particularly important for the clothing industry , as in the long run consumers will only buy the goods they want .
This is the key to the unemployment problem .
We simply have to ensure that the products available in this area are those which the consumer wishes to purchase .
I believe that training is one of the most important instruments here .
We have to provide training not only for the technical staff but also for those on the managerial side .
We must try to introduce the latest business management methods and for this reason we should take every possible action to ensure that a proper training strategy is adopted for this sector .
Mr President , the textile industry occupies a key place amongst the industrial activities of the European Union , since it is a labour-intensive sector .
At a time when employment is the Union 's most serious social problem , this industry deserves very special attention from Europe 's institutions .
I have followed closely the work of my own committee , the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy , and the other committees whose opinions have been expressed here , and I want to express the support of the Group of the European Liberal De Democrat and Reform Party for both the Ribeiro report and the proposals made by Mrs Ferrer and Mr Mendonça .

I would like to stress particularly that these proposals aim to increase the competitiveness of the textile industry .
It is not a question of protecting it , or sheltering it indefinitely from foreign competition . It is a question of making sure it enjoys a level of competitiveness which allows it to occupy a secure position as regards international competition .
For that reason , I should like to make special mention of paragraphs 5 and 6 of the Ribeiro report .
Paragraph 5 stresses the proposal to promote innovation and the use of new technologies , as well as the interaction of all the chains of the industry .
Not long ago there was an intervention which I think was mistaken , where only one aspect of one subsector of the textile industry was considered . It is a mistake to come up with a plan for the textile industry based only on one specific sector - there has been talk of the finishing sector - rather than considering it in its entirety .
Lastly , I want to underline the very important point in the Ferrer opinion about respecting the EU 's agreements and rules with respect to the textile industry in the area of international trade so as to avoid unfair competition which results in an unfair loss of jobs , all for the lack of an adequate basis to guarantee the necessary continuity in the textile industry in a context of international competitiveness .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , everyone acknowledges the predominant position of the textile and clothing industry in the European Union , which is important in economic and commercial terms , but also , and above all , in terms of jobs .
European business is faced with fierce international competition .
Companies are most concerned by globalization , above all else .
They are obliged , more than anything , to cope with social dumping , which they find particularly damaging .
From now on , as our rapporteur Mr Ribeiro has stressed , we must seek to introduce a Community strategy to boost the competitive stance of European business , and I believe that the Commission supports this .
I represent the Nord-Pas-de-Calais region in France , where the textile sector has for some time played a major part in the local economy .
The difficulties experienced by this sector in the past and , indeed , still today have had a profound effect on our entire regional policy .
Even within the Union , we have encountered competitive situations amongst Member States which at the time were highly damaging .
With the introduction of the euro , such situations seem unlikely to occur again .
I am pleased to note the intention of the Commission to draw up a Community plan of action to increase the competitiveness of the European textile and clothing industry . But , after reading the statement by the Commission , I feel I have to agree with the rapporteur that this report is more like a simple list of good intentions than the genuinely proactive strategy that business expects .
Business needs a more robust expression of support from the European Union and the Member States .
The previous French government implemented a plan of support for the textile industry . This clearly delineated plan had begun to produce positive results .
Unfortunately , the Commission rejected it as illegal .
That is why I am taking the opportunity of the debate on this report to ask the Commission to go even further in its proposals , because that way lies the wellbeing of countless businesses , the continuance of a large number of jobs and , ultimately , the survival of individual regions in the Union .
Mr President , I would first of all like to congratulate Mr Ribeiro on his report .
I think that he has vividly described the crisis faced by one of the most important industrial sectors of the European Union .
During the period 1990-1996 more than 600 000 jobs were lost and it is anticipated that over the coming years a further 800 000 jobs will go .
In particular , the impact on female employment must be stressed , given that the sector is dominated by women doing highly intensive work .
When will the European Union draw the obvious conclusions in terms of policy ?
Competition is all very well , but the production base and jobs are being destroyed .
The European Union , as a result of the broader policy that it is pursuing , but more especially as a result of its industrial policy , is fundamentally undermining the sector and is reinforcing the tendency for units or centres of production to relocate to countries with low labour costs .
The European Union bears the gravest of responsibilities , because it has not taken care to protect European production , even at the most elementary level , from unfair competition on the part of countries that practice social dumping .
The plan of action that has been presented by the Commission will not reverse the current unacceptable situation .
The problems pervading the sector cannot be solved without a more general review not only of competition policy but also of the industrial and commercial policy of the European Union .
The only way to achieve growth in the sector and increased employment is a policy addressing the issue of competitiveness , with a view to supporting production and investments to modernize existing production centres , to promote full and stable employment and a change in policy with regard to cotton , coupled with measures to combat commercial and social dumping ,
Mr President , what we are dealing with here is not just an Iberian or McCarthy matter , but the question of whether or not to establish a model for European industry policy .
This basically means that we have to do our own homework rather than looking for scapegoats elsewhere .
We have to apply ourselves to the innovative development of high-quality products using considerable mental input , instead of pinning our hopes primarily on anti-dumping measures .
Competitiveness is not essentially a question of costs but rather a matter of developing a quality strategy , whereby we would focus additionally on regional diversification , on conversion plans and on eliminating child labour , homeworking and undeclared employment , which still typify some parts of this industry , and concentrate on developing specific devices , such as environmental labelling and declarations that proper environmental standards are being adhered to , so that customers can really find the quality products they are looking for .
Mr Rübig , offering goods for sale and expecting those goods to be purchased by the customer naturally assumes that there will continue to be mass purchasing power .
This does not apply in situations where real wage levels are falling .
One question which we still need to ask the Commission is this : why do we only develop models of this kind when there are specific sectoral difficulties instead of using them as a basis for European industrial policy as a whole ?
Mr President , first of all I would like to congratulate Mr Ribeiro on his excellent report .
This is such a disaster area that we could very soon weary of referring back to catastrophic figures reflecting the thousands of jobs lost in recent years and the confusion sown in entire regions .
I am thinking of all the families affected , especially the women who were the first to feel the impact and , in most cases , found themselves back at the job centre , who could not offer them the slightest hope .
Not the slightest hope . In essence , these words sum up the statement from the Commission .
This catalogue of good intentions is undeniably fascinating with regard to certain proposals , but - quite simply - it lacks ambition .
For years now , and national governments have cause to shoulder some of the responsibility , the Union has pursued a defensive strategy : the strategy of despair .
If we were to highlight the individual checkpoints in the textile sector , we might first consider the drastic relocations that have occurred and their economic and social consequences not only in Europe but also in certain third countries .
Even more to the point , we should press home the advantages to be gained from innovation , quality and training .
But to achieve this we need the right facilities ; for example , we need an enhanced ADAPT programme , or a strategic offensive which would enable us not only to back up restructuring programmes , but also to gain market share and to create new jobs .
Textile companies relocated in Asia just a few years ago are now coming back to Europe , since high-performance machines permit a higher level of competitiveness .
Naturally , these machines require more intensive training and this is one of the problems we have to deal with .
I am not naïve .
I am well aware that some laid-off employees will not necessarily find a job in the textile industry , or might not - once they reach a certain age - benefit from training to a very high level or adapt to information technology .
In any event , we must not leave them standing by the wayside .
I seriously think we should use the European Social Fund to redirect them to the services sector , which is taking off .
All of this is part and parcel of a new more general way of approaching the unemployment problem in Europe , to the extent that after any lay-off , a paid retraining programme should be instituted that does not land the beneficiary in a " parking lot ' training course , but results in a genuine job opportunity .
Finally , Mr President , I would like to say a word about the codes of good conduct established in response to European trade unions for European textile companies investing outside the Union .
That is all very well and good , but the heads of these companies - and not just in the textile sector - are coming to see us and asking the Union to establish such a code , as the American administration did .
On a number of occasions , the European Parliament has asked the Commission to take its responsibility in this respect seriously .
We have not received any positive reply , apart from long speeches in support of codes of good conduct .
The time is up , I think .
This time , the Parliament should explicitly name those services and departments of the Commission that could take up the cudgels and exert more pressure on Mr Santer to rise to this challenge .
Mr President , I wish to begin by congratulating the rapporteur .
I share his concern that a definite plan of action is needed for the European textile industry .
The fact that more than 600 000 jobs were lost in the industry in the first 7 years of the present decade does not bode well for the industry in the next century .
Textiles , possibly more than any other single manufacturing industry in the European Union , can claim to be our traditional industry .
In my own constituency the textile industry was the foundation of industrial development .
I share the rapporteur 's concern that the Commission communication does not provide a specific plan of action .
It is clear that the industry needs such a plan : we need more definite measures which will encourage and support innovation , design , differentiation of products and processes , through research and development and smarter operating methods .
I would also advocate making funds available to support the piloting of imaginative , innovative projects .
Making our textile industry more competitive will require such funding to be made available , and it should be made available in a way which is accessible and easy to administer .
Incorporating piloted projects fully into the industry will also require strong support .
The more all those involved in the European textile industry work together , the better the chance for that industry in our individual Member States to become more competitive .
I fully endorse calls for support for supply-chain initiatives which , amongst other things , would encourage the large retailers in the European Union to develop links with European Union suppliers to facilitate quick response and mass customization of goods .
In line with the same logical pattern of cooperation , assistance for a European textile industry dating service would allow for greater collaboration between businesses in the European Union which share similar ideas but may not always have the means to establish such collaboration .
I note the rapporteur refers to the issue of anti-dumping measures .
The United Kingdom Members were particularly concerned at the effect the provisional measures regarding unbleached cotton grey cloth will have on the national industry .
The episode has displayed the extent to which the industry needs to be a prime candidate for anti-dumping measures .
Finally , I wish to say to the Commissioner that this is not a sunset industry : this is an industry which has a future but requires the support of the Commission of the European Union to ensure that its future is fully realized .
Mr President , Mr Ribeiro 's report presents a very clear picture of the facts , problems and needs of this sector , which is so important for Europe , for our small and medium-sized enterprises and for EU employment policy .
In view of the enormous international competitive pressures I consider it essential that this industry should organize its national production chains more intensively along European lines and should strive to develop a network of transboundary production chains within the integrated economic area .
There needs to be greater interaction between all the different links in the production chain , from the use of specialized machines through garment making to the retail distributors .
The fact that there are different types of textile sub-sector and that there is a high degree of fragmentation within the industry should not prevent this sector being considered and treated as a heterogeneous whole from both an economic and sociopolitical point of view .
We should therefore give our full support to the call for the Commission to submit a new plan of action which focuses more on promoting innovation and on using new technologies .
The SMEs , both as producers of finished products and as suppliers , merit particular attention , not least because of the important role they play in ensuring job stability .
Mr President , may I first of all congratulate the Commission on this plan of action to increase competitiveness in the textile and clothing industry , my colleague Sérgio Ribeiro on the report he has presented to us today , and the draftsmen of the Committees ' opinions .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , we are dealing today with one of the European Union 's principal industrial activities , one which on its own accounts for ECU 200 billion worth of trade , but in relation to which the European Union 's balance of trade with the rest of the world shows a deficit .
There are 120 000 businesses , nearly all of them small or medium-sized , involved in all aspects of the textile and clothing industry , and of over 2 million jobs the majority are occupied by women .
The employment situation in this sector is one of those which has most affected the rate of unemployment in Europe : between 1990 and 1996 600 000 jobs were lost , 100 000 of them in 1996 alone , and unemployment is expected to progress for the next few years , affecting 800 000 jobs , unless something is done to halt it .
Knowing that employment is a decisive issue for the European Union , and that most of the unemployed are women , we therefore demand immediate and far-reaching measures in that area , especially because it affects the least developed countries in the European Union , or those in industrial decline , and the regions that are heavily dependent on the textile and clothing business .
In Portugal , for example , the sector is responsible for over 30 % of industrial production .
The quality textile sector has a future in Europe , and the need to maintain employment and reverse the trade deficit means that the European Union must give the sector strong support , especially by :
implementing properly monitored anti-dumping measures and social conditions in relation to third countries , for example by stipulating a ' social label ' ; -actively supporting small and medium-sized enterprises , especially in the National Action Plans for employment ; -more action on professional training schemes and adaptation to women 's domestic needs , since the great majority of workers in the sector are women ; -increasing subsidies for the promotion of Community textile and clothing exports , particularly by allocating more funds to budget heading B7-852 . In this respect the European Parliament has a special part to play in bringing our financial proposals into line with what we propose to do ; -developing the creation of new products by means of the Fifth Framework Programme on Research and Technological Development ; -improving the way the internal market works and cooperation within the European Union.This is a set of measures the Commission should extend and elaborate on , and they need to be specifically included in the plan of action to increase competitiveness in the textile and clothing industry presented to us today .
This sector is vital to employment and production in the European Union .
Let us be consistent and give it our unequivocal support .
Mr President , we are now discussing the competitiveness of the European textiles and clothing industry .
I welcome the Commission 's plan of action in this area because I believe it is a very important sector for Europe .
It is important for us to talk about this , particularly in the context of continued liberalization within the WTO .
Since the 1970s , several Member States have opened their markets to textile imports and abolished old forms of subsidy .
An enormous change took place in these sectors and areas , and that happened because protection would favour neither increased expertise , development activity nor free trade with new competing countries .
Above all , it was imports from the countries of southern Europe , which were then demanding free trade and access to markets , which revolutionized conditions for , amongst others , Sweden 's industrial districts .
Several decades have now passed .
Today we have high-quality production , but without the same number of workers .
A lot of production has been relocated to places like Estonia .
However , the companies I am now talking about in Sweden 's industrial districts are not helped by distorting financial subsidy programmes within the EU or by textile quotas .
When I hear some colleagues demanding in various terms more protection against textile imports , this does not reflect the EU 's spirit of free trade or solidarity .
The newly democratic counties of central and eastern Europe , and developing countries in other parts of the world , must have access .
They must be allowed to compete with their conditions , and that often means lower wages than the wages we demand in the EU .
I fully respect the fact that we need a transition period .
I support the plan of action and joint efforts to bridge this period .
However , there should be no doubt at all about the objective , that is to say free trade and competition on equal terms .
I support this because I believe that this sector , the European textile industry , has very good conditions .
I do not believe that it is an end in itself for us to try to preserve many of the poor jobs which actually exist in the sector today .
Instead I have faith in this industry and know that it is actually a world leader in several segments and extremely competitive .
However , if we are to succeed in including the whole sector in this , we need an increased ability to change , specialization and a higher know-how content , so that we can compete in a globalized economy .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I am one of those who consider that the Commission 's communication can hardly be called a plan of action .
On the other hand , I do think that the industry should not expect too much from Europe , but that the industry itself and the Member States will have to make the necessary adjustments .
Ladies and gentlemen , what will have to happen to secure the competitiveness of the industry in a global economy ?
Europe has to ensure strict compliance with the rules of the Uruguay round .
Tariff barriers preventing free export have to be lowered and sophisticated techniques to prevent exports from third countries are absolutely forbidden .
European textile producers are , of their own accord , avoiding the need to compete with cheap imported products .
After all , the trumps they hold lie more in quality products , new applications and the use of new technologies .
In this respect , the Fifth European Framework Programme for Research and Technological Development may provide encouragement for many SMEs who are prepared to innovate .
National governments cannot escape their responsibilities .
At every Council meeting , they promise better training and a reduction of labour costs which , by the way , are part of the reason for the black economy in this sector .
It is high time that these promises were kept .
Mr President , in its communication , the European Commission acknowledged that the textile sector has , in recent years , sacrificed a considerable number of jobs .
We all know that the crisis in the textile sector is due mainly to delocalization , increased imports , lower consumption due to unemployment and a drop in incomes , but also to significant delays as regards training , research and equipment modernization .
Nevertheless , the textile industry still represents a promising sector for the future of Europe , as we have seen from the Ribeiro report , which not only criticizes the Commission 's approach , but also puts forward proposals to halt the massive loss of jobs and make a positive contribution to the future development of the textile sector .
In its communication , the European Commission committed itself to an approach that seeks to improve the competitiveness of business which , in itself , is not a bad thing , but it essentially wishes to do this by exerting pressure on labour costs and by encouraging flexibility , solutions which have already unworkable .
Neither pressure on wages , nor a reduction of labour costs has prevented continued job dumping and further aggravation of the trade deficit .
So , whilst offsetting the distortions of competition and combating the ill effects of social dumping , we must seek more positive means of promoting a reduction in working hours , developing research , improving training facilities and modernizing equipment by introducing new technologies ; we should also aim to elevate purchasing power to boost consumption in the textile and clothing sector .
Unless it is emasculated , or weakened by the adoption of amendments , the Ribeiro report - which covers all these proposals - should be given our full support .
Mr President , Commissioner Bangemann , ladies and gentlemen , there are certain reports that we have to debate and vote on in our Parliament which capture our attention as a whole and which appeal to me especially .
They are the ones that dwell on industrial policies , policies that sustain and create wealth , business and jobs .
Entire regions depend on them .
They constitute the bedrock , indeed the condition that governs everything else , including the drift of public opinion and the morale of employees everywhere , hope for the future and support for the European cause itself .
I said the very same thing just a month ago when I delivered my report on European industrial competitiveness and its prospects .
Sérgio Ribeiro 's excellent report emphasizes the logic of this approach .
It heads in the same direction and contributes to the creation of a future framework for the textile industry .
As the elected representative of a large , long-established textile region in the north of France , I commend his report and would like to tell him that I support the underlying philosophy of his message .
It is quite legitimate to institute an action programme that would allow this sector to fight on equal terms with the competition from third countries .
Consequently , I believe that the European Union should play a key role in the fight against dumping , by means of social and environmental provisions , together with financial restrictions on imported goods , should this prove necessary .
Yes , ladies and gentlemen , we must reaffirm the special nature of the textile industry , which employs a vast labour force , often with few qualifications and with a significant number of women workers .
Many parliamentary reports have stressed the training aspect .
Now we must find the means to do something about it .
So I am hoping for a strong , specific commitment on the part of the Commission .
Yes , ladies and gentlemen , it is quite natural for us to enquire about the repercussions of the Asian crisis , about the growth in the trade gap with those regions and therefore consequences for European textile companies .
I expect a greater degree of transparency .
And yes , ladies and gentlemen , we must support all initiatives that favour job growth , but not from an ideological standpoint .
We must further the development of new technologies in this sector .
Many of my colleagues have said as much .
We can and must be able to combine new technologies , steps to promote jobs and social development .
To conclude , I simply wish to restate the fundamental importance of the textile chain in European industry .
Textiles are not a mere relic of the past .
This is an industry with a future .
We must consider the consequences and provide the means .
My friends , we in Europe are once again in a cycle of growth , so much to the good ; we must now do everything in our power to encourage it with research , training , a strong commercial stance and a proactive , intelligent approach to the social aspects .
The textile industry in Europe is a fertile breeding ground .
Mr President , my colleague Sérgio Ribeiro 's report , on which I congratulate him , makes a significant contribution to the much-needed promotion of the textile and clothing sector , reinforcing Commissioner Bangemann 's welcome initiative .
This is a very important sector for Portugal , where it represents 9 % of production and 13 % of all jobs , and we are particularly concerned that it should have registered a 22 % reduction in employment between 1990 and 1995 , higher than for the European Union as a whole .
Yet this does not mean there is no future for the sector , because the loss of jobs - which requires readjustment measures - is largely due to ongoing increases in productivity .
By way of example , productivity in Portugal rose from 1.43 escudos per employee in 1990 to 2.14 in 1995 .
On the positive side , it should be pointed out that even in a world of fierce competition from countries with much cheaper labour , Europe has continued to maintain a strong position .
This is essentially due to high-quality fashion products : all over the world preference is given to our brand names , which is also a kind of recognition of European cultural values , in this case of an aesthetic nature .
It is therefore important that those values are happily married to our economic activities .
With regard to promoting our exports , there is every justification for increasing the budgetary heading we jointly proposed a few years ago .
This is a heading that has been amply justified by the contribution it has made to sales in major but much more difficult markets , such as those of Japan and other Asian countries .
You will understand , therefore , that we very particularly wish to emphasize the need to support the REX Committee 's suggestion - which Mrs Ferrer has also mentioned - that increased funds should be made available for that allocation .
If we agree or even wish that our markets should be open to third countries , we must also implement some restructuring measures , which are needed in many cases .
This is happening in Portugal , with the programme of assistance for the textile sector agreed at the end of the Uruguay Round , although we naturally cannot now accept any reduction in the funds presently allocated , which are fully justified and to which we are committed . It would be incomprehensible if the politicians were to fail to honour that commitment .
Mr President , first I should like to thank Mr Ribeiro for a very thorough and in-depth report .
In Finland too the textile sector has had to undergo radical structural change , and tens of thousands of jobs have been lost .
Nevertheless , the textile industry that has remained with us , after the changes were made , has shown itself to be competitive in world markets .
In trying to cope with both structural changes in the sector and present uncertainty , the most important factor , alongside technical development , has proved to be social innovation , such as the reorganization of work , greater autonomy of workers , and management methods .
For this reason we should pay close attention to the increase in demand for work skills among company staff , and the change in the type of skills required .
Professional training should be provided for all staffing sectors , taking account of three requirements : increased interaction , negotiation and problem-solving .
Mr President , I first want to congratulate the rapporteur .
Given the importance of this sector from an employment point of view , especially women 's employment , and its regional impact , Parliament should permanently monitor developments the sector , and carry on with this work .
This sector is a touchstone for European economic and social values and our reactions to the globalization which is talked about so much . It is true that analysis of this sector lends itself to conservative , protectionist clichés and attitudes .
It is also true that we are talking in positive terms about a European industrial sector which is complex by virtue of its heterogeneity and diversity , dynamic and , in many cases , competitive . Nevertheless , without wishing to dramatize the situation , it is also true to say that we are faced with problems in this sector - in Europe and the world - due to tough international competition and restructuring .
So we are looking at massive layoffs , unequal pay for men and women , a lack of job security , sexual harassment , low pay , undeclared employment , delocalization , and , in other parts of the world , the exploitation of child and female labour , unhealthy working environments , and examples of dubious industrial ethics - in what is called the necessary international division of labour - such as some ' maquilas ' in border areas and free trade zones .
What are the solutions ?
I believe that , as already has been said here , we must first of all respect social dialogue in Europe and support the international promotion of the basic conventions of the International Labour Organization .
Here and in the World Trade Organization we must speed up the processes of defending and promoting European trade .
That is why it is so important to promulgate and apply the code of social conduct which should also be complemented by programmes of economic and social support in third countries .
At the same time , here in Europe , we need wholehearted support for technological innovation , quality , branded products and lifelong learning , as well as implementing regional and social measures .
I say this because the restructuring process will continue , and diversification in the textile regions should guarantee the preservation of jobs in these areas , especially for women .
Unfortunately , we do not think the plan of action we are discussing is sufficiently ambitious , since it does not specify concrete measures or adequate funding .
So we are faced with an important challenge , which has already been mentioned : that of attaining a balance between growth , competitiveness and employment .
I would add that that applies not just within the European Union , but also in our relations with third parties .
It is not a question of protectionism , Mr President . It is a question of making sure that all the social criteria we say we stand for are respected in the international division of labour which is affecting this sector .
Mr President , in my opinion the proposal by the Commission to enhance competitiveness in the textile and clothing industry does not go far enough .
As we stated in the opinion of the Committee on Regional Policy , the so-called plan of action is more a preliminary , tentative plan than a programme ready for implementation .
The European textile and clothing industry has been made competitive mainly by an efficient , skilled workforce , high-quality , innovative and up-to-date production methods , and specialization and flexibility in the industry .
Weaknesses in the sector in Europe have long been due to unfair access to markets .
The EU has opened up its own markets without obtaining reciprocal and equal access to third country markets .
An example of this is the latest agreement with Russia .
The EU abandoned its restrictions with hardly any concessions in return .
European Community regional aid to the textile and clothing industry treats different EU regions unequally .
Large centres of population in Finland do not qualify for this kind of aid .
Nor can the RETEX programme be applied in Finland .
Yet Finnish business has to compete in the single market with companies receiving support .
I would like to remind everyone that EU aid and action to encourage competitiveness must be such as to avoid distortion of competition and guarantee companies the same opportunities for competition in the market .
Companies ' competitiveness is ultimately a question of their ability to be innovative and develop , which should be the main criterion in granting programmes of aid .
Mr President , before getting down to details , I should like to congratulate Mr Ribeiro , because this was not an easy subject to tackle , and he has done so efficiently and accurately .
I would also like to congratulate the three draftsmen of opinions .
I have already congratulated one of them , Mr Moretti , when we examined his work in the Committee on Regional Policy .
My compatriot , Mrs Ferrer , has done a wonderful piece of work for the Committee on External Economic Relations , and the same is true of Mr Mendonça for the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs .
The textile and clothing sector in Europe represents a very important source of jobs for women .
They account for as much as 75 % of the workforce in this sector , which makes it the mainstay of women 's employment in the industrial sector and means its future will have a decisive impact on the position of women in European industry .
The various restructuring strategies within the sector - such as the introduction of new technologies , the delocalization of some production , the reorientation of production towards the top end of the range and the rapid response to changes in demand - have a serious and almost exclusive effect on women workers .
As regards qualifications , women mainly work in semi-skilled or unskilled jobs .
Men are over-represented in more senior positions .
In sectors with a very high concentration of women , such as the one we are dealing with here , the percentage of skilled women is higher than that of skilled men , because skilled men are not attracted by the low wages in the textile sector .
The average wage is lower than the average manufacturing industry wage , and women 's average pay is sometimes considerably less than men 's , for example in Ireland or the Netherlands , as described in the 1991 study on " the impact of the internal market on the employment of women in the textile and clothing industries ' produced by the Directorate-General for Employment .
At this time of restructuring , companies which cannot anticipate the changes caused by the single market , new technologies and globalization will have to make an extra effort to adapt , which will chiefly affect the workforce , and particularly unskilled workers , who are mainly women .
To avoid this happening , it is imperative for us to provide these unskilled female workers with the means to retrain and obtain the qualifications needed for the new production processes .
I think this objective and this aspiration have been expressed perfectly in the report by Mr Ribeiro which we have before us today .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , colleagues , we are all aware of the fact that textiles and clothing have been synonymous with job losses for more than twenty years .
Although It has already been mentioned , I think we do have to keep in mind that a further 600 000 jobs have been lost in the last six or seven years .
We have cohesion and structural policies in the Union .
There are loans from the European Social Fund and the RETEX programme , but these are not real solutions .
Hence the importance of the plan of action that the European Commission has drawn up in consultation with the industry and the Member States .
Hence also the importance of the Ribeiro report , and I would like to particularly congratulate the rapporteur on his report .
I would like to talk in more detail about four points in the context of this plan of action .
First of all , improving competitiveness .
I believe that there have to be three important elements in this . First , reducing labour costs ; this involves increased training , because there are a very large number of semi- and unskilled workers in this industry and many semi- or unskilled women working in the ready-made clothing industry .
Greater efforts are also needed in research and development in order to be able to introduce new technologies .
Do not let us forget that we are mainly dealing with typical SMEs here .
There are around 120 000 of them in the European Union .
It is thus a completely different industry from the automotive sector , where in the final analysis we only have ten or twelve large companies .
There are a lot of small companies in this industry , Commissioner , and they have specific needs and have to have specific support , particularly with regard to new technologies .
Secondly , access to international markets .
It cannot be repeated often enough , Commissioner , that more and more new trade barriers are being raised .
Brazil , for example , introduced an import duty of over 50 % at the beginning of this year .
How can we get access to the international market when there are countries carrying on like that ?
We have reached agreement on the abolition of the Multifibre Agreement around the year 2005 , but to correct this access to markets has to be available at international level .
In other words , we have to act quickly against those countries that operate dumping practices , such as China , India , and Egypt , and above all we have to protect intellectual property as well .
The balance of trade with third countries is in the red .
Do not let us forget that .
There is a surplus in the textile industry of 5.4 billion but there is a deficit of 22.6 billion in the clothing industry .
Therefore , the European Commission and the Union have to take prompt and efficient action in this area .
Thirdly , the social dimension .
The European Union must support the basic conventions of the International Labour Organization as far as possible in the international arena .
That is an absolute necessity , it goes without saying that , among other things , there must be a ban on child labour in the European Union , and Mr Ribeiro referred to this .
Fourthly , the role of management and labour .
Before this action plan is implemented , Commissioner , I believe that it will be necessary to set up a follow-up committee where representatives of management and workers , the " social partners ' , will also be able to play a role .
I will conclude , Mr President , by saying that I , as the chairman of the textile and clothing committee of the Central Economic Council in my own country , would like to express my pleasure about the action plan and about the resolution that was approved by the Council of Ministers .
The most difficult phase , that is to say implementation , is now to come , and there we are counting on you .
Thank you , Commissioner .
We have all taken note of the Commissioner 's wishes . Now we will wait to see what happens and then decide , Mr Bangemann , what drink we should put in the glass you claim we will have to offer you .

The debate is closed .
The vote will take place at 12.00 noon .
Composition of the Economic and Financial Committee
The next item is the report ( A4-0264 / 98 ) by Mrs Berès , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy , on the Commission communication on detailed provisions concerning the composition of the Economic and Financial Committee accompanied by a proposal for a Council decision on the detailed provisions concerning the composition of the Economic and Financial Committee .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , Parliament has today been informed of the Commission proposal concerning the transformation of the Monetary Committee into an Economic and Financial Committee at the start of the third phase of European Economic and Monetary Union .
There can be no doubt that this report has come at just the right time since , from 2 May , we have finally been allowed to speak about of the institutional aspects of the euro and the institutional consequences of the euro .
In this respect , the Treaty on the European Union is certainly not the be-all and end-all in institutional terms , but until now we have been forbidden to talk about it lest we imperil acceptance of the euro . We were forbidden to speak about it at the Intergovernmental Conference .
But since 2 May , things have begun to stir and even actually to move .
We now have the Euro Council , the Euro 11 and - who knows ? - tomorrow there could well be further developments .
But , just for the moment , let us go back to the Treaty on European Union .
It has a weakness in that it only gives us the right to information on such an important subject .
It is surprising that it refers to the existence of a technical committee , unless it is not really a technical committee , in which case we have good grounds for our fears .
Fundamentally , however , it does envisage substantial changes with regard to the future of the Monetary Committee in terms of its name , its membership and its function .
From this standpoint , the Commission proposal , drawn up in accordance with the guidelines defined by the European Council in Luxembourg , does take us aback somewhat .
In fact , the Treaty does not lay down that each Member State should necessarily be represented by two members elected to the Economic and Financial Committee .
All the same , that is the choice that has been made .
The result is that we have an Economic and Financial Committee which , from the point of view of the national central bankers , will precisely match the membership of the Governing Council of the European Central Bank , which is the true decision-making body in the Central Bank .
Yet , it seems to us at this stage that tax and budget experts , economists and experts in economic forecasting should play a part .
We are told that they will be represented on the Committee on Economic Policy .
But that committee has been in existence since 1974 and we have scarcely noted its influence .
Its function is not mentioned in the texts concerning the Stability Pact and it was merely referred to in a document transmitted by the Ecofin Council to the European Council in Luxembourg .
Obviously , we are not expecting a central role in terms of coordinating economic policy .
Furthermore , the way in which the committee would manifest itself when the broad economic policy guidelines ( over which much ink has been spilt ) are adopted this year , does not convince us either .
My committee is would like to know if the status of the Economic and Financial Committee is compatible with independence .
Certainly , the Economic and Finance Ministers are invited to the European Central Bank .
But the bankers are fully paid-up members of the Economic and Financial Committee and their reflexes betray a strong national bias .
We feel that there should be an effort to seek common ground with the national central banks , but not to the extent of defining economic policy .
The Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy thinks a dialogue is necessary , but does not believe it is that particular dialogue that Economic and Monetary Union needs .
We now invite the Council to revise the proposal currently under examination and to reconsider the role of the representatives of the national central banks on the Economic and Financial Committee .
We urge it to define an unambiguous connection between the work of the Economic and Financial Committee and the Employment Committee .
We also call on it to seek a merger between the Economic and Financial Committee and the Committee on Economic Policy .
Objections have been raised to the effect that this would mean the Economic and Financial Committee meeting weekly .
Why not ?
The euro needs institutions and policies that accept the need to devote some time to it .
The transition to the euro is disrupting the life of our citizens , but also that of our institutions , our political leaders , our civil servants , their customary pursuits and their clubs .
Economic government is not an Ecofin Council meeting three times a week .
In addition , we think that a merger with the Committee on Economic Policy should not be brushed aside .
This might be the way in which we could set up genuine facilities for coordinating economic policy .
If , at this stage , nothing changes , we urge the Member States to make use of alternates to ensure that tax and budget experts and economists take a seat on the Economic and Financial Committee .
We want to be consulted on the status of the Economic and Financial Committee , rather than being simply informed of the membership of that Committee .
Finally , we would ask the Commission and the Council to ensure that this device is only a temporary measure .
We are awaiting the proposals from all the institutions concerned in the transition to the final phase of EMU in order to take these arrangements further .
Finally , your rapporteur is curious about the role of the Economic and Financial Committee with regard to the Euro Council , the Euro 11 , and , perhaps too , about who is to be the president of this envisaged Council .
This report gives us an opportunity today to make our position clear concerning one of the institutional arrangements that are to enable the European Union to promote the coordination of economic policies in pursuit of growth and jobs .
From that standpoint , we think there is still much to do .
We will do it together and your Parliament intends to play its full part in that respect .
Mr President , I congratulate my colleague , Mrs Berès , for throwing light on one of the more shadowy organizations of the European Union - the Monetary Committee .
Chaired by the distinguished and retiring Sir Nigel Wicks , it has done valuable service in preparing papers for Ecofin .
Some of its confidentiality is justified .
There is a sense in which seminal papers must be allowed to sow the seeds of their ideas before they see the light of day .
Nevertheless , it is time to be more transparent .
The change of the name to the Economic and Financial Committee is an appropriate juncture at which to prompt reform .
In my own recent meeting with Sir Nigel I was encouraged to hear him support the idea that his successor as Chair - he himself will not continue in that role , as Britain is not a founding member of EMU - should appear regularly before a relevant committee of the European Parliament to make the EFC more open to the public gaze .
This despite the fact that Article 109c of the Treaty only requires Parliament to be informed of the Council 's decisions .
All that would be a good start , but the change of name should also reflect a change of function .
Many of us are concerned that the Treaty emphasizes monetary matters at the expense of economic management .
The renamed Economic and Financial Committee should tilt the balance back to a proper equilibrium .
The rapporteur 's suggestion that new links should be formed with the near-moribund Economic Policy Committee set up in 1974 is good , as too is the proposal that dialogue should be encouraged between the EFC and the Employment Committee created under the employment chapter of the Amsterdam Treaty .
The key to what the rapporteur , and the Socialist Group , seek to achieve lies in the composition of the membership of the EFC .
It should of course be as balanced and skilful as France 's winning football team on Sunday .
However , at the moment it is banked with bankers , although Article 109c does not specify whether representatives should come from national banks or from economic and finance ministries .
Surely it would be preferable here , in addition to national central bankers , to have representatives from the economic ministries who are themselves responsible for formulating short and medium-term economic policies .
There is even a case for substitution on the 34-person EFC .
Experts in the fields of taxation or budgeting should substitute for regular members from time to time if that leads to better and more informed debate .
Finally , I support the rapporteur 's proposals that the Council 's decisions should be amended so they can be reviewed before 1 Jan 2002 and that the Commission , EFC and ECB should report before 1 July 2001 on the state of interinstitutional relations in the context of EMU since the beginning of Stage 3 .
Mr President , the Economic and Financial Committee that is to be set up has a large number of important tasks , and they are all in the previously mentioned article 109 C , paragraph 2 of the Maastricht Treaty .
What does the EFC do ?
It gives advice upon request or on its own initiative to the Council and to the Commission , studies the economic and financial circumstances of the Community , prepares the work of the Council in a wide range of areas such as exchange rate policy and the coordination of economic policy .
A great deal of attention has been paid in particular to the coordination of economic policy in the last few months .
And this coordination is becoming more and more important .
Wim Duisenberg wrote in his response to the written questions of the public hearing in May that inflation is not solely determined by monetary policy , but also by budgetary policy .
By both , therefore , Mr President , in contrast to what our rapporteur implies .
Therefore , good cooperation must be brought about between the governments who are responsible for budget policy and the European Central Bank , which ultimately determines interest rates .
The Economic and Financial Committee will play a central role in this , and to my way of thinking it will be the forum for coordination .
I find Mrs Berès ' proposal to remove the monetary specialists or the representatives of the European Central Bank from the Committee unacceptable .
National monetary specialists would therefore no longer be on the Committee , according to her plan .
Like Mrs Berès , I would like to emphasize the need for a coordinated policy , but not in the same way .
This is why my group has tabled three amendments .
I consider that it must be possible to make individual countries aware of their responsibilities .
If some countries relax their budgetary policies , this could mean that the ECB will have to step on the monetary brake at the expense of those countries that have their house in order .
This must not happen .
Wim Duisenberg has already stated that he sees a task reserved for the European Central Bank in rapping the knuckles of countries which go off the European budgetary rails as laid down in the stability pact .
In the Netherlands , too , the Nederlandse Bank has appointed itself the critical and independent judge of government finances , even in the past , and now the new President is taking this line again .
The Nederlandse Bank criticized the negotiations on the financial margins of a new government only three weeks ago .
That is precisely the reason why the national monetary specialists on the Committee cannot be dispensed with as Mrs Berès imagines .
They ensure the necessary impartial knowledge about the state of the economy in the various Member States and will be a critical voice within the Committee .
They must prevent the Committee from echoing " his master 's voice ' too much .
After all , if there are only civil servants from the Finance Ministries on the Committee , Ecofin will be advising itself .
Developments in German wages are another current indication that the warning voice of the national central banks has to be heard clearly .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I agree with the opinions which have been expressed here , both by the rapporteur and by the representatives of the Group of the Party of European Socialists and the Group of the European People 's Party , in the sense that the currently proposed composition of this Economic and Financial Committee , which is to replace the Monetary Committee , should be broader and that it should operate more at Community level .
The Commissioner will recall that during the debate on the content of the annual economic report , in which the Monetary Committee proposed limiting the Commission 's ability to assess the economic situation in the various Member States separately , Parliament rejected that restriction .
Maybe that restriction on the Commission 's competence will come about after all , if the composition of the Economic and Financial Committee is established as it stands in the current proposal .

I can see an important defect in this composition , because the Economic and Financial Committee would become a sort of alternative Governing Council of the European Central Bank and an alternative Ecofin , so that the overall situation would be controlled but without there being a forum for debate at the level of the whole European Union , able to analyse the economic and financial situation objectively and thus advise both the ECB and the EU institutions themselves , such as the Commission or Parliament itself .
So I think it would be a good idea to review this composition and provide it with a real Community dimension , at EU level .
Mr President , what we are dealing with here is a much more general problem than simply the composition of a committee .
What we are dealing with is the risk of diminishing political vigilance in the wake of the decision on the euro , where the old dreams of the technocrats suddenly appear again on the agenda and institutional non-regulation changes to institutionalized non-policy .
I have a word of warning for the ECB .
Institutional nirvana is not a safe place to be and there is circumstantial evidence for this .
Firstly , the press are saying that Mr Duisenberg 's salary is to be regarded as a state secret .
I hope that he will be able to deny this .
Secondly , there is the procedure for establishing the basic principles of economic policy , where the Monetary Committee has practically worked out all the political aspects , that is to say the primacy of employment policy , the embodiment of monetary policy and the relationship between wages policy and productivity trends , on the basis of the Commission 's proposal , thereby rendering the latter incapable of action .
What we need here are institutions which can enter into consultation with the European Parliament , and not just feed it information .
We need a political body which is properly qualified to run the Ecofin and Euro-11 meetings in coordination with the Employment Committee - something like a European economic government . This will not be achieved by the proposal as it stands , which does nothing more than revive the nightmares of technocracy .
Mr President , Members of this House , we should congratulate Mrs Berès on her perspicacity .
The Commission proposal concerning the composition of the Economic and Financial Committee due to succeed the Monetary Committee actually conveys an innocent impression of continuity .
But , in reality , it represents a divergence from European economic construction towards a double overindulgence : a surfeit of monetarism and an excess of technocracy .
Yet the name of the Economic and Financial Committee projected an image of a place of reflection extending beyond mere monetary matters .
Its function in formulating decisions regarding the coordination of economic policies or defining major economic policy guidelines leads it naturally to consider all economic and social data , with reference to all the instruments of economic and social policy .
But the Commission proposals relating to its membership are exceedingly limiting .
They simply make it an adjunct of banking and monetary policy , which the ESCB could well do without , since its independence and range of measures have a solid basis .
The rapporteur has good reason to criticize the elevated status some would seek to grant the representatives of the central banks on the Committee and , with respect to the senior officials , the monopoly envisaged for the representatives of financial administrations only .
So , it seems to us that it would be a good idea to increase the membership of the Economic and Financial Committee , to restrict - as Mrs Berès would wish - the role of the representatives of the central banks , but also ( and here we are deliberately stepping beyond the wishes of our rapporteur ) , to ensure that the skills of practitioners in economic and social matters , other than those of the senior officials , are represented .
Finally , we share the Mrs Berès ' desire to see a regular information and consultation procedure set up between the Economic and Financial Committee and the European Parliament .
Mr President , the start of the third phase of EMU is prompting a restructuring of the Monetary Committee .
The name will be changed too , unfortunately .
In my opinion , it should have stayed the same .
Then the rapporteur would at least have been spared a disappointment .
Now she thinks that the change of name will also lead to a change of substance .
However , cause and effect are being reversed here .
There should have been a much stronger plea for retaining the name Monetary Committee .
In the explanatory statement of the report , the rapporteur says that the countries of the euro-area have dual representation on the Economic and Financial Committee , namely via their own representatives ( directly ) and via the representatives of the European Central Bank ( indirectly ) .
I cannot follow this reasoning .
It will not do to regard representatives of the ECB as indirect representatives of the euro-area countries .
That essentially indicates a failure to understand the independence of the ECB .
This is also demonstrated by the following point .
Because despite the fact that the rapporteur does not think much of the influence of national civil servants within the Economic and Financial Committee , her report is an unmistakable plea for a typical national French hobby-horse : the formation of an economic administration at European level as a counterpart to the ECB , which - in the eyes of the French government - is too much along German lines .
Given what I have just said , the European Parliament 's lack of serious powers in this area is of very little importance .
Mr President , the Economic and Financial Committee , which is to supersede the current Monetary Committee , strengthens the position of the Finance Council in relation to the EU 's other Councils of Ministers .
It is worrying to me that not enough emphasis was placed on such things at Maastricht , that the role of the European Commission is thereby weakened and that in important processes for the coordination of finance policy the Commission does not propose but rather recommends .
Parliament must support calls for this situation to be changed when the time comes for the Treaty to be revised .
The EU must adopt a new approach to policy coordination .
The rapporteur is quite right in referring to this and the Economic and Financial Committee - and here I can only share your hopes and indeed your opinions - must also reflect this new approach to coordination .
I very much regret that the twin-track approach to the process of monetary union , as conceived by Giscard d 'Estaing and Helmut Schmidt when the European exchange-rate mechanism was being set up , has not yet achieved its crowning moment , as it were .
At that time two committees were set up - the Monetary Committee and the Employment Committee .
The Monetary Committee was institutionalized and enshrined in treaty law , while the Employment Committee continued to live in its shadow .
This is not justified , given the dramatic policy development and the nil return in respect of European added value .
I therefore think that the problems of employment policy , economic policy and financial policy actually have to be seen as a whole .
I should like to recall that this Parliament , when it adopted the broad guidelines for economic policies last year , stressed that these guidelines must also take account of other considerations , particularly since the Ministers ' decision on economic and finance policy has to be seen in connection with the budget debates in the national parliaments , which always take place in the autumn of each year .
The Economic and Financial Committee has an advisory role , yet it has become an institution .
Its function must accordingly be made more transparent and enforceable .
It is therefore correct to say that we need a monetary dialogue over and above the previous dialogue .
You know that for years Parliament has been carrying on a dialogue with the Monetary Committee via the Subcommittee on Monetary Affairs .
This must also be extended to the Economic and Financial Committee , so that opinions on stability plans , on the avoidance of excessive deficit and other moves aimed at coordinating economic policy do not remain solely in the hands of monetary authorities and monetary advisory bodies , but that other parties are also included .
I still think that it is important to have a Jumbo Council every year .
The already paramount role of the Council of Finance Ministers , should not lead to a situation in which economic and employment policy is decided upon without input from the Ministers for Employment and Economic Affairs .
While the institutional structure of Monetary Union is all too clear , the decision-making processes for this Union are , by contrast , underdeveloped .
We need a fresh approach here , and the Berès report gives us renewed hope of this .
We probably even require an additional protocol to Article 103 of the Maastricht Treaty , so that in future we too become part of the real processes of negotiation and decision-making .
Commissioner , Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the debate seems to be dwelling , above all , on the membership of the Committee .
In fact , the real debate should not be about that at all .
Instead , the real debate should focus more on the nature of the Committee .
But the Committee as it stands today , as we have seen , is there merely to defend national interests and skim off anything that is Community-related .
Whether it is composed of representatives of the national banks , or representatives of economic and finance ministries , nothing changes and that is the pity .
What we have in effect is the Commission which , when it comes to coordination , draws up draft recommendations .
These then go before the Committee , now known as the " Economic and Financial Committee ' but there is still no change : it is there to defend views that are not in the common interest .
We cannot change anything because that is how the Treaty has ordained things .
So we must now do something to remedy this mistake and to do this we must allow Parliament to exercise its influence , thereby providing a dimension that this Committee can never offer since , as we have seen and will doubtless see again , it will never do anything in the common interest , it will be there to defend the positions of governments .
What we need is policy coordination and policy coordination implies supra-national power .
It is not only the Commission and Parliament who have such power .
There are the only ones who should step in at this stage .
They duplicate Ecofin .
So this Committee serves no real purpose .
I would have liked this factor to have surfaced in the Commission proposals , especially since the Commission has stood by in agony watching the way in which the proposals have been eroded .
I had hoped that as a result of these proposals , it might have targeted things better . Unfortunately , this has not happened .
Mr President , the Economic and Financial Committee , which replaces the former Monetary Committee , is something completely different , and its composition and the way in which it will function must reflect that fact .
In other words there is no longer any question of it carrying out some kind of coordination of the monetary policies of the relevant Member States .
This work is carried out by the European Central Bank .
The new committee will be a kind of technical adviser with as broad-based a composition as possible . This technical adviser will attempt to find ways of coordinating the financial policies of the Member States who have signed up to European Economic and Monetary Union and of the states that have not yet joined Economic and Monetary Union yet remain within the exchange rate mechanism .
In other words , it must have the general power to advise on issues relating to the coordination of the financial policy of the Member States of the European Union with more general monetary policy .
This work is new and has not previously been carried out .
I do not think that much needs to be said and I think that we must not overstate its role .
Naturally it will help , naturally it will assist along these lines , but it is not anything absolute or anything that should give rise to the fears that have been expressed in this House .
Judging by the way in which audiences are arranged between the Parliament 's committees and various bodies that are far more important than the one we are debating at the moment - and Mrs Randzio-Plath makes reference to this - and judging by the way in which they respond , I have the impression that this will continue . I would also like to see what committee would refuse to appear before the committees of the European Parliament to give an account of decisions it has taken , even if this is not provided for by the Treaty or by anything else .
I do not think , therefore , that we need be overly concerned about this , and the composition of the Economic and Financial Committee must be as before : it must contain representatives of the central banks of the relevant Member States .
It will be a good compromise between the European Central Bank on the one hand and representatives of the finance ministries on the other .
Let us then look at the matter coolly and let us not exaggerate either the significance or the role of this committee .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Mrs Berès ' report concerns the procedures relating to membership of the Economic and Financial Committee , on which the Economic and Financial Affairs Council must make a decision . This report makes a major and interesting contribution to the overall debate about the process of establishing Economic and Monetary Union .
Certainly , Article 109C , paragraph 3 of the Treaty on European Union does not formally admit consultation with the European Parliament on this matter , but it is quite legitimate that this House should seize upon an issue of this importance .
Moreover , the Treaty does impose a general obligation on the President of the Council to keep the House informed , so it is natural that this should be given some substance .
Along with the Commission , I therefore commend the words of your rapporteur on the membership of this new Committee and I also note with interest everything that has been said regarding its status , which should also be adopted before 1 January 1999 .
The Commission will also pronounce on this new status and , at the appropriate time , it will take account of your views .
To reply to the matters raised - especially by the rapporteur this morning - I would like to make two quick comments concerning , firstly , the actual membership of the Economic and Financial Committee and , secondly , its role .
With regard to the membership , Article 109C , paragraph 2 , stipulates that the Member States , the Commission and the European Central Bank shall each appoint not more than two members of the Committee .
Now , at the European Council in Luxembourg , on 12 and 13 December last year , the Heads of State and Government , in their resolution on the coordination of economic policies , stated their intentions and I will quote the conclusions of the European Council : The Economic and Financial Committee , which will bring together senior officials from the national central banks and the ECB as well as from finance ministries , will provide the framework within which the dialogue can be prepared and continued at the level of senior officials .
So , Mr Castagnède , there is no departure .
I do not accept this criticism since the text from the European Council defines the natural framework in which the Commission is bound to make its proposal even if , as the rapporteur rightly points out , the Commission has not specified the original administration which is to be represented in the Committee .
This , however , was the only room for manoeuvre left to it by the text from the Heads of State and Government .
From the standpoint of the Commission , there can be no continuity between the Monetary Commission and the Economic and Financial Committee .
As Mr Harrison pointed out , it is not merely a matter of changing the name , it involves changing the nature of the system itself .
This is why the tasks facing the Economic and Financial Committee are no longer the same as those of the Monetary Committee .
The duties of the Economic and Financial Committee have been specified , they are defined in Article 109 , paragraph 2 of the Treaty and they focus exclusively on monitoring the economic and financial situation of Member States and financial relations with third countries and other international institutions but especially , and I think this is important , the Economic and Financial Committee contributes to the preparation of Council work at technical level .

In reply to Mr Herman , I would say that those appointed are appointed on an intuitu personae basis , rather than as governmental representatives and I believe that Mr Christodoulou is right when he says that this function should not be overestimated .
We are talking about preparing the Council technically with regard to three essential subjects : multilateral surveillance , the broad guidelines for economic policies and decisions to be taken under the excessive deficit procedure .
So , what we need to make the Economic and Financial Committee work is a base of expertise , it will not override the Council , let me reassure Mr Castagnède that it is not nor ever will be a mere branch office of the national central banks .
I am of the opinion that the economic dimension of the Committee 's duties is of primary importance .
So this should be reflected in its membership .
The European Central Bank should duly appoint its representatives with regard to monetary policy and the Member States should do the same with regard to the various components of economic policy .
Consequently , the suggestion by the rapporteur , Mrs Berès , about alternate members should be given particular attention .
In truth , it is vital that the senior officials present should be technically competent in the subjects dealt with - whether this be taxation -as you pointed out - budgetary matters or economic forecasting .
As far as the Commission is concerned , the Economic and Financial Committee should be a technical instrument which will help to enhance the coordination of economic policies which , I would remind you , are aimed at promoting growth and jobs .
This brings me to my second set of comments which , I assure you , will be very much shorter ; these concern the role of the Economic and Financial Committee .
Here , too , the European Council in Luxembourg reached the conclusion that the Economic and Financial Committee should serve as a focus for dialogue - and here I am responding to the wishes of Mrs Randzio-Plath - specifically a dialogue between the Council and the European Central Bank at senior official level .
I believe that there are two sides to the matter of dialogue on coordination : firstly , coordination between economic policy and monetary policy and , secondly , between individual aspects of economic policy .
While we are on the subject of the link between economic and monetary policy , I think that it is the responsibility of the ECB , the guardian of single monetary policy and the Council , which adopts and implements the broad guidelines for economic policies , to ensure that that link is maintained .
I also think that the Economic and Financial Committee should prepare and monitor meetings of the Euro Council , now known as the " Euro 11 ' .
On this matter , I might say - although I hope to address the issue after the recess , that the first two meetings of that new body gave rise to a new impetus .
The Economic and Financial Committee should adapt to that fresh mood in order to back up the introduction of the euro , within the terms of the Treaty and under the best possible conditions , and then to administer it .
With regard to coordination of the individual components of economic policy , as the rapporteur mentioned so pointedly , the Economic and Financial Committee should also direct its work and proposals as part of a genuine spirit of complementarity with the Employment Committee and , at the same time , with the Economic Policy Committee .
Allow me at this point , Madam , to diverge slightly from your own analysis .
The Economic Policy Committee is responsible for structural matters ; the domestic market , job creation , competitiveness , state funding and so forth .
The European Council in Cardiff stressed the importance of these structural issues by reminding us that the broad guidelines for economic policies should in future also cover the economic reforms needed to guarantee the satisfactory conduct of Economic and Monetary Union .
As far as the Commission is concerned , it is therefore important that the workload be distributed evenly between the specialized committees , including the Economic Policy Committee .
Nonetheless , let me assure you that the Commission , in line with the wishes of the House , will exercise a coordinating function with regard to the activities of the Economic and Financial Committee , the Employment Committee and the Economic Policy Committee .
Quite apart from the formal composition of the Economic and Financial Committee and its duties , I feel that the final , determining factor will be how that Committee functions in practice , and , in conclusion , I would like to stress that in this area too , the Commission - which plays a central part in the coordination of economic policies , as the last " Euro 11 ' meeting demonstrated - will ensure that the work of the Economic and Financial Committee and other committees is correctly coordinated .
Consequently - and this is where I bring matters to a head - I would say that the Commission has noted with interest your proposal that you should receive a report before 1 January 2001 regarding the operation of the Economic and Financial Committee within the context of inter-institutional relations between Parliament , the Commission and the Council , but also - I believe - relations between the existing committees .
I heartily endorse this proposal and I will , I hope , be able to report to you in person on those conclusions .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place at 12.00 .
Participation of EEIGs in public contracts
The next items is the report ( A4-0196 / 98 ) by Mr Tappin , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy , on the communication from the Commission on the participation of European Economic Interest Groupings ( EEIGs ) in public contracts and programmes financed by public funds .
Mr President , European economic interest groups : what are they ?
They are groups of small or medium-sized companies joining together to get themselves an increased profile , increased chances of winning contracts against larger competitors , increased resources to promote their expertise , a legal personality and , of course , increased chances to expand , employ more staff and thereby reduce the number of unemployed in the European Union .
Obviously , if successful , such a scheme is a good idea .
This report on the Commission 's communication on the participation of European Economic Interest Groupings in public contracts and programmes financed by public funds addresses exactly that issue .
The scheme has been operating since July 1989 .
It cannot , as yet , be accounted a success .
Where groupings have been formed - frequently cross-border organizations dealing in goods and services - they have shown that the concept works .
However , insufficient groupings exist , or have existed , to enable the Commission to analyse all the problems or define how best it can help promote the idea , and its application in practice , for the future .
This is recognized and is why the Commission has produced the communication .
The Commission is to be congratulated on the initiative and thanked for the efforts it is putting into the promotion of the interests of smaller businesses across the European Union .
The public procurement market alone accounts for ECU 720 billion a year , of which very little goes to smaller companies : only about 11.7 % .
To increase that share , and the share of funds from EU programmes which flow to SMEs , I made several proposals .
I would like the Commission to promote the establishment of voluntary cooperation panels at EU level , consisting of national and sectoral experts , social partners and , of course , Commission representatives , to help disseminate information and to raise awareness about the possibilities available through this scheme .
Secondly , I would also like to see the Commission positively encouraging Member States to identify or establish centres where good-quality advice and training are available for SMEs wishing to participate in the scheme .
This might add an impetus to the same request which was made in regard to procurement centres in an earlier report I drafted .
Since one of the aims of this report is to enable SMEs to take a much larger share of the ECU 720 billion procurement market than they currently do , it would be appropriate if the information centres were one and the same .
Similarly , the diffusion of information through informal centres , such as Euro-Info centres , business information centres - BICs - and local chambers of commerce , is to be encouraged .
Since there is a huge difference between publicity and guidance and the sort of training and legal counselling that a national centre could offer , it becomes clear that these would be complementary systems .
National centres would also greatly assist in the monitoring of results .
This is essential if we are to maximize the effectiveness of measures we take .
After nearly ten years of operating , there have only been about 800 EEIGs formed under this scheme .
It is clear that the Commission is taking what steps it can to improve this take-up , but our message must also be to the Council , calling on it to support the efforts of the Commission and the SMEs at Member State level .
This will be especially useful when it comes to ironing out some of the difficulties which arise for SMEs during international commerce , especially in dealing with the anomalies created by differing national legislation .
The Commission is to produce clarifications of the rules governing the establishment of EEIGs and the way they can operate .
In view of the legal complexities , and the fears many SMEs have of extending their activities outside the safe and well-known limits of their existing commitments , such clarifications would be invaluable .
However , I hope that interest groups and SMEs can have the chance to appraise these clarifications and that the substance of those appraisals , plus the conclusions drawn from the monitoring of EEIG activity , can form the basis of a further Commission communication in a couple of years ' time .
This should be put before Parliament , the sectoral organizations and Member State representatives .
Then , if there has not been a significant take-up in the procurement market of programmes funded from Community money by EEIGs , we must do something more .
We are working against a deadline as the GPA is opened up to more countries .
This means big foreign companies squeezing our SMEs out of their existing markets .
If we do not enable them to take up the opportunities offered by global access , then their situation will go from bad to worse .
Of the amendments , I can support Nos 1 , 3 and 4 but am against No 2 .

Finally , I commend the Commission for its initiative , and I hope Members will be able to support my resolution .
Mr President , I would like to thank Mr Tappin for a splendid report that looks carefully at the status of SMEs and public services .
Both sectors are vital for our societies but , nonetheless , they suffer from unfair treatment .
If Europe is going to be something more than just an internal market and achieve its hope for economic and social cohesion , it must develop services for the benefit of all at European level .
Establishing internal markets thus means having to free up services for the public good , which in turn means great changes in social structure .
There must be a wide debate on policy guidelines in public services among Member States , the Commission and Parliament .
The debate must involve management and labour , and consumer and social sector organizations .
The European Economic Interest Grouping the rapporteur refers to may bring a precious element of added value to the status of SMEs , which by and large are not yet aware of the opportunities available in the single market .
There are many barriers .
The European Parliament until last year was the only institution trying to define the European welfare state through the notion of the public sector .
Now , with Cardiff , a step has been taken in the same direction .
In accordance with the principle of subsidiarity Member States will decide whether to use private or public companies for the implementation of public services .
We must - at European level - guarantee opportunities for SMEs to compete for public procurement contracts .
The participation of SMEs in public procurement is vital .
They employ most of the workers .
In addition to openness in competition , we have to invest in the development of the taxation and social security system so that they too support the sort of labour-intensive entrepreneurship that characterize SMEs . Reduced income tax is the goal and that is of particular concern to labour-intensive service sectors .
I think they have been dealt with wrongly when it comes to taxation .
Furthermore , more venture capital is needed to establish companies .
In Europe this is particularly required for innovative SMEs , which will then grow into larger companies and , as was stated in the meeting on SMEs and employment held by the Group of the Party of European Socialists , on that hangs the future of employment in Europe .
Mr President , when you intervene in a market , you will discover that you have to stay on afterwards and repair the damage .
That is how it was in the European Union when we intervened in the traditional set-up whereby national government contracts were placed nationally : we discovered after a time that the intervention had unintended side effects .
As so often , it was the small and medium-sized enterprises that footed the European bill .
For years , they had carefully built up and nurtured their relationships with local , regional and national governments , relationships based on mutual quality and trust .
Under the anonymous European tendering procedures , these trust-based relationships lost their value in one fell swoop .
Small and medium-sized businesses in particular were the victims and went to the wall .
That was not the intention , so the damage had to be repaired again .
Hence the creation of this crossborder interest grouping , which is intended to make it possible for smaller companies to combine to take on large projects which are being placed more and more on the basis of stringent qualification procedures .
And we as a Parliament want that too , because , as we have stated in other reports , European government tenders have be simpler , easier and involve less bureaucracy .
What I cannot find in the Commission communication , Mr President , is an analysis of and a solution to one major problem with EEIGs .
That is the lack of awareness of this instrument in the very sector for which it is actually intended .
Nobody in small and medium-sized enterprises has ever heard of these interest groups , which have after all been in existence since 1989 .
That is something that Michael Tappin rightly remarks on in his report .
The Commission communication concentrates on legal possibilities and impossibilities , while the point of lack of awareness remains untouched .
Measured by the yardstick which the Commission itself attaches to the communication , namely publication of the actions that have to be taken , the Commission has fallen short .
It might have been expected that the Commission would put a plan on the table stating what has to be done to deliver information to companies about this instrument : it is the age-old European Union communication problem .
The Commission writes that 800 interest groups have been set up , 80 per year .
That figure does not mean anything in itself unless we know how successful these interest groups have actually been in obtaining government contracts or subsidies from EU programmes .
The communication does not contain this information .
Nor does it state what opportunities the interest groups encounter in their day-to-day operations .
Perhaps the Commissioner could give me some information about this .
Is it perhaps possible that small and medium-sized enterprises businesses have no need at all for this kind of interest group ?
Does it ever happen that we in Parliament or in the European Union dream up things that nobody needs ?
In general , my group can support Michael Tappin 's report .
My only doubts are about paragraph 3 of his motion for a resolution , in which he suggests a special panel at European level .
Socialists always expect good to come of this kind of structure , but I do not .
Fortunately , what he has in mind is a voluntary basis .
I myself think that it would be much more effective to link up with existing networks in order to inform small and medium-sized enterprises , and in order to make it easier for companies to find partners .
The European Commission does already have the facilities here , I am thinking of the Europartnership , the Interprise scheme and the BC-NET network .
Mr President , first of all I want to congratulate Mr Tappin on this report .
I welcome it as a valuable means of promoting small and medium-sized industries throughout the Member States .
Indeed , as Mr Tappin rightly points out , small and medium-sized industries naturally tend to be the norm in smaller countries .
He is right as well to say that a concerted assessment of needs has to be made and that we have to take a more user-friendly approach when delivering information and practical support for the operations of EEIGs .
One point which I should like to stress from the outset is the gains for small organizations who become partners .
A small operator would not only be able to bid for and win a contract that would normally be beyond its capacity to complete ; but would continue to reap certain benefits even after the contract had been completed .
For example , Mr Tappin , I would point out that a small road building contractor in Ireland that wins small-scale contracts from local authorities would find it absolutely impossible to bid for larger-scale construction projects for major roadways or motorways because it could not afford the investment required for the quantity of equipment needed to complete the job .
Even if the investment were made , the outlay would not be justified in the long run , since the equipment would be lying idle for most of the year because not enough work would be available on a constant basis .
If a small operator were part of a consortium , it would have a greater chance of continued work .
New contracts in other Member States will help to bring that prospect about and are therefore to be welcomed .
We must insist that all Member States play by the rules , since capital investment in smaller states will never be forthcoming .
Mr President , it is a pity that such little use is made of the only existing Community instrument for transnational cooperation between SMEs .
With just 800 EEIGs having been set up since 1989 , it is no surprise that there is little or no participation in public contracts .
This low figure assumes even starker significance when one considers that almost 99 % of European businesses are SMEs and that 52 % of jobs are still to be found in this sector .
Anyone who has had a lot of personal contact with SMEs and with micro-enterprises will confirm the rapporteur 's remarks , namely that SMEs are completely unaware of the good fortune which could come their way .
The EEIG scheme is an extremely valuable instrument for small businesses in that it allows them to participate in transboundary cooperation within the internal market and even to go so far as to tender for public contracts .
The proposals contained in Mr Tappin 's report clearly show what is needed , namely genuinely practical information and concrete measures of support .
The promotion of non-bureaucratic access to public procurement by undertakings engaged in transnational cooperation is very important if the internal market is to have more substance .
An information scheme using every possible means , from personal contact meetings to the use of modern technology , is needed to help overcome the dearth of information and other barriers which exist .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , for some considerable time European integration has been endeavouring to bring transnational forms of cooperation under company law .
For it is through transboundary cooperation between enterprises that we shall come nearer to our goal of a European internal market .
The challenge before us today is just as intense as it was 10 years ago .
At the start of the Austrian presidency we are therefore eager to see whether it will be possible to adopt the European Company Statute before the end of the year .
This would enable firms to avoid the unnecessary and costly procedures associated with national company law .
This new option should be directed not just at multinational companies but more particularly at small and medium-sized enterprises which are keen to participate in Community projects such as transEuropean networks .
We have already heard in the debate that the European Economic Interest Groupings provide just such a structure , but that there is an obvious need for improvement and that life still has to be breathed into the formal legal framework .
We should also be considering exactly how many firms can be offered a form of association of this kind or indeed how many there should be , as small businesses , which should benefit in particular from this form of association , should in future also be able to participate to a greater degree in public procurement between Member States .
Mr President , I too would like to join in congratulating Mr Tappin on his report .
It comes at a very critical time when we look at the new measures being introduced to boost employment , because the figures show that the majority of employment within the European Union is created within small- and medium-sized enterprises .
Therefore it is vitally important that we do everything we can to facilitate further growth within that sector .
However , I have some criticisms .
In particular I have criticisms of the way in which the Commission is so slow in paying people who have been involved in contracts in the PHARE and TACIS programmes , for instance .
I can point to three individual small firms from Ireland that went into liquidation because of the late payment by the Commission for contracts those firms completed in Russia .
It seems to me that to get information on these types of initiatives you need to be a member of the Freemasons .
You simply cannot get public access to the information , and this is something which is essential for small enterprises .
In Ireland we have established the Small Business Operational Programme .
That pointed out five key areas where work needed to be done to allow SMEs to become involved in European economic interest groups : access to finance , access to public procurement documents , access to proper tender support , access to a prompt payment guarantee from the contractor , and access to closer networks of SMEs across the European Union to allow broadly based enterprises to develop .
Unless we give real information in a very public manner then we cannot benefit from these groupings .
Mr President , on behalf of the Commission I would like to thank the European Parliament , and Mr Tappin in particular , for the support it has given to this communication on the participation of European Economic Interest Groupings ( EEIGs ) in public contracts and programmes financedby public funds .
I must say that since this communication was adopted on 9 September 1997 there has been a swift and unprecedented move to set up new EEIGs : the number has risen rapidly from 800 ( the figure at that time ) to 966 within in a short space of time .
This represents a significant step forward in our efforts to encourage interested parties to familiarize themselves with the EEIGs .
Because the EEIG is the only Community instrument that promotes cooperation between companies , the EEIGs may be considered an important link in European cooperation and a means of speeding up the real achievement of a single market .
The Commission is planning other initiatives with the aim of offering more extensive and detailed information on the features and possible uses of EEIGs - and particularly their usefulness to small and medium-sized enterprises .
One of these initiatives will be a communication on the participation of small and medium-sized enterprises in public contracts .
I can tell Mr Crowley that this specific communication on the participation of small and medium-sized enterprises in public contracts is due to be made published shortly . It will also deal with problems of payment terms and credit .
The issue of information has been raised several times , particularly by Mr Peijs .
Insufficient information is available on the EEIGs and the possibilities they offer .
This was evident at the 1996 conference on the EEIGs proposed by the Commission and aimed at economic operators . It is also evident from the number of requests for information on this subject that the Commission receives each day .
How will we go about providing more and better information ?
One way will be to publish a guide containing a sample contract and practical advice for operators on all stages of a an EEIG 's life , from setting up to operation to dissolution .
Another way will be to make increasing use of European Information Centres .
BC-Net and other operators are already acting as specialized consultants to small and medium-sized enterprises on participation in public contracts .
We also intend to consult the Contact Committee to find out what information could be useful for promoting and developing EEIGs .
As the topic of trans-European networks has already been mentioned , I would also like to remind you that some EEIGs already participate in trans-European network projects , particularly in the transport field .
Lastly , Mr Tappin , the suggestions you propose in your report and the resolution will be very useful in helping us to achieve the objective that is so important for all of us .

Finally , I should like to state that I agree with what Mr Rübig said and I hope that the Austrian presidency will manage to make the idea of a European Company Statute a reality . This will be very important for large European enterprises but also for small and medium-sized European enterprises which will , I am sure , make great use of the resource .
To Mr Paasilinna I should like to say that the Commission is very sensitive to the two topics he raised .
In relation to his first point , that is the need to reduce fiscal pressure on labour-intensive activities - as you know , the Commission presented a communication on employment to the European Council in Luxembourg .
With regard to the second point on venture capital , which could be so important to small and medium-sized enterprises , the Commission presented a document that aroused great interest at the Cardiff European Council .
To conclude , I would like to give my thanks again for the support that the European Parliament has given to this communication and to congratulate Mr Tappin in particular .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place at 12.00 noon .
Electoral procedure
The next item is the report ( A4-0212 / 98 ) by Mr Anastassopoulos , on behalf of the Committee on Institutional Affairs , on a proposal for an electoral procedure incorporating common principles for the election of Members of the European Parliament .
Mr President , after efforts that have lasted forty years and more and that have proved to be exercises in futility , we now find ourselves once again on the starting blocks .
A uniform electoral procedure for European Parliament elections was provided for in the Treaty of Rome of 1957 , through which the European Communities were created .
This is perhaps somewhat paradoxical as at that time there was no European Parliament , but an advisory Assembly , which was , moreover , slow to evolve .
What does this mean ?
It is perhaps a sign of the inordinate institutional significance attributed by the founding fathers of Europe to a European Parliament that would reach maturity - and did reach maturity - in democracy , within a united Europe that would be based , and is based , on democracy ?
Forty-one years on , that objective has still not been achieved .
A few steps have been taken .
In 1979 the Members of the European Parliament , on the initiative of the then French president , Valéry Giscard d 'Estaing , began to be elected by direct universal suffrage , and from 1987 , with the Uniform Act of Luxembourg , they began to gain their first fundamental legislative powers .
But a uniform procedure did not appear on the horizon even then , and has not appeared up to the present time .
Efforts always foundered on two rocks : the unshakeable refusal of the United Kingdom to change its electoral system of first-past-the-post voting with narrow constituencies and to unite with its partners , who had all opted for proportional representation , and , secondly , the operation of different national electoral traditions which did not permit any agreement on a uniform procedure .
The efforts of the European Parliament were futile and were perhaps at times coloured by political romanticism , since it judged that the political map of Europe could be redrawn - albeit for European elections - with Brussels and Strasbourg at the core .
And so we come to 1997 , a year of great changes .
In Britain the new Labour government of Tony Blair , after reaching an understanding with the Liberal Democrats , tabled a bill for the revolutionary - to the British way of thinking - introduction of proportional representation for the European elections and the partition of Britain into 12 electoral constituencies .
And at the Intergovernmental Conference , which led to the Treaty of Amsterdam , government representatives and our own European Parliament representatives , realizing that they were at an impasse , added the alternative solution of common principles to provide an element of flexibility in order to make it easier to reach agreement .
Against this background , the European Parliament last year launched its sixth and most recent push .
It was preceded by the report of Mr De Gucht , which each of us should hold in great respect .
And I , as rapporteur for the Committee on Institutional Affairs , took it upon myself to learn the lessons of our past mistakes .
I judged it advantageous to take a simple , evolutionary and limited approach in order finally to enable the first great step to be taken , after forty years of continuous failure .
I also considered it necessary , in addition to the long-drawn-out and exhausting debates in the Committee on Institutional Affairs , to visit many of the capitals of the fifteen Member States , to have talks with government representatives and representatives of political parties , to inform and to be informed .
The outcome of all these exchanges of view , the deliberations and the search for answers , undertaken on such an extensive scale for perhaps the first time in the annals of the European Union , appears in the report and in the proposals which I have the honour of presenting to the House today .
There are two basic principles : proportionality and the close relationship principle .
Proportionality is without doubt the fairest electoral system .
It permits fair representation of all political tendencies of the peoples of Europe .
And in the case of the European Union , which does not have - at least in the period under consideration - a central European government which needs to rely on majority voting in the European Parliament , the representation of all major political tendencies is necessary .
Europe can not be constructed on the basis of a single political power , or even two , however great these may be , and however convenient that might be .
A wider political base is necessary .
And the powers that maintain it must be represented in this continually evolving and improving European Parliament .
Hence our preference for proportional representation , which is , during this period of European construction , honourable , honest and constant .
But this does not mean that we are in favour of the fragmentation of political power , which does not help in the evolution of European political life .
For this reason we are allowing Member States to institute , for the allocation of seats , a threshold that does not exceed 5 % of the votes cast , in order not to place the preservation of proportional representation at risk .
This is not the only way in which we are offering Member States more room for manoeuvre .
Nor is it blind dedication to the famous principle of subsidiarity which is governing our choices .
It is rather our conviction that on to matters such as electoral issues - but not only on those issues - we must bring forward framework laws within which Member States can make their own decisions .
A big YES therefore from us for proportional representation .
And Member States will determine exactly what kind of proportional representation they want .
We were amazed , at a time when the British government was abandoning first-past-the-post voting , to see political powers in continental Europe , who up till now have not been noted for their love of Great Britain , declare themselves - with much delay it has to be said , and with a kind of necrophilic nostalgia ! - in favour of the system the British had liberated themselves from .
Of course each system has its advantages and disadvantages .
And it is a fact that the British system brought constituents and those elected closer together .
But how acceptable can a system be regarded which , if it had been implemented in France in 1994 , would have given the electoral alliance of my friend the Mayor of Toulouse , Dominique Baudis , a total of 87 French seats , with 25.5 % of votes ?
The close relationship principle , the principle of proximité , is in fact the second principle in our proposals .
We believe that it is necessary for constituents to be closer to their European Members of Parliament and for this reason , as a first step , we propose that the five largest countries of the present European Union , which have a population of more than 25 million , should be divided into electoral constituencies .
The countries themselves will be the judge of which and how many constituencies .
We do not aspire to lay down ourselves , from Strasbourg , those constituencies which geography , history , economic and cultural conditions have determined .
We are aware of the difficulties of the operation .
But it needs to be done . The ability of the European Parliament to represent its people must not remain a subject of debate .
This Parliament , which is moving onwards and upwards , slowly but surely , will be judged by the quality of its work , the awareness of its responsibility in fulfilling its mission , and its ability to reconcile the challenges of constructing Europe with unflagging political activity within the Member States and with its ability to represent its people .
The latter must not be called into question .
With the division of the largest Member States into electoral constituencies for the European elections , the democratic choice of candidates from the political parties , and a declaration by constituents in favour of preferential voting , the close relationship principle will have a firm foundation and will change the entire picture .
Is it necessary to ask whether , in the current European Parliament , with its already considerable legislative or colegislative powers , there is any room for part-time Members ?
Our proposals contain another element , however , which has most often given rise to debate .
I am referring to transnational constituencies , which are intended to be in place in ten years ' time .
The idea has been aired before but it was initially regarded as Utopian .
However , it has stayed the course and may possibly lay claim to a place in the Europe of 2010 or that of 2020 .
There is no question that it will be a very different Europe from today .
And the European Parliament needs to look ahead , to have vision , to break new ground , to be in the vanguard of its age in terms of thoughts , proposals and ideas .
It is unacceptable for us to tackle problems with the wretched approach of daily routine , with petty political self-interest , with small-mindedness and in the extremely restricted sense of small-party compatibility .
It is intolerable for us to have institutionalized European political parties with the Maastricht Treaty , and not to attempt to give them fundamental political substance .
It is rather foolish to maintain that transnational constituencies disadvantage the small and the medium-sized parties , when there are possibilities of guaranteeing that neither the medium-sized nor the small will be harmed by the implementation of this great European idea .
These proposals , which the Committee on Institutional Affairs paid me the honour of adopting with an overwhelming majority , are now being placed before you for your verdict .
They are restricted to just 10 or 11 points but they have been put together in the ambitious hope that they will finally lead to the first step towards equal opportunities , a more democratic Europe and a more representative Parliament .
We will not cease to fight unrelentingly for these principles .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , now that the euro has completed the process of Economic and Monetary Union , the time has come for Europe to be a " Citizens ' Europe ' .
An important sign of this is the election of Members of the European Parliament from Member States by universal suffrage , a subject which Mr Anastassopoulos dealt with quite brilliantly in his report .
The right to vote is the most important of all citizens ' rights , as it allows people to participate in the most direct way possible in shaping the course of politics .
This shaping process has to take place in such a way that each citizen feels that the European Union , with all its vicissitudes and values , is his political homeland , a place in which his dreams and aspirations of peaceful coexistence can become a reality .
The opinion of the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights is based on this principle .
We need a system of universal suffrage which is clearly intelligible to everyone .
A voting system which brings people and Members of Parliament closer together , which takes account of traditions and which at the same time is flexible enough to absorb new Member States into the European Union .
We do not need fifteen national systems of electoral law - with more to come - interspersed with one or two common European principles .
This would not be in keeping with either the letter or the spirit of those treaties on the basis of which we are working .
The Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights has tabled concrete proposals to this effect , which are also essentially contained in Mr Anastassopoulos 's report .
Where there are omissions , or where the wording is not sufficiently binding , it is up to us to rectify the situation .
To this effect there is a whole series of amendments which bear my name , for the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights cannot act as a proposer here .
I wish that the rapporteur had recommended the acceptance of these amendments .
However , I also know that he has to reject a considerable number of amendments , as otherwise the political structure of Europe would be set back a considerable way from its current position .
Looking to the future , we need a system of European electoral law which is formulated in clear and concrete terms .
We have to ensure , for example , that the binding form of wording " shall ' cannot be substituted by the nonbinding form " can ' .
In my view such options are only appropriate when they refer to rules existing in individual States or when they open up additional possibilities for others .
Examples of this are the preferential votes and a threshold clause which should not be above 5 % .
Some may well shake their heads in surprise , but parts of the new European suffrage system do need to contain clauses of a self-evident nature if they are to be properly observed .
Just think of the principle of equal rights for men and women . This is a vested right in almost every Member State , yet it is often ignored in everyday life .
If we want to bring Europe closer to the people by making it their Europe , rather than a Europe run by a political elite , we have to ensure a strict separation of powers and the elimination of duplicate mandates .
One amendment therefore contains an extensive list of incompatible mandates - a list which , in my personal view , still does not go far enough .
I would even like to see all mayors excluded from the European mandate , but the proposals as they stand are still acceptable .
Neither will the citizens of Europe understand us if we fail to put a cap on electoral costs .
And of course it goes without saying that transparent accounts should be provided here .
Finally a few words on transnational lists and on the mandate given to MEPs .
I know that the rapporteur is very much concerned about transnational candidate lists as a symbol for the unity of Europe .
I am too .
We should therefore adopt this list , without any ifs and buts , in the form proposed by Mr Anastassopoulos .
Amendment No 45 which has been proposed by the rapporteur contains a clarification of the MEP mandate .
I would withdraw this excellent amendment in favour of Amendment No 48 as proposed by the Group of the European Liberal Democrat and Reform Party , which suits our common purpose even better , Mr Anastassopoulos .

Because it is now time to vote , I declare the sitting suspended .
We will resume this afternoon .
( The sitting was suspended at 11.55 a.m. and resumed at 12.00 noon )

Votes
Mr President , I agree with Mr Falconer that voting by roll-call conflicts with the constitution .
Last time , I actually approached you when you were in the chair to tell you that I did not want to say that during the sitting , so as not to delay the vote and not to frustrate the President , because I have a great admiration for the way you chair sittings .
I have just realized that , in contrast to what Mrs Nicole Fontaine had been told , it does have to be done formally .
I am therefore informing you formally - you can see that I am here , I have voted neutrally once - that I am not participating in roll-call votes as a matter of constitutional principle .
I hereby request you to take into account retrospectively what I have up to now told you informally in good faith .
Mr President , on behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists , and after consultation with Mr Lehne , as rapporteur , I wish to table the following amendment : on the basis of Rule 129 of the Rules of Procedure I request that before proceeding to the vote we refer the report and the amendments back to committee .
Some of the amendments are still very controversial .
Mr Lehne has agreed to make a further attempt to reach compromises which will avert the risk which currently exists that we shall ultimately be voting on such a contradictory text that the report will be altered beyond recognition and consequently will be devalued .
We therefore request your approval for the report to be referred back to committee .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , let me say first of all that I am very grateful for the proposal which Mr Schulz has just made , because it basically constitutes a positive response on his part to the appeal which I made in last night 's debate , where I requested that this House , and particularly those on the Left , should think again about the results of the deliberations of the Committee on Civil Liberties and Internal Affairs .
I am pleased to see that the House is prepared to do this .
However , I also wish to make some critical comments on this amendment , plainly and simply because this is now , I believe , the third time this week that a report from the Committee on Civil Liberties and Internal Affairs is being referred back to committee .
This is apparently because the Socialists have not done their homework on the subject and because they have quite literally pushed through a series of decisions in the Committee on Civil Liberties and Internal Affairs which in our understanding , and after what I said yesterday in the House , are simply not acceptable in their current form .
To be specific , this concerns the extension of family allowance to partners of the same sex , the possibility of immigration when only one job is on offer and the introduction of electoral rights for third-country nationals in municipal elections which go well beyond the rights currently available to EU citizens .
With this in mind , and in view of the fact that this House , including the Socialists , has indicated its willingness to discuss these issues once more in committee , I am prepared to agree to the amendment being referred back to committee and would ask my group , and indeed all other Members of the House , to comply with Mr Schulz 's proposal .
Mr President , if the rapporteur himself can accede to Mr Schulz 's request , I as the Chairman of the Committee accept that .
But I do want to say that this , of course , has nothing to do with the arguments used by the rapporteur .
This is a committee , and it is in the nature of this committee that controversial political topics will be on the agenda .
It is actually a miracle that in most cases we do agree , that we do reach consensus in this committee .
In a number of unusual cases which deal with politically heavy-weight matters , it is sometimes useful to have a further opportunity to discuss them in committee .
But in this case , I just wanted to add that , it would possibly also be very useful to hear from the European Commission what it thinks of amendments which have been tabled by our parliamentary committees .
We were not really told that properly yesterday .
It would be very useful for the continuation of our discussions , and this can naturally also be done actually in committee , for us to hear what the Commission , or the responsible Commissioner , thought of the points of view we have jointly adopted and that have been tabled in the form of amendments .
Mr President , I wish to speak against the amendment and to respond to Mr Lehne by saying that we certainly did do our homework .
We may have - indeed we definitely do have - different opinions on the subject .
The efforts being made to keep families together , which you have criticized , are in keeping with what the European Parliament has readily accepted in other reports , namely in the report on equal rights for gays and lesbians and in the report on human rights - and whether it suits you or not , this was supported by the majority of this House - which stated that there should be no discrimination based on a person 's sexual orientation .
It was therefore quite logical that the family in its extended form should be defined in this report .
You say that the electoral rights of third-country nationals in municipal elections go far beyond the rights of EU citizens .
I am sorry , Mr Lehne , but this is simply not true .
EU citizenship gives European citizens the right to vote and to stand as a candidate at European and municipal elections , and there are now calls to extend this to third-country nationals - which incidentally is fully in keeping with what Commissioner Flynn called for in the Year against Racism .
That was last year , and we should not forget it .
I am against the motion .
I am sure that the major coalition in this House will decide differently .
It would have been nice to be voting today on a report which laid down rules for immigration and the rights of immigrants .
( Parliament decided to refer the report back to committee )
Mr President , whichever way the final vote on this resolution goes , I would like in any case to address a comment to Commissioner Gradin , who yesterday , after the reading of my report , responded with a number of policy plans which boiled down to adopting all the policy proposals I particularly value and which I think that almost everyone supports , except possibly the extreme right of this Parliament .
The work of the Committee on Civil Liberties and Internal Affairs and my own work as rapporteur is thereby richly rewarded , in my opinion .
I thank the Commissioner .
Mr President , I would like you to note that none of the members of the Union for Europe Group will take part in the vote on the report by Mr Oostlander , neither by raised hand , nor by electronic verification , nor by roll-call vote .
This is because we believe that the status of religions is a matter for national authorities , in accordance with the principle of subsidiarity , and that , therefore , it should not have been presented before this Parliament .
Consequently , in accordance with our rules , I call on the sitting 's services to note the presence of those of my colleagues who are here , but who will not take place in the vote .
Thank you , we will make sure your attendance is recorded .
( Parliament rejected the motion for a resolution )
We note that paragraphs 1 to 6 in the explanatory statement amount to a description of how the situation actually appears today .
However , we cannot agree with the expression of intent in paragraph 7 , which advocates protection clauses for tobacco and rice , because , among other reasons , in general we do not think that this amounts to a permanent solution .
Instead we should seek adaptation to the existing WTO rules .
We are also opposed to specific protection clauses for tobacco since we think it is totally wrong to support this sector because of the very great adverse effects on health which the use of tobacco entails .
We have today voted in favour of the European Parliament 's approval of the proposal by the Commission on the arrangements applicable to agricultural products and goods resulting from the processing of agricultural products originating in ACP States .
We support the Commission 's proposal because it serves to improve access to the European market for some of the poorest nations in the world .
In many cases , these countries are utterly dependent upon exporting their agricultural produce .
Nevertheless , we have several reservations with regard to this proposal .
Firstly , it is regrettable that it has taken the EU almost three years to get as far as this reading .
Even though the change will take effect retrospectively , this has caused unnecessary uncertainty in ACP States .
Secondly , we must urge the EU to involve more developing countries in this system .
ACP States are , of course , among the poorest in the world , but there are equally other countries needing to export to Europe .
Thirdly , it is a disgrace for the EU to expend so much energy protecting its own agricultural production .
There is nothing - either in this proposal , in Agenda 2000 or in other actions relating to this area - to indicate that the EU would be prepared to sacrifice its own production in order to come to the aid of other parts of the world .
Our group is in favour of developing a specific Europe-Asia cooperation strategy in the field of the environment and environmental protection .
In 1997 , the United Nations General Assembly confirmed that the pact concluded within the framework of the Rio Conference had been almost totally disregarded .
It is therefore necessary to use this Europe-Asia cooperation strategy to implement a policy which takes into consideration a certain number of the Rio commitments .
There are many environmental problems in Asia :
As far as water pollution is concerned , domestic sewage in and around urban centres threatens human health as well as aquatic life , allowing disease to flourish , leading to high sickness and death rates .
In addition , most industries discharge their waste into rivers.-With regard to air pollution , according to the World Health Organization , 12 of the 15 cities with the highest levels of particulate matter and 6 of the15 cities with the highest levels of sulphur dioxide are in Asia .
The region is becoming the major contributor to acid rain and greenhouse effect gases.-Land degradation , which is largely due to efforts aimed at maintaining self-sufficiency in food , using unsuitable technologies given the specific soil and climatic constraints of these regions.Having made these alarmist comments , what else can we do ?
Some , like the Commission in its communication , envisage the establishment of an environmental cooperation policy which will of course require separate funding .
Our group recommends an alternative which may nevertheless be compatible with the first solution , in order to repair the damage caused by the current situation as quickly as possible .
Globalization , as we know it today , must by replaced by the internationalization of trade .
This means implementing specific clauses guaranteeing compliance with social , environmental and health principles within the framework of the COM .
We must put an end to the social and environmental dumping seen today .
What is the point of liberalizing trade by limiting tariff and customs barriers if this leads to ecological disasters ?
We are in favour of the free market provided social , environmental and health clauses are established .
Mr President , I voted against this report by Mr Oostlander , and I am very pleased indeed that Parliament has rejected it by a decisive two to one vote .
It was confused .
I am sure the rapporteur was well-intentioned but this bizarre report came over as though fixated with the Islamic religion .
It focused unnecessarily on the Islamic religion , whereas it was meant to be a report on the problems associated with fundamentalism .
Overall , it was a general insult to Muslim citizens and residents of the European Union .
One of the paragraphs referred to the stereotyped image of Islam and Muslims in the western media .
This report itself contributed to increasing that poor image .
There are millions of ordinary , decent Muslim people , followers of the Islamic religion in the European Union , who are perfectly respectable and law-abiding and who were quite right to feel insulted by this report .
I am glad it has been rejected .
European societies which lack ideals , objectives and clear reference points are totally defenceless against the rise of fundamentalism .
Bogged down in a deceptive , even desperate materialism , they do not know how to face up to the sometimes violent challenge represented by Islamic fanaticism and which is becoming all the more serious in that it is finding a happy hunting ground amongst uprooted immigrant populations , who are poorly integrated and are victims of unemployment and of the low life that flourishes in the dehumanizing suburbs .
Mr Oostlander 's report might have made a valuable contribution to the debate on this problem .
Unfortunately , this work was misleading in that it was basically ambiguous with a very broad scope .
It was ostensibly a report on religious fundamentalism but the actual report dwelt heavily on Islamic fundamentalism .
This is not by chance , since that is what we are witnessing in such a bloody manner in the European Union , and especially in France .
The debate held in this House , far from clearing our minds , has simply sown further confusion , since no-one can agree on the definition of fundamentalism , a word that is sometimes used in the sense of fanaticism , sometimes extremism and often applied to areas outside the religious fold .
More than that , with the understandable desire to avoid pointing an accusing finger in the direction of Islam , some speakers have wallowed in grotesque fusions of ideas , even going so far as to speak of " Catholic terrorism ' with reference to groups opposed to abortion who pray in front of hospitals , not to mention the fantasies woven by others around the Opus Dei organization .
Whereas Voltaire regarded the Jesuits as his bête noire , the Voltaire network seems fixated on the Opus Dei group , but as a writer Voltaire at least had talent and style .
So the entire debate has added nothing new to the subject .
It would probably have been preferable to demarcate the boundaries of the report more clearly ; this would have avoided some of the interminable discussions .
So this is a report on religious fundamentalism that dwells heavily on Islamic fundamentalism .
This is a major problem because it leads us to the question of the integration of Islam in societies that understand the concept of the separation between things spiritual and things temporal ; " render unto Caesar that which is Caesar 's and unto God that which is God 's ' is not a precept that prevails in Islamic societies .
Hence , the challenge we face is a dual one :
for our societies , showing respect for Islam as the spiritual expression of increasing numbers of peoples in the European Union-for Muslims , respecting the separation between the spiritual and the temporal , which is a gospel truth in our societies , and accepting that religious law must not be confused with civil law.Consequently , the initial ambiguity about the scope of the report made it incoherent , so that - despite some good points - it provoked such ill-structured debates .
To conclude , I regret the fact that one form of fundamentalism was not discussed and that is secularism , which preaches a hatred for religion and which , especially in France , is sadly too often exemplified , sustained and propagated by allegedly secret societies that are far more dangerous for the state than Opus Dei .
In setting before you my views on this report dealing with " fundamentalism ' , I would like to repeat the fact that I was sorry Parliament last night failed to debate and adopt a harsh report attacking sects that represent fundamentalism at its worst .
Our Parliament lacked courage .
With regard to the Oostlander report , I would like to say that I too am vigorously opposed to Islamic fundamentalism , as I am to all forms of fundamentalism , whether religious or otherwise .
Not only do such movements incite violence and war , all of them threaten the bedrock of our democratic structures and hence our individual and collective liberties .
Therefore we must fight them all without fear or favour .
To achieve this aim , we have one sure weapon and a set of principles on which we should rely and that is quite simply - secularism .
As defined in the explanatory statement appended to the present proposal for a recommendation , religious fundamentalism here seems to mean the will of a particular group to impose a type of society ( which may indeed be eminently democratic , in principle ) by violent means , based on the religious convictions held by its members .
In accepting this , we have to conclude that a group which latches onto the notion of promoting , by peaceful means , a nondemocratic type of society based on the religious convictions of its members , is not fundamentalist .
The definition we end up with might lead us to believe that it is not so much the ends - the type of society based on religious convictions - as much as the means employed - violence - that is the defining feature of fundamentalism , as envisaged within the context of this motion for a resolution .
Now , as your rapporteur rightly stressed , religious fundamentalism of a violent nature will not be welcomed in the European Union .
In certain Member States it may find favourable territory in which to set up base for battles to be conducted beyond the frontiers of the Union .
Similarly , it would be beneficial if , in this area as in many others , foreign policy were more consistent ; but we should concentrate more assiduously on the ends to be achieved in this respect .
At the same time , a preventive policy encompassing all the factors underlying a genuine dialogue based on a better mutual understanding is the key to a truly intercultural society .
And this is conditional upon the State guaranteeing and encouraging this preventive policy by law , by making appropriate provisions and continuing to demonstrate its impartiality towards individual religions , whilst at the same time respecting the personal convictions of everyone ; yet it should still show that it is adamant in rejecting any social behaviour , even if it is irrevocably bound up with those religious convictions , that runs counter to fundamental rights and liberties .
Woe betide us if we adopt the animosity , the prejudice , the ignorance , at times , and , mainly , the fanaticism that the rapporteur directs against fundamentalism .
We will be automatically led to precisely what Mr Oostlander is alleging that he is trying to prevent : tearing apart social cohesion and transforming of our societies into arenas full of racist , fanatical gladiators .
Using law and order as an alibi , first class arguments are advanced for the close supervision and control of social and political life , which will encourage the further strengthening of supervision mechanisms , the keeping of files , actions taken by companies , including dismissals , all of which will fundamentally increase and deepen racism and xenophobia .
The rapporteur , who is monolithic and absolute in his approach , inveighs against any kind of anti-European religious fundamentalism that threatens European prosperity and democracy , whilst failing to mention the fanaticism currently steeping Northern Ireland in blood , with continued cruelty and violence , because he avoids " like the plague ' tampering with the established order of the European Union , the sway of Catholicism and Protestantism and their own fundamentalist groups , while denouncing fundamental orthodoxy as anathema and blaming it for the slaughter in Bosnia .
Mr Oostlander 's report fanatically calls for new crusades , reducing the " law and order ' of the European Union to religious dogma . It calls on its " disciples ' to carry out campaigns of religious conversion in every direction .
The modern inquisition is to exploit the modern mechanisms of Schengen and Europol .
It is to turn political cooperation and the common foreign policy into mechanisms of coercion and of the imposition of a " European dogma ' .
No mention is made of the more deep-rooted phenomena that encourage acts of violence and blind confrontation .
No mention is made of the real social , economic and cultural reasons which transform religion into a pretext for the expression , channelling and violent release of deeper class-related and other problems . These are problems which the inquisitorial findings and proposals contained in the report can only reinforce and exacerbate .
Moreover , the fundamental objective is this : the construction of an apologetic alibi for all the criminal interventions in foreign countries , such as the Gulf War , Bosnia-Herzegovina and so forth . It is also an alibi for everything that the new order is generating , for new interventions , such as in Kosovo or anywhere else for that matter , in its American or European Union guise .
It will still require disorientation and other alibis for military policy plans such as the restructuring of NATO and armament programmes , to provide a market for the military industry .
The Oostlander report cries out " what will become of us without barbarians ' , without threats and without dangers .
And when they do not exist , we manufacture them .
For these reasons I will be voting against the report .
We voted against Mr Oostlander 's resolution on fundamentalism because of its unbalanced and tendentious nature .
The title of the report , ' on fundamentalism and the challenge to the European legal order , ' gives the impression that all forms of fundamentalism are going to be described objectively .
Unfortunately , the report does not do this .
Islam is picked out yet again as the greatest potential danger for the West .
The way the resolution is written is insidious , in that unobjectionable paragraphs about the protection of , among other things , the rule of law , are mixed together with paragraphs which express a patronizing attitude towards Muslims , such as the idea that Muslims can have difficulty accepting the rules of democracy and the rule of law .
Groups and parties on the extreme right are attacking refugee camps , murdering people because of the colour of their skin , setting fire to houses and murdering small children because of different religious beliefs .
These authoritarian and in some cases fascist tendencies represent a much greater threat to the legal order in Europe than any possible fundamentalism .
For me many of the positive aspects of this recommendation are common to all questions relating to Community foreign policy and the need for a preventive approach to this subject .
But I have no time for policies which state , for example , that the Council ' should compel the Member States to remove the legal and practical obstacles to the performance of religious duties ' .
This interference of a supra-national body in national affairs , such as the question of giving equal status to the Muslim faith , must be rejected .
This is one of the reasons why the Members of the Freedom Party voted against this report , both in the final vote and in many of the detailed votes .
The Danish Social Democrats in the European Parliament have today voted against a report that is primarily concerned with Islam as a challenge to the European legal order .
The report concludes that the problem of violent religious fundamentalism is not particularly serious in Europe .
Nevertheless , it goes to great lengths to describe the challenge from Islam .
Reference is made , for example , to the Islamic religion having certain requirements of a legal order that would conflict with the European legal order in certain areas .
And European Muslims are warned against Islamic manipulation .
The report does make some positive observations , urging , for example , a firm and consistent policy towards governments that support and permit terrorism .
All countries should be judged on equal terms ; hence , no distinction must be made on the grounds of economic or strategic considerations .
We also support calling on Member States to take preventive action against fundamentalism by following a deliberate policy of integration to strengthen the position of Muslim groups in the labour market and in the education system .
However , we have voted against the report , because we do not believe that it contributes to integrating Muslim groups into the Member States ; neither do we believe that Parliament has a negative approach to the Islamic religion .
Why should a report about measures to combat religious fundamentalism be discussed in the European Parliament at all ?
It sets religion against religion and points to religious tendencies as being fundamental and therefore less good than ' European ' religions .
Nor is the word fundamentalism defined .
That is the wrong approach .
If violence is the main issue , then that is what should be discussed .
Matters of religious legislation and religious rights should be dealt with at national level .
There is also no reason for the EU to start special media programmes on Islam for journalists or to start up any European research aimed at being able to ' meet the need for spiritual leaders trained in a European context . '
Against this background I have voted against the report .
We are directly opposed to this report .
Not because we do not acknowledge the importance and rightness of responding to the phenomena of fundamentalism , but because of the twisted and wrong-headed way in which the report tackles the question , ' pinning it ' on the Arab world , confusing it with Islam and disregarding its political , social and cultural causes .
In particular , it disregards those situations which originated in Europe and have become a hothouse in which it thrives .
It is , furthermore , symptomatic that this report treats the phenomena of racism and xenophobia , which ought to be of such concern to us , in a biased and equivocal manner ; it is like a parody which , in this context , ignores - and encourages us to ignore - the ' fortress Europe ' that is being created .
Thus it is no surprise that the report gives priority and particular emphasis to policy measures .
These are some of the fundamental reasons why we are voting against this report .
I have voted against this report because of its implied view that all Muslims in Europe are susceptible to Islamic fundamentalism and that Islamic fundamentalism always manifests itself as violence .
This is not true , and the report has caused extreme offence to many European Muslims .
The report does contain a few sections that could be supported , but unfortunately they are outweighed by the simplistic , intolerant and unbalanced majority of the report .
If people break the criminal law they should be dealt with through their national jurisdictions as appropriate , but this should have nothing to do with their religious convictions .
I , too , am of the opinion that the European Parliament has no authority in the matter of fundamentalism .
I therefore abstained in the final vote on the Oostlander report .
Many of the reports we discuss here in Parliament argue for the creation or maintenance of European centres or organizations .
That is also the case here .
You hardly ever see a report which proposes that an organization or centre should be closed .
We think that the existence of ' European ' centres tends , unfortunately , to lead to the production of a lot of documents , but does not have much effect on the ordinary lives of people .
Even though we are voting for the report , we would like to express our strong reservations as above .
We will be voting in favour of Mr Sérgio Ribeiro 's report , because at least it has the merit of highlighting the importance of the textile industry in terms of the economy and jobs in the European Union , especially in the least privileged regions , in view of the challenges they face - dumping , unfair competition , relocations , and so forth - and the blatant inadequacies of the Commission in taking appropriate action .
But we have some important reservations .
When will we find a measure of consistency in the European Union ?
We cannot seek to protect the textile industry and at the same time approve abandoning the Multifibre Arrangement .
We cannot at the same time condemn dumping and accept Community legislation designed allegedly to protect business , which is derisory , ineffective and deliberately slow .
We cannot , at one and the same time , play the welfare game and continue to trade with countries where children and political prisoners are made to work under conditions of virtual slavery .
We cannot at the same time seek to support a particular sector and forbid France to abandon its textile plan in the name of ultraliberalism .
In other words , it is high time the European Union gave precedence to jobs and to the prosperity of Europeans before worrying about competitiveness and free trade policy .
It is high time we placed humans at the heart of Europe and finally stopped promoting capital .
In this written statement , on behalf of the Group of the European Radical Alliance , I want to express our vote in favour of the Ribeiro report .
The basis of our support is centred on the rapporteur 's criticism of the Commission 's plan of action to increase the competitiveness of the European textile and clothing industry .
It is true that there is a need for such a plan , because of the precarious current situation of this important sector , which employs more than two million workers throughout the Union and involves more than 120 000 companies .
Most obvious is the alarming drop in the production level - about 5 % compared with 1990 - with more than 600 000 jobs lost in the period 1990-1996 . In this last year alone , 100 000 jobs have been lost .
The European Commission 's plan of action is well-intentioned , but it is not very specific . It lacks cohesion and precise commitments about funding and a timetable for implementation .
So the Commission should produce a new plan to make good these deficiencies and place the emphasis on training , innovation , technological development and anti-dumping measures .
The internal market too is subject to intense competition .
In order to safeguard businesses and jobs , it will in future be even more important fully to guarantee internal market conditions .
The delocalization of economic activities , in whatever sector , is dependent from the very beginning on how attractive the means of production are .
However , this delocalization , particularly in favour of labour-intensive production , should not benefit from additional support in the form of subsidies or even EU funding .
Instead , we need to invest in the training of our workforce and in making people more competitive in the job market .
This will really be an effective way to prevent damaging distortions of competition .
The Ribeiro report raises the important issue of competitiveness in the European textile and clothing industry .
The Group of Independents for a Europe of Nations wished to table two amendments to this report to underline the particularly damaging effects of business delocalization on our textile and clothing industry .
This industry , especially in the poorest nations of the EU , suffers from unfair competition , more particularly in the low-paid countries with inadequate welfare protection , located outside of Europe , which results in a loss of market share , factory closures , very many job losses , delocalization and a growth in undeclared employment .
Delocalization is far from enhancing the well-being of poverty-stricken populations in the developing world and emergent nations ; quite the contrary , it encourages their exploitation in working conditions that can be compared with slavery .
According to the principle held by our late Chairman , Sir James Goldsmith , delocalization enriches the wealthy in poor countries to the detriment of the poor in both rich and poor countries .
This is why , yet again , we urge the European Union to go back to the principle of Community preference , a pillar of the Treaty of Rome sacrificed to American interests during the Uruguay Round negotiations .
Restoring the principle of Community preference is the most valuable and effective support the European Union could give in the battle for jobs .
In supporting this report I would like to draw attention to the opinion of the REX Committee , the contents of which I fully endorse .
On the report itself , I would like to support the broad criticism by the rapporteur of the lack of genuine action in the Commission proposal .
At this time the textile industry in my constituency is caught up in a terrible situation caused by a combination of events .
The high value of sterling , the crisis in south-east Asia and high tariff barriers in our major export markets , such as the USA , have all served to bring about severe problems for employers and workers .
Almost daily we receive yet more reports of further job losses in areas where there is little prospect of alternative employment .
In these circumstances , therefore , for the Commission to call its proposal a ' plan of action ' is an understatement of laughable proportions .
I listened to Commissioner Bangemann in the House today and I heard nothing that gives us any hope for the future .
We need action now on a coherent and effective strategy , so I would ask the Commission to think again .
I represent a part of the North-West of England with a proud history of high-quality textile production stretching back hundreds of years .
I am voting for this report today as is puts forward practical ideas to help the industry remain competitive with rivals in other parts of the world - greater use of incentives to encourage new inventions and the use of new technology are key measures the EU should promote . And as in all industries , the best possible training aimed at improving people 's skills for their daily work is needed .
I also welcome the idea for a code of conduct to be worked out by staff and employers in the textile sector aimed at outlawing the use of child labour .
We should not stay silent on the use of child labour in other parts of the world today in sectors such as textiles , just as our forebears in Europe rightly campaigned to outlaw child labour in our own factories .
On one issue , however , I must state my disagreement with this report .
Despite the industry 's proud past , many of the people who work in its most advanced companies today face an uncertain future due to the protectionism of some in the Commission and in the European cotton production sector .
We must see an end to the repeated use of anti-dumping duties against the very raw material - cotton greycloth - which our most progressive companies then use their skills and technology to process into high-quality textile products .
Because Sweden is not going to participate in the introduction of the euro in 1999-2002 , we have chosen to abstain from the vote on this report .
The report deals with an issue which only concerns the Member States which are going to be in the euro-area .
Both the Commission 's communication and the report include a number of elements which should lead to a greater participation of SMEs in contract procurement .
Many industrialists know nothing whatsoever about the EEIGs , let alone about the possibilities afforded by such an instrument .
We therefore have to try to find centres , such as local Chambers of Commerce , which can offer expert advice and training .
This transfer of information can also be promoted through the EEIG forum , comprising representatives from the fields of economics and administration .
Finally , it is also important for us to clarify in quite general terms the practical obstacles to transboundary cooperation between companies .
As long as direct business activities cannot be developed , and as long as our objective is simply to facilitate and enhance the economic activities of the Member States , it is essential that we find ways to use and promote the high-quality help available through the EEIGs .
We have no fundamental objections regarding the Tappin report and the communication from the Commission on which it is based . However , there are two fundamental problems which we consider to be indirectly related , and which go beyond the specific problem of the European Economic Interest Groupings ( EEIGs ) .
The first of these is the poor legal infrastructure for crossborder economic trade , in particular with regard to the structure of European undertakings and groups . The second is the creation of appropriate support measures for small and medium-sized enterprises which will actually allow them to participate fully in the potential of the single market and its continued reinforcement as a result of the introduction of the euro .
If no sustainable progress is achieved in these two reports , in our view the success in real terms of hybrid instruments such as the EEIG should unfortunately be regarded with the greatest of scepticism .
This does not detract from the efforts made by Mr Tappin and of the Commission .
However , it should not be forgotten that these are at best only a stopgap and will remain one .
That concludes Voting Time .
( The sitting was suspended at 1 p.m. and resumed at 3 p.m. )

Electoral procedure ( continuation )
The next item is the continuation of the debate on the report ( A4-0212 / 98 ) by Mr Anastassopoulos , on behalf of the Committee on Institutional Affairs , on a draft electoral procedure incorporating common principles for the election of Members of the European Parliament .
Mr President , it is my pleasure and honour to speak today on behalf of the Socialist Group on this important subject .
May I begin by congratulating the rapporteur on the work that he has put into this .
This is of course an old issue .
It is an issue on which the treaties give Parliament the right of initiative , and Parliament has used that right a number of times to put forward proposals for a uniform electoral system .
But , alas , each time it was unable to find the necessary unanimity in the Council for the adoption of such a system .
We now have a window of opportunity , thanks to two new developments .
The first of these is the election of the Labour Government in the United Kingdom which is introducing a system of proportional representation by regions for European elections .
The UK was the only country not to have a proportional system and this therefore brings the UK into line with all the other Member States at least in that respect .
Mr Anastassopoulos referred to that as a surprising new development .
It is not really surprising ; it has been a long-standing policy commitment of the Labour Party , and was in Labour 's manifesto when it won power last year , so it is not surprising that this has come through .
There is a determined government , keen to act on its promises .
The second development is also important , however .
The issue of proportional representation is far from being the only issue on which it had proved difficult to reach the necessary unanimity in the Council .
That is why the Treaty changes agreed in Amsterdam are equally important : for the first time it will be possible simply to adopt common principles for the European elections , rather than a completely uniform system .
If we can reach agreement , this will allow us to make progress immediately without needing to go all the way to having a fully uniform system straight away .
It is that window of opportunity that we must take advantage of today .
Mr Anastassopoulos ' report points the way .
It contains much that is wise , it leaves a lot to Member States under the principle of subsidiarity , but it determines a number of common principles .
If we can iron out one or two little problems that still remain in his report , then we should be able to get a large majority to support it .
One of those problems is the proposal for 10 % of seats to be set aside for transnational European lists .
There are , frankly , divergent views , not just within my group but within most groups on this issue .
On a report like this it is necessary to get a very large majority in order for Parliament to speak with authority .
I have therefore put forward a compromise amendment in the name of my group which should give satisfaction to both sides - both those who think that transnational lists are important because they are more European , and those who say you do not need a system like that , and that even federal-type systems do not normally have federal level lists .
If you look at America , Switzerland or Germany , that is not normally the case for elections .
Both sides can be satisfied if my amendment is adopted because it says that Parliament will ' examine ' a proposal for such a system in time for the 2009 elections but would not make it legally obligatory now by inserting it as a requirement in the act .
Those who support the system would gain the satisfaction that the idea is kept alive - it goes forward to the Council and we will have to come back to it .
Those who are opposed to the system would be satisfied that it does not immediately become obligatory and an essential part of the acts to be adopted .
I commend that compromise to the House and I remain convinced that , if it is adopted and if one or two other minor problems are sorted out with this report , we will find it possible to obtain the very broad majority which I am sure we are capable of getting for this report and which we should indeed aim for as a parliament .
Mr President , one of the new features of the Treaty of Amsterdam is to establish the possibility of this Parliament incorporating common principles for elections to the European Parliament .
The Treaty of Rome gave us a single mandate : the establishment of a uniform electoral procedure .
For 40 years we have been unable to achieve it , but I believe that with this excellent , meticulous report by Mr Anastassopoulos we will be able to establish common principles for elections to the European Parliament , even before the Treaty of Amsterdam comes into force .
So I think this is an example of work done well , quickly , accurately and with political meaning .
Furthermore , I think it exemplifies something I have been lucky enough to be able to talk about in this House before : from having had a role in providing the impulse , our Parliament has moved on to having a role via codecision .
I think that is extremely important .
Mr Anastassopoulos ' report underlines the essential principles of an electoral system for the European elections .
The first principle is that of proportional representation .
There is no denying that in this House at the moment there is a Socialist parliamentary majority , because of the fact that in certain EU Member State elections are carried out by means of a majority single-vote procedure .
At the moment , that first-past-the-post electoral system has resulted in political misrepresentation .
If this Parliament unanimously approves Article 1 of the Anastassopoulos report , it will mean that the rules of the game will be the same in all the Member States .
So I think we have to congratulate ourselves on the acceptance , by everybody , of proportional representation for the European elections .
Secondly , the Anastassopoulos report also has the merit of applying the principle of subsidiarity , for example in the power it gives the Member States to determine the constituencies , according to the specific characteristics of each country .
I want to mention a third point , to which the previous speaker has already referred : the transnational list .
We in the Group of the European People 's Party believe we should promote transnational lists because we think we ought to develop that precept , which is included in the Maastricht Treaty , where it talks about European political parties . So I agree with what Mr Corbett said .
We are going to try to find a formula with which all the political groups in this House can feel comfortable .
But we must give a clear political signal that we want transnational lists in the future .
Finally , we also want to mention the incompatibility between a European Parliament mandate and national mandates . The work we do here is important enough .
This Parliament is involved in codecision and has a lot of work to do .
It will have even more work in the future . So we do not think it is possible to be both a national MP and a Member of the European Parliament .
So , Mr President , given these views , my group , the Group of the European People 's Party , is going to vote wholeheartedly in favour of this excellent report by Mr Anastassopoulos .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , if today , on the strength of Mr Anastassopoulos 's excellent report , we finally agree on common principles for an electoral system for the European Parliament , this will be a quite decisive step - and one which has long been overdue - towards greater electoral democracy in the European Union .
It is very encouraging to see that we are in agreement on the basic principles of proportional representation , or rather that we are on the verge of reaching such agreement .
In this connection the political representatives from the UK , who prepared the way for this measure , deserve every respect .
It is quite vital for us to recognize that proportional representation will provide us with a more vigorous and dynamic parliamentary system .
This will have particular benefits for the European Parliament and for the political union of Europe .
Why ?
Because this political union is still unfinished and still has no fixed constitutional structures .
It is therefore very , very important for this Parliament to keep an open mind when it comes to many of the political policies and , as far as I am concerned , to territorial interests and ideologies as well .
This openness is vital , for what we do not want to see is a Parliament made up of two blocks with rigid voting patterns and so on , as tends to be the case with the first-past-the-post electoral system .
As we enter a historic phase in European history it is particularly important that we have a Parliament capable of open debate .
The rapporteur has adopted just the right approach in attempting merely to define the principles of universal suffrage .
This leaves room for national political traditions and cultures - which is a very important factor .
Let me now raise a number of points which have an important bearing on this debate .
Firstly the matter of constituencies . It is right that these should be limited to the larger countries and it should be made quite clear that the principle of proportional representation should not be affected by this in any way .
Secondly the percentage hurdle .
In my view the 5 % being proposed for the larger nations is simply too high .
It would be deplorable if possibly millions of voters in the larger countries were not to be represented in the European Parliament .
I therefore hope that we will lower the 5 % hurdle .
Now two more fundamental issues .
The first concerns the compatibility of a seat in the European Parliament with one in the national Parliament .
Let us be honest - if you take your mandate seriously , you cannot perform both roles .
My final point relates to the common European list . If we are to take European political union seriously , we should be happy to see our citizens organizing themselves on a Europe-wide basis and standing as candidates in democratic elections .
I therefore support the idea of transnational lists in the European Parliament .
Mr President , I would first of all like to congratulate Mr Anastassopoulos on the very fine piece of work he has brought us here , especially the part that deals with European electoral rights , which are very important to our work .
In addition to my acknowledgment and thanks , I would like to string together a few thoughts , mainly regarding territorial constituencies and transnational lists .
This report recognizes that eleven of the present fifteen States have only one electoral constituency .
Even so , it considers it important to make territorial constituencies based on population criteria for the areas in question compulsory .
I wondered why , and found the answer in the report as well : our colleague says his aim and objective is to bring elected Members closer to the electors .
I myself am entirely in favour of that principle .
I do indeed consider that the closer we get to the citizens that elect us , the better Europe will be built .
And I therefore think this principle is to be applauded .
But I have serious doubts as to whether this arrangement or system is the most likely way of achieving those aims .
There may be other , different ways of achieving them . From my point of view it suffices that we should be attentive to public opinion in the various Member States , which of course is expressed through their national Parliaments .
And , therefore , I myself would give the principle of subsidiarity free rein in that area - a principle which is also recognized and applauded in the report .
Another aspect I cannot overlook relates to the question of making transnational lists compulsory from 2009 .
And I must say I am delighted by the opening Mr Corbett has provided for a possible agreement on the matter .
I have to say that , as this motion is worded , I have the most serious doubts .
Firstly from the legal and institutional point of view : I wonder , and I ask my fellow Members to enquire of themselves as well , whether Article 190 of the Amsterdam Treaty will not perchance be a little cramped by a proposal of this nature ...
But apart from this legal question , with which we should be concerned as a House of specialists in such matters , which we also are , there are questions of a political nature that I cannot help bringing to the House 's attention .
I am thinking for example of the question of what role Parliaments should play vis-a-vis public opinion .
I myself have always believed that Parliamentary legislation should follow the demands of public opinion , and not the other way round .
So far as I am aware , public opinion in the various Member States is not calling for transnational lists .
What the public wants most of all is that we here should do our job properly and that those we represent should feel that their interests are genuinely protected here .
I am inclined to quote a well-known Portuguese figure , not even a member of my party , who used to say ' Let Europeans marry one other , let them meet one another , don 't run too far ahead of Europeans ' .
For my part , I am open to that understanding for the very reason that I am one of those people who do not believe European public opinion is calling for transnational lists .
Mr President , I too wanted to pay tribute to Mr Anastassopoulos ' work and make it clear that it is possible to admire a rapporteur 's work , and congratulate him on it , without necessarily agreeing with all the points in the report .
I particularly agree with the way it gathers together all our national experience ; proposes a draft electoral procedure based on common principles , developing the Treaty of Amsterdam ; presents the principle of proportional representation as the most important ; and the incompatibility of mandates , especially those between the European Parliament and the national parliaments .
But although I agree with all that , and also the transnational dimension of the elections - although I know public opinion is against that in some countries - I have to say that I do not agree with the idea of territorial constituencies , and making them compulsory for countries with a population of over 20 million .
My first argument is that it is an arbitrary figure .
So in countries with a population of 19 million , if any existed , Members of the European Parliament elected in a single constituency would be close to the people , whereas in countries of 21 million inhabitants they are not , and have to be divided up into various constituencies , of approximately 5 or 6 million people .
I do not think such an arithmetical method will resolve the question of the citizens being close to their representatives .
Secondly , there is an adverse effect on medium-sized political options - not the People 's Party , to which Mr Anastassopoulos belongs , or the Party of European Socialists .
Political choices such as the one I represent , which count on approximately 10 % of European voters , and which are not nationalist parties , would really be placed in a very difficult situation .
In other words , the people we represent would be left with virtually no representatives .
That is an attack against the fundamental principle upheld by Mr Anastassopoulos : the principle of proportionality .
I believe we need to study what happens in real political life .
Here , perhaps , the Conference of Presidents could be made up of just four group chairmen .
That is why , every now and then , the report says " without violating the proportional system ' , " without generally violating it ' , and so on , because the main objective is being compromised .
I must also say that in some countries there are worrying political consequences because not all regions are equal and not all territories have political power .
Of the 200 European regions , only 69 have real regional parliaments . They have a different dimension , and in Member States with historical communities , with a political personality , it is very difficult to set up different constituencies with a very different dimension .
I will finish , Mr President , by saying that the constituency system in a country I greatly respect - Italy - has not exactly solved the problem of the people being close to their representatives , because political parties can also put forward the same candidates in all the constituencies , which is something this document does not address .
I am not sure that subsidiarity is being fully respected , and for all those reasons , if the rapporteur and Parliament do not accept any amendments then , regretfully , we shall not be able to vote in favour of this report , which contains such interesting elements .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , if we want people to regard the European Parliament as their Parliament and to see the Members of this Parliament as their MPs , then we need to have universal European suffrage and a common set of rules and principles .
The same view was expressed 40 years ago and I only hope that we do not have to wait another 40 years to see it happen .
On behalf of my group I wish to thank the rapporteur , Mr Anastassopoulos , and to congratulate him on his report .
We agree with him .
We agree in particular with the principle of proportional representation as the democratic system of suffrage .
We also support the idea of preferential voting , addressing incompatibilities and the creation and development of European lists , even though this process is fraught with major technical difficulties .
If we have submitted amendments , these are aimed at speeding up the whole process and at achieving a more democratic arrangement .
We are therefore of the opinion that the obligation to introduce equality for women should apply to the national Parties from 1999 .
I hope , Mr Anastassopoulos , that we also have your agreement on this .
We also believe that the proposal for European lists should have a 2004 deadline , not a 2009 one .
If we do not try to get these reforms going , who will ?
Others can be relied on to create delays !
As far as the question of democratization is concerned , I agree with all those who have expressed misgivings about regional constituencies .
At least there should be no pressure exerted here .
This could be handled by applying subsidiarity .
There would be two different types of Member in this House - one with European legitimacy and one with national legitimacy .
I am of the opinion that we need to think this through once again , to say nothing about the various possibilities for manipulating proportional representation .
Naturally the smaller groups in this House - and this is something which Mr Frischenschlager referred to - wish to drop this qualifying clause .
The strength of this House also lies in its representation .
A further reduction in the voting age would also be possible , in our view .
In closing I would like to make a further point .
I believe that current developments also require us to look at the representation of European interests and to bear in mind the development of European political parties .
This is also relevant to the report and is something which is directly associated with it .
If we wish to define and represent European interests , then we need to have European parties .
I believe that here too there are reasons for thinking that the parties present in this House must not just see themselves as European groups but should also align and organize themselves as such , if there is to be any point in having European electoral rights .
Mr President , every Member State is represented in the European Parliament by directly elected individuals .
If the plans of the Anastassopoulos report go through , this will change .
A certain percentage of the seats in the European Parliament will be distributed across " transnational ' lists .
Our citizens are already far from the European Parliament , a fact which will only be exaggerated by this change .
In addition , the rapporteur wishes to take away the right of Member States to organize European elections on a day which fits in with their traditions .
The report suggests electing members of Parliament in all countries simultaneously , possibly over two days .
This is a problem for a country like the Netherlands , in view of the fact that the proposed Saturday and Sunday as election days run totally counter to Dutch tradition .
This not only poses organizational problems , but also problems of principle .
There are many people in the Netherlands who recognize Sunday as a day of rest , for which reason no elections are held on a Sunday .
These two reasons will ensure that the turnout for the European elections will be even lower than the 35 % last time .
A certain class of voters will not show up at all , and will thus not be represented in the European Parliament .
In addition , I am concerned here with the principle that every Member State should have the right to determine itself when it holds elections .
The amendments I have tabled refer to this .
Finally , if the European Parliament wishes to increase European awareness as stated , it has to respond in these election plans to the customs of the Member States in this regard .
This will be very easy to arrange by allowing the elections to take place within a number of days .
Mr President , the National Alliance also wishes to thank to Mr Anastassopoulos for his valuable work and gives its backing to further efforts by the European Parliament to establish a common electoral procedure for European elections throughout all Member States .
Our imminent expansion makes this decision particularly urgent and important . But our most pressing task is to ensure that the parties - which represent a link with democracy in Member States - understand that Europe now more than ever needs representatives who are elected by the people and who will devote all their energies and skill to parliamentary work .
Monetary Europe and the new parliamentary Europe - to an even greater extent - pose important problems that cannot be resolved by half-hearted effort .
The National Alliance still holds to what it said in the last legislature , in other words that proportional representation remains the only real way to involve citizens in electoral choice and thus achieve true democracy .
To turn to the proposals , we consider that the new uniform law should include the incompatibility of mandates already discussed and also stipulate incompatibility - or rather ineligibility - for those who fill important national posts such as regional councillors , mayors of towns with more than 50 000 inhabitants or deputy mayors in regional capitals .
The Europe of the year 2000 must be served by parliamentarians able to devote all their time to giving the European parliament all its eagerly awaited and necessary legislative power .
These parliamentarians must represent all the citizens of their own countries and help them achieve true European citizenship .
For this reason , we ask the rapporteur to consider these comments on incompatibility and ineligibility . We also ask the President of Parliament to send an official invitation to the political forces and governments of all Member States to ask them to adopt measures to be implemented during the next elections - once again due to take place without a common European law - to ensure that the electoral lists , which represent the wishes of our citizens , are made up of people institutionally engaged in acting as Members of the European Parliament and nothing else .
Mr President , may I begin by expressing my support for Mr Anastassopoulos 's report as regards what I consider to be the fundamental issue .
He is proposing a set of common electoral principles based on the proportionality rule .
This seems to me to be the fundamental issue , and I therefore think Parliament should strongly support this report , using the opportunities provided by the Treaty of Amsterdam and the result of the English elections to the best possible effect in order to support , at last , common electoral principles for European elections .
I am in sympathy with the report over a number of proposals , particularly regarding areas of incompatibility , and , I have to say , the creation of infranational constituencies as a way of bringing Members closer to those who elect them . I do not think such a device should cause too much strain on the principle of proportionality .
The aspect I wish to dwell on , however , is the question of transnational lists .
I have to say that I am against this idea , not because I am anti-European , but because I think an intelligent and critical pro-European would prefer not to vote here on this absurd proposal , which is not included as a method of correcting deviations from proportionality , as happens in those of our countries where a national electoral constituency is provided to make it possible to correct deviations from proportionality .
This idea is presented here as a way of , shall we say , identifying a pro-European vanguard from the European political parties .
And I consider this a bad idea , because the way to strengthen the building of Europe is , on the contrary , to reinforce the Commission 's ability to act , its supra-national character and its responsibility to the European Parliament .
That seems the right way to me .
Instead of drawing electors and the elected together , the proposal put before us here drives them still further apart , and , in that respect it may or might seriously damage our fellow citizens ' commitment to strengthening the European Union .
It also has another serious disadvantage , from my point of view .
With the object of promoting European political parties , it attempts to create by this method a class of Euro-politicians who would be perpetuated by means of the European list , but would or might lose touch more and more with their electoral bases in their respective countries .
I think a different way is best .
And Mr Jacques Delors ' proposals are different !
For example , the proposal that a candidate from the European parties should stand for President of the Commission .
That is what the debate is about , not these absurd ideas , as I see them , which may militate against the idea of strengthening democratic and federal forms of European political integration . Those are the principles I support , and I think they should be taken into consideration in this document .
Mr President , I also wish to thank Mr Anastassopoulos for undertaking this very important report .
Although I do not agree with the rapporteur on all the details contained in it , I consider it important that its central concern is to aim for proportional representation in all Member States of the Union .
The report talks about the significance of the principle of subsidiarity as the connecting thread running through the whole issue of European Parliamentary electoral reform .
That is only right , but it appears that what subsidiarity might consist of in this context turns out to be very different for different people .
As the aim is , as the rapporteur stresses , that Members of Parliament and citizens assume closer ties , I cannot agree with the rapporteur 's assessment , for example , of the need for a single European list of candidates for election .
Communications between Parliament and the voters are already very often pretty tenuous .
This being the case , we can only wonder how someone elected from a single European list , say a Portuguese Member of the European Parliament , could actively run things , for example , in the Åland Islands .
Greater community and representation of the people will not come about through common election lists and dates .
Any debate on whether the Belgians , say , may vote one day before the Finns is trivial and diverts attention away from the real problem of how to arouse interest in citizens in European Parliament elections in general .
This report does not get its teeth sufficiently into the problems of representation and the involvement of the people .
As for the latter , the main question concerning election dates is the assurance of sufficiently long-term advance voting for all EU citizens .
This is an idea that is unfortunately absent from this report .
The rapporteur 's idea of rejecting dual mandates is one we warmly support .
Simultaneous membership of a national parliament and the European Parliament calls into question the whole credibility of both the Member of Parliament and the institutions .
Dual mandates were not approved in Finland , and I hope that we will be able to do something about them as quickly as possible in Member States where they are still allowed .
Mr President , Commissioner , allow me first of all to congratulate Mr Anastassopolous for his careful handling of a difficult text , which finally addresses a problem that has long been held in abeyance .
I am pleased with the adoption by the Commission , supported by Mr Anastassopolous , of the amendment in favour of parity between men and women on the European lists .
The European Parliament has always been at the forefront of this struggle since its election by universal suffrage in 1979 .
The Committee on Institutional Affairs continues to follow this path and , once again , I thank Mr Barros Moura for his endorsement of my amendment .
With regard to Article 3 , concerning the transnational lists , Mr Anastassopolous and myself have each tabled an amendment seeking to reflect precisely the terms of Articles 137 and 138 of the Treaty .
In fact , just as the national parliamentarian represents both the interests of his constituents at state level and the national interest as a whole , the European parliamentarian represents the interests of his constituents at European level and the general interests of the Union .
This is the letter of the Treaty whereby - and I quote - " the European Parliament consists of representatives of the peoples of the States brought together in the Community ' .
This is the same logic on which the Maastricht Treaty is based , asserting the principle of European citizenship by offering European nationals the right to vote and the right to be elected in all Member States .
This is the meaning conveyed by Article 7 of the proposal put forward by Mr Anastassopolous which , within a period of ten years in a single constituency , enables candidates to put themselves up for election by all citizens .
That said , I am in favour of the amendment tabled by Mr Corbett , which sends out a clear signal and which , unquestionably , will enable us to reach a more substantial majority in favour of the proposal put forward by Mr Anastassopolous .

Mr President , democracy in the EU countries and in the EU is based on and emanates from the national constitutions and the national parliaments .
Therefore that is where rules for elections , including elections to the European Parliament , should be formulated .
That is where you find democratic legitimacy and respect for national conditions .
For this reason the Swedish Left Party rejects all proposals to regulate the electoral system at EU level on such matters as constituency boundaries and qualifying percentages for small parties .
In the report , paragraph 4 on additional seats at the EU level appears unrealistic .
Such a system requires functioning EU parties .
Such parties can only be created in theory .
In practice , EU parties will for the foreseeable future lack any democratic legitimacy .
They cannot therefore play a true democratic role .
That is why we are going to vote against the report , with the exception of certain parts , such as the fact that elections should be held in May and that dual mandates will not be allowed .
Mr President , I rise to support in particular Amendment No 46 by Mr Ebner , and my own Amendment No 49 , which focus on the rights of historic recognized nationalities within the European Union .
I am quite convinced that a democratic Europe cannot ignore the rights of its small peoples , whether they are the Friesians , the Sardinians or the Valdostans .
The amendments which I am supporting draw attention to exactly that point .
But I am not persuaded at all by the argument that the big Member States have to subdivide into territorial constituencies and the small ones can be left out .
That seems to be quite irrelevant .
Portugal is a nation-state , but so is Germany .
What we have to look at is the multinational states such as Italy , Spain and the United Kingdom where we have to recognize the rights of nationality .
This is something which a sensitive and democratic Europe has to take on board .
Let me conclude by congratulating the rapporteur on his report , which has set us on the right lines .
I would concur with Mr Corbett 's point that after a 20-year British veto on a proportional representation system , it is a relief that we are at last within sight of that goal .
Mr President , the report by the Committee on Institutional Affairs concerning the procedure for selecting European Members of Parliament , contains two dubious innovations .
The first is the general obligation to regionalize the ballot , except in countries with more than 20 million inhabitants .
In this respect , the report neatly reflects the Barnier private member 's bill which has been used in France as the basis of a government bill seeking to regionalize the ballot .
But I should inform the House that all of these developments are now out of our hands since the French government , in view of the general opposition it faced , preferred to withdraw the bill .
Why so ?
Over and above the circumstantial arguments put forward by each party , a proportional ballot - within the framework of a single territorial constituency - as currently practised by 11 of the 15 Member States - is the best way European Members of Parliament can represent their entire country .
This therefore seems to us to be most in line with the concept of a Europe of Nations .
Under such conditions , I would find it inconceivable that the European Parliament could now vote for the regionalization proposal which France wishes so firmly to reject .
It would be even more inconceivable given that the proposal put forward by the Committee on Institutional Affairs is clearly discriminatory , since it enables countries with less than 20 million inhabitants to retain a representation that reflects their national unity , but which is forbidden to all others .
Perhaps other large countries would benefit more than France in this matter .
I do not know .
At all events , I will tell my French colleagues that this proposal is not in the interest of our country .
The second questionable innovation in this report - the election of 10 % of Members within the framework of a single European constituency - is really just another aspect of federalist folklore .
It has no chance of being included in any revision of the Treaty and I wonder if its inclusion in the motion for a resolution placed before us is designed simply to divert our attention from the first issue , which is the more dangerous in the immediate future .
Finally , we note that the European Parliament would gladly accept the election in a regional context , or even a European context , but the only context that terrifies it is the national context .
Anything but the national context seems to be its guiding principle .
How odd .
This is precisely the context that seems to us to be the most robust , the most realistic principle , the closest to a calm democratic expression of popular will , based on national parliaments .
All the others favour the establishment of a confused Europe , deprived of any reference points and opening itself up to all manner of mishandling .
We absolutely refuse to follow this path , Mr President , and we prefer to pursue the path of a Europe firmly grounded in national democratic procedures .
Mr President , I too begin by warmly congratulating the rapporteur .
I believe that the Anastassopoulos report will , without doubt , enter into the history of the institutions of the European Union .
The electoral procedure is - as we all know - the crowning moment of the legitimization of power .
Precisely for this reason the convergence of national systems of electoral law for electing Members of the European Parliament is wholly desirable .
They should converge but not be made identical .
Quite rightly , then , we are going along the road of common principles , which is the cornerstone of the logic of the Anastassopoulos report .
The institutional and political culture of all Member States has from time to time brought to the forefront significant elements and principles such as popular sovereignty , the separation of powers , fundamental rights , and so forth .
Thus , insofar as national political systems both flow from and serve these principles , it is justifiable , productive and in accordance with the philosophy of the European Union that we move towards a common framework for electoral systems .
If we were to opt for just one electoral system , thereby ignoring specific national features , be they geopolitical , sociological or cultural , such a legislative choice would cease to serve the other great objective of the European Union , which is respect for the national identity of Member States .
In parallel , however , with the convergence of the electoral systems , it is essential that the institution of European political parties should evolve , as Mr Voggenhuber so rightly stressed .
Only through such mechanisms and structures , within which Europe 's citizens will carry out , with their active participation , the exciting work of European integration , will the common elements of the common electoral culture be able to evolve and finally become firmly established .
The proposed international list is certainly a good thing in principle , but it must be given time , and this institution can never be understood in isolation from the parallel development of European political parties .
The rapporteur 's proposal for a preferential vote aims to allow constituents to elect specific people .
This proposal , which is on the right lines , has two preconditions : firstly , the acceptance of the regions , which is a precondition that is not without its problems and which must be looked into , and secondly , that we must think carefully about the fashioning of such a system , so that we do not make the election of Members of the European Parliament a matter of personal rivalry .
We hope this Parliament will support Mr Anastassopoulos 's report by an overwhelming majority , since it is important to lend authority to an idea so bound up with the future of Europe .
Mr President , first of all I should like to thank Mr Anastassopoulos for his excellent work .
We do indeed need to have common principles in the electoral procedure for elections to this House .
One of those should be full respect for proportionality .
But there is also a need for all the peoples who make up the European Union , all the national identities , to have the ability to send their own elected representatives to this Parliament .
And where different nations , different peoples , live together in a single Member State - as in the case of the Spanish state where Basques , Catalans and others are all of us nations comprising a state - that plurality needs to be reflected when it comes to establishing the European Parliament 's electoral constituencies .
For those of us who believe in a federal European project , it is important that the people should feel that Europe is close to them , as something they can identify with .
Establishing territorial constituencies brings Europe closer to its citizens and the reality of their national and cultural lives .
That is why the report 's proposed Article 2 is important , establishing that each Member State shall set up territorial constituencies , with these essentially being compulsory for countries with a population of more than 20 million , the ones where this lack of territorial representation is most apparent .
Some governments , such as the Spanish Government , are opposed to their country 's domestic plurality being reflected in the construction of Europe .
That is an archaic , centralist view , which reflects apprehension about Basque or Catalan actualities , or others , being reflected in European politics .
But they have nothing to fear .
We do not want a presence in Europe in order to destroy anything , but to build a common European space .
We are going to contribute and collaborate with solidarity to the European project , which can be the reflection and multicultural sum of us all - not just French , Spanish and British , but also Catalan , Basque , Scottish , Welsh and so forth .
So creating territorial constituencies for the European elections can and should be a step towards achieving a Europe for everybody , in which all its peoples can participate .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , this is an important moment in this session of the European Parliament .
I would like to start by offering the warmest congratulations on behalf of myself and of my whole group to Mr Anastassopoulos for the quality of the work he has delivered .
I said that this was an important moment for the following reasons , ladies and gentlemen .
You will be aware that the Group of the European Liberal Democrat and Reform Party in particular has been devoted for many years to establishing of a common electoral system for the European Parliament .
I must , however , point to the important reports that were completed in the last Parliament by my fellow party member and fellow countryman Karel De Gucht in connection with a European election system , and which were approved by a large majority .
A very creative idea was put forward in the De Gucht report , namely that a uniform system does not mean that the same electoral system has to be established in all Member States down to the last detail , but that all Members of the European Parliament should be elected on the basis of the same principles , that is to say chiefly in accordance with the principle of proportionality .
The principle of proportionality is very precious to us liberals , and that is truly not just because we are one of the smaller political families in Europe , but is because our basic convictions and ideology mean that we greatly value the pluralism of political democracy , because we believe that a mature democracy is one in which there is room for diversity of ideas and views , because we believe , ladies and gentlemen , that the business of politics has to be something more than the confrontation of power among large blocs , and therefore we are delighted with this report and my group will consequently approve it .
Mr President , I also acknowledge the work Mr Anastassopoulos has put into this , even if I think that his report is not entirely appropriate , because Amsterdam is not yet in force and , in particular , because changes are being made to the electoral system of the Member State at which reports of this kind are usually directed .
We consider , furthermore , that the diversity of electoral cultures in our countries should lead us to be extremely careful in our approach to these matters .
That is to say , when we talk about principles we ought not to talk about anything else .
Any drifting beyond that limit will inevitably be ruled offside .
The emphasis given by the rapporteur to the principle of proportionality therefore deserves our acceptance .
And we could say the same about the principle of non-accumulation .
But , for the same reasons , we cannot say the same about certain other guidelines it directly or indirectly recommends .
First and foremost , let me address the matter of electoral constituencies or a single constituency .
It seems wrong to us to lay down any guidelines in this area .
In addition , this is an attempt to link electoral constituencies to the population of Member States while disregarding , for example , their political and administrative organization , whilst giving a markedly federal character to the building of Europe by creating a single constituency . This , in particular , would drive a wedge between Members and electors , when our agenda should primarily be to find ways of dealing with the real alienation of the one from the other that we are seeing today .
The references both to preferential voting and to setting qualifying percentages seem equally inappropriate to us , if only , in the latter case , because it clashes with the principles of proportionality and pluralism .
For these reasons we think this report is in fact inopportune at the present moment .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the rapporteur 's task has been a difficult one .
It is good that the Treaty of Amsterdam creates a framework for the harmonization of elections in all Member States .
This is equality , but something quite different from organizing the European elections as if Europe were a single electoral constituency .
Regional representation guarantees democracy in national and international policy .
Federal states have also recognized the importance of regions and their division into local constituencies .
Even the USA is divided into electoral districts .
And this is despite the fact that there they have one common language throughout the entire country .
As far as political familiarity and influence are concerned , the main state television networks are likewise the same throughout the whole of the federation of the United States .
Europe is not the USA , but it is trying to become an even tighter federation than the United States .
In the EU there is not nor will there ever be one single language nor one single television network broadcasting identical TV programmes to one and all .
So if we were to support single European crossborder elections , we would be turning our backs on national representation .
We would be bashing different cultures into the same unfounded shape .
It is diversity that is the very hallmark of Europeanness .
Sameness is not a strength in the information society .
For example , in my country , Finland , people representing Britain could become well known via the BBC ' s channels , which Finns who understand English watch .
Finnish affairs and representatives on the other hand could in no way become well known in Britain .
In practice this would mean a fall in the number of small language groups and also of seats in Parliament held by Members from small nations .
If single lists were to be organized , representatives of the smaller countries would , as a result of their being less well known , be right at the bottom of the list before very long .
This is the sort of " silly ' federalism that destroys harmony .
Is it not enough that people have already become alienated from these polls ?
Mr President , the history of a civilized society is the story of a succession of battles against repression and discrimination .
This report seeks to lay siege to one such current bastion of injustice .
Our European Union has 15 Member States ; we currently use 16 different electoral systems to choose our Parliament .
We use 16 because one Member State - my own - uses two systems : a fair one in Northern Ireland , where injustice would lead to armed conflict in a province which has seen far too much violence ; and an unfair system in Great Britain , where the minority has limited itself to passive protest .
Great Britain is the only country which uses a non-proportional system of voting to elect Members of this House , and that has rightly been condemned : not simply because it is inherently unjust but also because it has skewed the balance of power between the political parties in this House .
I am the first Liberal Democrat from the United Kingdom ever to be declared elected to this House .
I participated in three election campaigns - in 1979 , 1984 and 1989 - which saw not a single Liberal Democrat elected despite , on one occasion , one voter in every five having cast their vote for my party .
The two Liberal Democrats elected from my country in 1994 should , by rights , have 12 colleagues in this House .
I would like to thank Members of this House , in particular former colleague Karel de Gucht , Gijs de Vries and now Mr Anastassopoulos , for their work to see that such injustice is repaired .
The United Kingdom Government has introduced a bill in Parliament to right the wrongs that have hitherto persisted .
But so long as procedures for election to this House are a matter for national governments , we cannot guarantee a continuation of the principle of proportionality and that is why this report is so important .
We must cement for the European citizen the right so wisely identified by the governments at Amsterdam to an electoral system based on common principles .
This report does that .
It is a major step forward and I commend it to the House .
Mr President , Mr Anastassopoulos ' report clearly shows that the political unification of Europe requires a Parliament whose members are chosen for the role it has to play along the same institutional and political lines .
The rest will be ironed out by national laws .
I recall how our Green colleagues protested in July 1989 , because the British Greens , having got , if I remember rightly , 12 % of the vote , did not have a single Member in this Parliament .
It was politically unacceptable not only to the Greens , but also to the entire British people and to the European Parliament itself and as a failure to reflect the extent to which the Parliament is representative of Europe .
However , we Members of the European Parliament are set apart from each other by the way in which each of us was elected to office .
Some were preferred by the constituents themselves , some chiefly by the leadership of their parties , while others were selected by the members of their party and at times by their constituents as well .
This does not strengthen interest in European affairs , nor does it bring Members of Parliament closer to the people .
In this regard we would like to see arrangements which would give citizens greater and more appropriate involvement .
For this reason I support Mr Anastassopoulos ' proposals for a system of proportional representation , and also for the ability of the citizen to express a preference among candidates .
This can be achieved by various national arrangements , technically speaking . The spirit and the aim , however , must remain the same from country to country .
For the same political reasons the qualifying threshold for being allocated seats must not be prohibitive and , in my view , must not exceed 3 % .
Finally , the election of a number of Members of the European Parliament on a pan-European basis is a positive idea , as long as there are arrangements to prevent the marginalization of smaller countries and of less widely used languages .
Mr President , I would like to offer my congratulations to the rapporteur as many others have already done .
This report might well have passed unnoticed by the public .
But nothing of the kind , and the great merit of the rapporteur is that he had the courage to introduce the proposal for transnational lists , along with other proposals whose importance I do not underestimate , for five specific reasons .
Firstly , it is an initiative that ties in neatly with a programme for building Europe not strictly focused on national interests .
Next , given transnational lists and the opportunity to be included in those lists , minority groups throughout the Member States could gain representation in the European Parliament .
By way of example , minorities we might consider would be the Romanies and Muslims .
Thirdly , as a socialist belonging to a party of European socialists that exists alongside the parliamentary group that bears the same name , I further believe that such lists would help to establish genuine European parties .
Fourthly , it might be interesting to add a little touch of drama to the European elections , in order to distinguish them from national elections .
Finally , there is the question of whether to build a Europe of nations or a federation , which is once more the issue at stake in this debate .
There are , of course , a number of practical problems to be ironed out , but that does not detract from the fact that the principle of transnational lists needed to be brought to our attention and that it would help to develop European awareness .
Mr President , drawing up a draft electoral procedure for electing European Members of Parliament is a long-winded process and many reports have pursued that same line without success .
Doubtless because a uniform , restrictive procedure is neither acceptable nor desirable .
The Anastassopolous report recommends proportional representation , which is the fairest and I commend it , but it does put the burden of creating territorial constituencies on individual Member States . Yet , of the Fifteen , eleven have a single constituency .
By what right does the European Parliament seek to impose a solution that differs from that prevailing and for which most of the States have opted ?
The argument about bringing electors closer becomes quite absurd when we are considering constituencies with several million inhabitants .
In addition , this provision has two major disadvantages .
Firstly , it replaces the national character of the delegations from individual countries and imposes a regional character .
Some States have chosen that path and they are entitled to do so .
But others have not .
Secondly , it infringes the principle of fair representation by raising the eligibility threshold , thereby compromising the representation of small or medium political groupings ; it encourages bipolarity and therefore whittles away at the principle of democratic representation .
The French government , which would like to see such reforms in the balloting procedure , has been forced to retreat because there was not a sufficient majority in favour .
This was a wise move , and I would urge the European Parliament to take counsel from that wisdom by allowing Member States a clear choice between adopting a single constituency or the right not to do so .
Mr President , I should like to add my congratulations to Mr Anastassopoulos on his report and the manner of the consultation he carried out in writing it .
The European Parliamentary Labour Party broadly welcomes the report .
As Mr Corbett reminded us earlier , the Labour Party election manifesto in 1997 included a commitment to introduce PR for the European elections .
The Labour government has acted swiftly to fulfil this commitment .
The European Parliament is a representative body , not a parliament from which a government is drawn .
So the objections to proportional representation at a national level do not apply to the European elections .
We also acknowledge that the UK 's electoral system skews the balance of forces in this increasingly important Parliament .
I should say to Mr Watson - who is muttering away there - that the system we have had , and continue to have , in the United Kingdom , and which has preserved our representative democracy fairly effectively for many centuries , simply consists of the candidate who gets the most votes winning the election .
It really is beautifully simple .
He should not complain if he keeps coming second .
To return to the report , like all reports in the European Parliament , the Anastassopoulos report is a compromise .
I suspect there are few individuals or political groups in this House who would support every part of it .
The European Parliamentary Labour Party has a particular problem and is fundamentally opposed to the proposal that 10 % of the seats be elected in a single constituency comprising the whole of the European Union .
This proposal will , we believe , have virtually no support among the peoples of Europe .
MEPs elected on a transnational list would have no contact with their constituents and would be either independents or the creatures of very remote transnational parties .
Moreover , as the EU expands , the number of MEPs for each Member State is going to be reduced .
This proposal to set aside 10 % of the seats for a transnational constituency would reduce that still further and consequently further remove the MEPs from the constituents they are supposed to represent .
With that caveat we would welcome this report , but we cannot support the 10 % proposal .
Mr President , the report quite rightly favours the principle of proportional representation .
However , it also advocates the division of Member States into electoral regions .
This means a majority can create such numerous and such narrow constituencies that the system of proportional representation will degenerate into a monstrous majority voting system .
Secondly , this division into regions is intended to bring Members of Parliament closer to their constituents and to their problems .
But this is totally at odds with the proposed provision of supranational Members of the European Parliament .
These Members , who will make up 10 % of the total , will be physically distanced from the people and from their problems .
Moreover , it means that this Chamber will include a second category of Members of the European Parliament , who will be in a superior position .
They were elected at a pan-European level !
And this will happen in the name of some united European nation .
It does not exist !
Will it ever exist ?
It has not appeared on the near horizon .
Perhaps in the future , after the Second Coming , there will be such a nation , which will elect supranational Members .
Thirdly , there is the issue of the 5 % threshold .
In other words we must decide who has the right to be represented and who does not .
With this system three million Germans may not be represented , even though they take part in the ballot .
450 000 Greek citizens vote and they will not be represented with the 5 % threshold .
This is unacceptable .
Mr Anastassopoulos says that we are not mature , not " ripe ' , but it appears that we have become overripe , that we have putrefied and that we are moving towards an antidemocratic system .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the proposal for common principles of electoral law is a truly historic step forwards .
With this text , we are coming to an agreement about what we are , namely representatives of the people in a Community of united states .
Yet we cannot , and do not wish , to create total uniformity .
This would not be in accordance with the EU 's current state of development , nor would it take account of different regional and national characteristics .
We are creating unity with diversity and , at the same time , are taking account of diversity in unity .
This means , firstly , that the legal instrument , which requires a unanimous vote in the Council , should regulate the essential points and not be weighed down with too many details .
Secondly , we are creating the opportunity for European lists which can , and should , be implemented in the elections at the beginning of the 21st century .
That is a job for the parties .
I hope that in the year 2004 , each group will jointly put up its key European candidates for election in all Member States .
Thirdly , before enlargement , the candidate countries must be clear about the parameters pertaining to them too .
For Europe , and for the Union , there must proportional representation .
The Treaty of Amsterdam has conferred on the European Parliament the task of working out a draft for joint principles of electoral law .
Today , we are fulfilling that political responsibility .
As from tomorrow , it is the Council 's turn .
I should like to express my thanks to the rapporteur , Mr Anastassopoulos .
Mr President , EU federalists aim to increase transnational decision-making .
This will favour big countries , the former colonial powers .
This will be the state of affairs when the entire EU region is one single constituency in the European Parliamentary elections .
To insist on such a thing would be a travesty of democracy .
There is only national democracy .
For that to exist there has to be a nation .
Europe is not a nation .
It is thus not a nation that Members elected from one constituency should represent .
In the EU there is no generally pervading concept of international democracy .
Insistence on one vast European electoral constituency is at odds with the whole idea of decision-making becoming decentralized .
It means concentrating decision-making .
Voters in the big countries , the former colonial powers , will also be electing representatives from the smaller nations .
These lists will furnish Parliament with only " yes ' Members , " ja ' and " jawohl ' Members , " oui ' Members , " sí ' Members , but no Members from small countries .
Mr President , I think that our colleague , Mr Anastassopoulos , has approached this difficult area with moderation and discernment .
It is an area in which there are divergent national situations and political viewpoints , and he has given us a basis for debate .
I agree with the remarks that were made previously by Mr Papayannakis .
I would just like to make four points .
The first relates to the importance of proportional representation as a common electoral system . This importance must also filter through to national parliaments on the basis of the Amsterdam Treaty .
It is part of the institutional provision for the whole of the European Union .
It is not a matter for us , but we must draw attention to it .
The second point relates to the qualifying threshold .
The threshold was launched on the basis of the threshold in the national parliaments , which is aimed at preventing the fragmentation of political powers and at providing viable forms of government .
Is such a logic tenable for the European Parliament ?
In any case , I think that 5 % is too high a threshold .
The third point relates to preferential voting .
I think that our colleague has touched on a very important issue .
Of course there are parties that elect their candidates on the basis of a vote by its members .
However , there are also parties in which the candidates are chosen on the basis of the preference of the leader of the party or his or her entourage .
This is unacceptable and I think we must think very hard about the democratic mandate of Members of the European Parliament , either by means of preferential voting or by means of democratic procedures within the parties .
The fourth point I would like to make relates to supranational Members of Parliament .
This issue is very important .
However , I wonder whether it would not be more advisable to take an overall view of this matter or to deal with it through the normal procedures of the parties themselves , which would result in greater stability and less opposition .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Commission first wishes to congratulate the rapporteur of the Committee on Institutional Affairs , Mr Anastassopoulos , on the excellent report he is presenting today , and also wishes to express its support for this new attempt by the European Parliament to resolve once and for all the question of the electoral procedure as regards those fundamental aspects where there is a broad consensus among the Member States .
I believe this attempt is an essential part of a whole set of proposals , the ultimate aim of which is to improve public participation in the election of Members of the European Parliament . The Commission has already pointed out the importance of that in view of the future enlargement of the European Union , in the opinion it presented to the last Intergovernmental Conference .
I also want to remind you that the procedure provided for in Article 138 ( 3 ) leaves the legislative initiative in this area in the hands of the European Parliament , and it will be the Council which establishes the relevant provisions , acting unanimously after obtaining the Parliament 's assent .
So on behalf of the Commission , I want to acknowledge the importance of the rapporteur 's efforts during the last few months to facilitate an agreement in Council as quickly as possible .
Finally , ladies and gentlemen , I just want to end by thanking you for the opportunity to take part in this debate , and reiterating the Commission 's support for the essential objectives set out in Mr Anastassopoulos ' report .
Thank you very much , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12.00 noon .
European voluntary service action programme
The next item is the report ( A4-0274 / 98 ) by Mrs Fontaine , on behalf of Parliament 's delegation to the Conciliation Committee , on the joint text , approved by the Conciliation Committee , for a European Parliament and Council Decision establishing the Community action programme " European Voluntary Service for Young People ' ( C4-0381 / 98-96 / 0318 ( COD ) ) .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the plenary is now invited to cast its vote on the conciliation agreement we concluded with the Council , on 23 June , on the subject of the European Voluntary Service action programme .
As the rapporteur for this conciliation exercise , I have to tell you in all truth that I have suffered , as have many other members of our delegation .
Suffered , Mr President , through witnessing the extent to which the Council has once again demonstrated its shortsightedness by skimping - there is no other word - on the funding required to implement an initiative that , as we saw during the trial phase , very much lived up to young people 's expectations .
But the Council knew this .
We had no choice .
We had no choice because it is an excellent programme , precisely because young people write and tell us how interested they are in being able to extend their horizons beyond national boundaries , learning a new language in a neighbouring country , able to cement their projects through direct action .
In all conscience , Mr President , we cannot disappoint them .
A lack of agreement on conciliation would have deferred , or even cancelled out the positive effects of European Voluntary Service , particularly by fragmenting the impetus generated so far .
So , after long hours of debate , we have managed to wrest ECU 47.5 million from the Council for the period 1998-1999 .
This financial package is wholly inadequate and I thank Commissioner Cresson for the statement by the Commission in which it undertook to look favourably into the possibility of boosting the credits .
I have no doubt that Mrs Cresson has her heart set on making this intention a reality , and I have no doubt that Commissioner Bangemann , who has been gracious and kind enough to stand in for Mrs Cresson , will confirm this in a few moments .
With regard to the other items , I am pleased to note that the Council has taken account of our requests concerning the need for cultural and linguistic training among the young , as well as quality hosting projects .
We note , too , the steps taken , albeit somewhat hesitant but nonetheless significant , towards eliminating the legal and administrative obstacles that hamper young people 's access to programmes and towards acknowledging the special needs of the young volunteer .
Finally , on the ever thorny problem of the comitology procedure , we have at last reached agreement on an honourable solution regarding the basis for a modus vivendi .
In view of this package - according to the formula adopted - and the vital need for the European Voluntary Service to be operational as soon as possible , your rapporteur proposes that you approve the joint text .
But I fervently hope that the success of the programme in the coming months will prise open the budgetary corset in which the Council has stuffed it , as has been the case with other Community mobility programmes .
Mr President , we have finally arrived at the final stage of the long and laborious process that will result in the adoption of the first multiannual programme for European Voluntary Service for Young People .
We know that this programme will cover only the years 1998 and 1999 , but it will nevertheless be of fundamental importance in determining the nature of the new Youth programme that will continue the same work from 2000 .
Parliament has formulated some amendments to a few essential points in the Commission 's original proposal , which was in the main supported by this House .
These amendments specifically related to the following points :
the age band of the volunteers included in the programme-the legal status of volunteers-the relationship with national civil and voluntary services-finance for the programmes.On the first point , we succeeded in reaching a mutually acceptable compromise with Council after the first reading . As a result of this , access to the programme was made easier for young people aged over 25 .
On the other points , however , we found the attitude of the Council - and of certain Member States in particular - deplorable in that it sought to block any progressive actions that aimed to make the most of all the potential offered by the European Voluntary Service .
We were faced with a really difficult task .
I would like to take this opportunity to thank , on behalf of the Party of European Socialists , parliamentary members of the Conciliation Committee and in particular the rapporteur Mrs Fontaine and the VicePresident , Mr Imbeni , for the patience , tenacity and intelligence with which they conducted the negotiations .
I would also like to thank Commissioner Cresson for the active role played by the Commission throughout the negotiations .
The results we achieved were only partly satisfactory .
As far as the legal status of European volunteers is concerned , we obtained an important declaration from the Commission , but no firm commitment by the Council , to try and draw up common legislation governing legal , fiscal , social security and health insurance aspects for European volunteers .
In terms of the relationship with national services , we succeeded with great difficulty in drawing up a general formula for possible " complementarity between European Voluntary Service activities and similar national activities of various kinds ' .
This formula still allows room for States to try out joint initiatives between the EVS and national civil and voluntary services .
With regard to the programme budget , we did not succeed in obtaining more than ECU 47.5 million for two years , a sum that falls far short of our proposals .
These partial successes are made even more disappointing by the obtuse attitudes of certain governments : they should try explaining to their young people - who demonstrate enthusiasm for the European Voluntary Service - exactly why they are against the development of community youth policies .
Despite these limitations , the results achieved will allow the EVS to expand during the next two years and to continue with the actions we have set in train during the trial stage .
Now no-one can question the existence of the EVS - and this is a result we hardly dared hope for just a few months ago .
For these reasons , our group urges Parliament to adopt the Conciliation Committee 's proposals so that we can proceed without delay to help the thousands of youngsters who wish to reinforce their training , their education and their European citizenship through the European Voluntary Service .
Mr President , it appears to be a platitude to say that European development depends on the youth of Europe .
The training and education of young people is an essential matter .
In today 's world , young people have to be able to operate in an international atmosphere .
Exchange programmes are a suitable means of familiarizing the youth of Europe with the cultural diversity within Europe .
This provides a basis for us to be able to satisfy the demands of the increasingly globalizing labour market , in other words knowledge of different languages and of different cultures .
We have a number of successful exchange programmes for students , and now , with the European Voluntary Service action programme for young people , we finally also have a programme for working and in many cases for unemployed youngsters who are not or are no longer students .
What I have just said does not represent anything new or startling .
So my disappointment is all the greater that this has met with no or precious little support from the Council of Ministers , and it has certainly not been translated into reality .
The outcome of the conciliation we are discussing today is very disappointing .
The Council of Ministers has demonstrated in two areas that it does not take improving the mobility of young people in Europe seriously .
In the first place , Council is making too small a budget available .
A budget of ECU 47.5 million will only enable a few thousand young people to use the programme .
The contribution per person is too small to allow everyone access to the programme .
We are therefore creating a programme for the happy few who win the lottery and can pay to participate .
In the second place , Council was not prepared to guarantee that all obstacles to mobility arising at administrative level would be eliminated .
Recital 13 is a poor apology for what the Parliament proposed and the Commission 's statement on the matter is only a sticking-plaster on the wound .
The Council was seeking a compromise , that is a compromise between the Council 's proposal and that of the Commission .
Actually , Parliament 's proposals have not been taken into account .
I was and am apparently stupid enough to assume that conciliation means a reconciliation of the two standpoints of the Parliament and the Council .
In practice , Parliament has been unable to play much of a role in this matter .
It was a case of " like it or lump it ' .
The Commission , in the person of Mrs Cresson , deserves praise for their persistence in this matter .
But I think that the Commission was too easily satisfied .
As long as a programme is put in place , then that is fine , although the scope of the programme is disappointing .
I am actually against the outcome of this conciliation .
But I acquiesced in the result .
That did not come from the heart , but only because the youth organizations involved in this work asked me to .
Better half a loaf than none , was their attitude .
Because I do the work for the young people this project concerns , I said yes .
As a result , as far as I am concerned the Council and the Commission have won .
It is a bad outcome .
I fear it will have the effect of setting a precedent for subsequent conciliations in the area of culture and education .
The Council will have to realize how important education and culture are for the future of Europe , especially when it comes to young people .
My thanks go to Mrs Fontaine , who has made this programme possible through her report , her commitment and her staying power .
The youth of Europe must know that if it had been up to her and the other members of the European Parliament , the programme would have looked a lot better .
Mr President , is a voluntary service still a valid proposition in our society ?
When I was a boy scout , we called this a " good deed ' .
Nowadays , such words invite ridicule .
Yet , despite that , the need is still felt , since we are creating a voluntary service at European level and the number of young candidates far outweighs the number of opportunities available .
Because while a service , any service , is originally born from generosity , it is also a training ground , it generates human interchange , shared experiences and mutual enrichment .
Thus , many young people aged between 18 and 26 years can participate in the work of NGOs , they can enter problem areas , they can perform humanitarian services for others once they have acquired the rudiments of the language of their host country .
We are truly in the realm of informal education .
So , the fifteen Member States of the Union decided to cooperate in offering young Europeans this citizenship opportunity , but Parliament and the Council failed to reach agreement on all the procedures to be implemented .
Whilst each of the partners has reached an agreement on the status of the young volunteer and the complementary nature of European and national activities , the financial package unfortunately remains a sore point .
Yet , in the Conciliation Committee , we reached agreement thanks to the intervention of the Commission , and Mrs Fontaine earlier emphasized the part played by Mrs Cresson .
But can we really talk about conciliation when the Council always has the last word and it decides on the scale of the programmes , whilst Parliament holds the authority to apportion budgetary funds ?
If I abstained from voting during the conciliation , it was because the ECU 47.5 million allocated for 1998-1999 is totally inadequate to satisfy the expectations of the ever-generous young .
But this programme must go on .
This is the reason why , despite the most disappointing budgetary allocation , the Union for Europe Group will support the report by Mrs Fontaine , whom I commend here for her work and her determination to see the European Voluntary Service dossier through to completion .
Mr President , on behalf of The Green Group in the European Parliament I would like to thank the Conciliation Committee , and especially Mrs Fontaine , who has worked very actively for these issues , and for the fact that they have at least succeeded in increasing the Council 's original offer of ECU 30 million to ECU 47.5 million .
Of course , we should like to have seen a much larger sum , but the Council clearly does not think that youth projects are particularly important to invest in , which is something we of course regret .
We in The Green Group are going to support the proposal , since we think the involvement of young people is important , especially in the social area , the environment and cultural work and so forth - areas which we know are priorities for young people .
I also think it is important for this programme to be open to participants from countries in central and eastern Europe .
It is important for us to bridge the differences which exist .
The programme could be a significant first step in that .
However , from the point of view of the Swedish Green Party , some of the proposals are questionable , although I do welcome the principle of a Europe-wide voluntary service for young people , which must be supported .
We in The Green Group are of course going to vote for the report .
Mr President , I agree with the previous speakers that the European Voluntary Service for Young People is a well thought out and important programme , but , as Mrs Fontaine has said , its future is uncertain as a result of the political short-sightedness of the Council .
I , and indeed all my colleagues , especially those from the Committee on Culture , Youth , Education and the Media , have shared in Mrs Fontaine 's suffering throughout this affair .
I support Mr Pex and Mr Vecchi , who have explained that although some of the well-founded proposals put forward by the Parliament have been adopted , it has unfortunately proved impossible to introduce specific regulations in line with our proposals on legal status , social status and , more generally , the elimination of legal and administrative obstacles to access to the programme .
The question of complementarity between European Voluntary Service activities and similar national activities of various kinds has been solved in part .
A positive point , certainly , is that the programme is open to third countries .
I do not wish to hold back from expressing my regret that it has not been possible to increase the funding available for this programme .
We proposed a budget of ECU 80 million , but in the event the Commission was not even able to push through its proposal of ECU 60 million .
The inadequate funding of the European Voluntary Service for Young People begs the question whether the noble aims of Article 1 , which were , after all , voted for by the Council - namely to contribute actively to the ideals of democracy , tolerance and solidarity to promote European integration and strengthen cooperation between the European Community and third countries - can actually be achieved in practice .
Mr President , I would like to speak a little about the European Voluntary Service .
It has taken a long time but at last we have reached a conclusion .
I hope that this will now be a programme which will break down the barriers among young people across the continent , giving an opportunity to help foster European integration and gain some valuable experience .
The whole point of conciliation is to look for an agreement .
The very fact that we have reached this point means that both sides have had to compromise .
We are still unhappy about the resources available for this programme because funding will in effect be cut in future years .
However , we believe it is a programme worth keeping .
Our only other option was to stop the whole initiative .
So , I should like to apologize to all the young people who might have participated in the programme had we been granted more money .
At least we have something to show for all the hard work that has been put into the pilot actions .
I would like to thank Mrs Fontaine and everyone else who has been involved in this initiative .
We in Parliament , together with the Commission , attach great importance to eliminating all the legal and administrative obstacles hampering access to any programme .
But this is particularly relevant in the case of the European Voluntary Service .
We will be monitoring the implementation of this programme very carefully .
Congratulations to Mrs Fontaine for getting us through a very difficult time .
I hope we will be able to build on this in future .
Mr President , the EU must be there for young people too .
If the EU ignores the needs of young people , the result - at best - will be indifference and , at worst , hostility .
The allocation of ECU 47.5 million to the European Voluntary Service for Young People is , it is true , the minimum required and much less than the European Parliament wanted , but at least it enables the project to continue .
It means that at least a small number of young people without higher education will be able to understand and experience Europe for themselves .
At a time when youth unemployment has reached 15-20 % , this programme is just a drop in the ocean anyway .
In Austria , it has been implemented especially well .
100 young people have already participated in the programme and many others are on the waiting lists .
The programme is not intended to conflict with the voluntary social service year , but is designed to appeal to young people and encourage them to look beyond their own immediate horizons .
In order to make the programme attractive , there must not only be a good range of projects but also good pastoral support .
The criticism that this programme undermines collective agreements is unjustified .
The aim is not to provide cheap labour but to promote personal development and offer young people an opportunity to gain international experience and thus have better opportunities in life .
However , the programme is too limited to have any real weight .
We can of course question the justification of projects such as ' frog conservation in Provence ' .
If we bear in mind that 10 million young people in Europe leave school without qualifications , it would be more sensible to increase the budget for the Leonardo programme by 100 % .
This money would benefit apprentices and young people in occupational training .
One cannot help but think that despite all the good intentions , programmes like the European Voluntary Service for Young People smack of tokenism .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , as you can imagine , my colleague , Mrs Edith Cresson , would have very much liked to be here to thank the rapporteur and , like her , to recommend the adoption of the result of the conciliation procedure .
Unfortunately , she is unable to attend and has asked me to stand in for her today .
The Commission welcomes the agreement and , as Mrs Fontaine has already said , participated actively in achieving this result .
Of course we understand the disappointment expressed by all the speakers about the funding of the programme , but as is often the case , the Council is not in a position to fulfil what Parliament and Commission propose .
In the Council , economy measures of this kind are always more popular than the most well-intentioned programme , and the interest of the young people who have already registered as a result of the pilot projects shows that this programme could have had a major impact .
Nonetheless , as is always the case , we should accept what we can achieve rather than having nothing . We are sure that this programme will develop an impetus of its own , and by its new approach to bringing young people closer to Europe , and through its results , it will show that Mrs Cresson 's intentions , which she shares with Parliament , will be translated smoothly into action .
We will do everything in our power - and I speak for Mrs Cresson here too - to overcome the obstacle , namely lack of funding , which is impeding the programme .
We will also eliminate the other obstacles which may occur .
A number of other difficult questions undoubtedly also need to be resolved , although the conciliation procedure has settled many of the issues arising in connection with the complementarity between this programme and national community service activities .
This is certainly very complicated , but once it is implemented we will see how we can achieve even better results .
On behalf of my colleague Mrs Cresson , I would also like to assure Parliament once again at this point that , as with Youth for Europe , no decisions about individual projects will be submitted to the Committee .
With the proposed funding of ECU 47.5 million , the Commission can ensure programme access and the quality of the measures during the remaining 18 months .
Recent experience has shown , however , that the interest of young people in the European Voluntary Service is already very great and is likely to increase further .
For this reason , when we implement the EU budget , there will be an opportunity to examine whether additional funds should be allocated to the programme , and I can promise now on behalf of the Commission that we will certainly look at this possibility .
We would like to express our thanks once again to the Committee on Culture , Youth , Education and the Media , especially its rapporteur , Mrs Fontaine , and also to the delegation of the European Parliament and its chairman .
I should also like to thank Parliament generally for its support and its sympathy for this project , without which we would not have made as much progress as we have .
We have not yet reached the end of the process but we have moved some way in the right direction and I am sure that together with the Parliament , the Commission and perhaps , ultimately , even the Council we will see that more must be done , and that a programme of this kind can do more to develop European identity and understanding than certain other programmes which get bogged down in technical detail and do not really deal with people or reflect their views , ideas and wishes .
In this respect , I should like to thank you all once again personally on behalf of Mrs Cresson too ; we hope that this programme will mark a new page in the history of European integration .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12.00 noon .
Food additives
The next item is the recommendation for second reading ( A4-0242 / 98 ) by Mrs Breyer , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection , on the common position established by the Council with a view to the adoption of a European Parliament and Council Directive amending Directive 95 / 2 / EC on food additives other than colours and sweeteners ( C4-0183 / 98-96 / 0166 ( COD ) ) .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to make some general points before I present the amendments of the Committee .
In principle , harmonization of the authorization and use of food additives in the European Union is to be welcomed .
Without a standard regulation on additives , the principle of mutual recognition leads to a great deal of uncertainty amongst consumers and to major shortcomings in the monitoring and labelling of foodstuffs .
Harmonization of the authorization and use of additives is also designed to achieve , as far as possible , a reduction in the range of additives and areas of use .
Unfortunately , this objective is not achieved in the amendments proposed by the Commission , which seem to pay more attention to the needs of the producer than the consumer .
It has been a long-term policy , in line with the demands of European consumers , as well as a trend in the food industry , to dispense voluntarily with certain food additives .
Experience has shown that this has led , particularly in many EU countries , to reductions in the food additives used in the last twenty years .
This is due less to legal provisions than to voluntary restraint exercised by the food industry .
The Framework Directive defines the general criteria for authorization as follows : a technical need must be demonstrated , they must not mislead the consumer , there must be no health risk , and they must benefit the consumer .
As far as the assessment of technical need is concerned - and here I appeal to you , Mr Bangemann - we really must arrive at some agreement once more as to how this term is defined .
When the report was submitted , you did not provide an adequate definition of what is meant by ' technical need ' and where this technical need lies in many points of the amendments .
I therefore fear that the situation will deteriorate into tokenism , especially if the authorization procedure is to rely solely on information provided by producers .
Examples are the proposed new authorization of flavour enhancers in margarine and the enzyme Invertase , enabling a higher sugar content , which is supposedly justified on the grounds of technical need , even though only one manufacturer in the whole of the European Union has applied for it .
I think that technical need should not be recognized simply because one manufacturer demands it when all the other manufacturers demonstrate that another approach is entirely possible .
Today , it is possible to produce many foodstuffs - such as gourmet salads - with and without preservatives .
However , I should now like to confine myself to presenting Parliament 's amendments .
The Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection has adopted 10 amendments ; the European Parliament , during its first reading , adopted 26 amendments and thus largely followed the decisions of the Committee .
However , the common position took full account of just 11 ; it took partial account of 4 and rejected 11 completely .
Admittedly , this is a partial success for the European Parliament , but it is an illustration of the extent to which both the Commission and the Council of Ministers sympathize with producers .
On such important issues as allergy labelling , in particular , there is obviously little movement in the Commission .
A very important principle for us must be transparency , which means that we must put an end to secrecy , that is the use of additives in food ingredients .
I must emphasize - and I make no secret of this even in my capacity as rapporteur - that I would like to see more comprehensive labelling .
I regret that the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection did not support this , but would like to put a question to Commissioner Bangemann at this point . The Commission said that it could not agree to the amendments because they were in the wrong place .
I would therefore like to know when , and how , the labelling of genetically modified additives will be regulated .
Now there is also a proposal from Austria .
Perhaps you could explain to us how the Commission will respond to this Austrian proposal and when you will submit it .
You promised us that the Commission would soon bring forward a proposal on novel food .
The same applies to the labelling of loose foodstuffs .
It is unacceptable that loose foodstuffs need not be labelled .
Parliament thus does not want any extension in additives in flour-treatment agents as we feel this is unnecessary and there are already enough products .
It also rejects the surface treatment of peaches and pineapples with beeswax , as we want natural products to remain natural .
It is not acceptable for the consumer to be misled and offered an apparent level of freshness which does not exist .
As regards nisin , the House did not call for the introduction of antibiotics in mascarpone , in cheese , at second reading .
( The President indicated that the speaker should finish ) We should allow antibiotics to be available on subscription , but they should not be in foodstuffs .
Those were the amendments put forward by the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection .
I hope , however , that the Commission is still prepared to respond to the unresolved questions , which have been orally supported by colleagues in the Committee , on the labelling of genetically modified additives and also the ...
( The President cut the speaker off )
Mr President , I would like to highlight two points before we proceed to the vote this morning : on the one hand , nisin , and on the other , sulphites .
Nisin is an antibiotic that could , in the long term , lead to resistance to medicines .
Antibiotics are crucial in treating certain illnesses ; thus , they are medicinal and should not , in principle , be used either to promote pig growth or as a preservative in foodstuffs .
In my opinion , this has no place in this directive .
Now , mascarpone is not even an effective treatment for sore throats .
More and more people are affected by food allergies .
Sulphites are among the contributing factors here .
I believe that at the very least a specific limit value should be set for their use , rather than estimating the extent to which they are thought to be necessary .
Sulphites are typically used in processing dried fruits , for example for breakfast products .
And many parents buy dried fruit loose for their children as a healthier alternative to sweets . However , thanks to sulphites , this can lead to allergies .
I appreciate that to a large extent , climatic and hence cultural differences may give rise to different views of what additives are necessary .
The distance between two refrigerators could be a determining factor in evaluating which is the lesser of two evils - food-poisoning from sausages , or food additives .
But we must understand that there is a difference between whether it is possible to produce and add an additive on the one hand , and whether the additive is really necessary on the other .
Today , we have foods in the European groceries market that would keep long enough to allow us to make a trip around the equator in a rowing boat . We do not really need our food to keep that long .
Please remember that European civilization once lived quite hygienically by smoking , salting , boiling and cooling food , long before all these strange additives came on the scene .
The Group of the Party of European Socialists will be voting in favour of the amendment by the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection to Mrs Breyer 's recommendation for second reading - for which I would like to thank Mrs Breyer - and I hope the amendments will receive the required number of votes .
I am in no doubt that they will receive a large number of votes , but what they need is enough votes .
There is no doubt in my mind that the current trend - even discounting ecological foods as such - is towards greater simplicity and more natural foodstuffs .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , in 1995 we adopted a comprehensive Directive on food additives other than colours and sweeteners in the European Union .
With the common position , we are today debating the first major amendment to this directive .
The amending directive is required firstly because during the many years of deliberations on the 1995 Directive , not all additives or their use had been scientifically tested , and secondly , because technical uses have evolved in the intervening period .
Furthermore , particular conditions applying in the Member States , especially in the new Member States of Finland , Sweden and Austria , must be taken into account and , finally , a number of errors have crept into the full text of the 1995 Directive which this amendment is designed to correct .
It is true that the Parliament has put forward a number of amendments and the Council has now adopted some of them .
On behalf of my group , I can say that we are in agreement with the common position .
The amendments which have been proposed , in the main by the rapporteur in the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection , were adopted by a majority there ; however , we cannot vote for them .
I should like to come back to the issue which was mentioned by Ms Breyer .
The objective was to ensure that as few food additives as possible were used , and preferably to reduce them further .
I have been involved in these discussions for twenty years and I have changed my political view to some extent .
I think that if we concentrate on very few food additives , these few additives will be used across the board .
I believe that we should not always consume the same additives , because this is the only way to ensure that health considerations are taken into account .
Furthermore , the issue of authorization should not be regulated to such an extent that everyone is compelled to use additives ; however , we should ensure that if they are used , they should only be used to a limited extent .
As I said , they need not be used , but if additives are used , then the product must obviously be labelled accordingly , and that is what needs to be regulated here .
Awaking new fears about things which have traditionally been in existence in Member States is , in my view , unnecessary , for after all these additives have not caused any health problems and in any case the Committee was there to monitor this .
For this reason , my group and I are able to vote for the common position in its current form .
Once again , I would like to thank the rapporteur for her work on this directive .
I would also like to draw attention to my speech at first reading , in which I pointed out how unintelligible this directive is in its full form , in spite of the fact that many citizens would be extremely interested in its content .
I would also like to remind you of the subsequent questions to the Commission and the Council on the possibility of simplifying the directive without necessarily altering its content , and I would like to remind you of the answers given .
I stand by my opinion that the Commission 's answer is a study in arrogance , whereas , by contrast , I am delighted with the much more constructive response from the Council .
I am reminding you of this in the hope that the conciliation procedure can be used in such a way that simplification is addressed alongside the work of finding a compromise .
The Group of the European Liberal Democrat and Reform Party supports the Committee 's amendments , but in connection with the first two amendments , I have to say that we are not doing so because we would ultimately want to see flour treatment agents exempted from the directive . Rather , we are doing so because the common position appears to be comprehensive to the point of meaninglessness in this area .
The best approach would have been to introduce flour into Appendix 2 - that is , as the staple commodity it most certainly is - spelling out permitted substances there .
Now we have a situation whereby far too much is permitted , and the argument that the industry would obviously not use all these additives is really rather feeble .
I think the best thing would be to consider flour as an unprocessed commodity and thus take it as a starting point that Annex I substances must not be added to it .
In this regard , I am also referring to Directive 89 / 107 , Annex 2 , point 1 , where it states that there has to be a " sufficiently great technical need ' for approving additives .
I do not believe this to be the case when all of a sudden it is all right to use any substances at all from Annex I in flour . I cannot actually make sense of the common position any other way than this .
Moreover , the Group of the European Liberal Democrat and Reform Party opposes sulphites in nuts and maize , and is also opposed to wax treatment of peaches and pineapples .
Pineapples may not in fact matter , because the outer part is not eaten , but it would be quite unreasonable for peaches .
Can we please just have the plain produce here ?
Mr President , the three criteria put forward by the Commission for including additives in the list of permitted substances are technical need , benefit for the consumer and no health risk .
I think these three criteria have been bandied about too much , to the extent that - as the rapporteur states - we will actually end up with a considerable extension of the number of authorized additives and especially the use of those additives .
I believe the choice is a bad one and I will give you two examples which , in my opinion , are glaringly obvious .
Firstly , the extension granted for the use of sulphites as additives points unquestionably to a poor choice : we know very well that they cause a lot of people health problems , especially those prone to allergies .
So , why should we use these sulphites when there are alternative solutions and when , in any case , we can well do without them ?
Secondly , Mrs Jensen was right to speak about the problem of nisin .
This is an antibiotic .
Is it reasonable for the Council and the Commission to use an antibiotic as an additive whilst we are still wondering about the wisdom of using antibiotics in animal feed and whilst the WHO , for example , is producing evidence that many infectious diseases are spreading and that a number of antibiotics are proving ineffective ?
Does it make sense to include an antibiotic as an additive ?
I think some Member States have raised the issue and I would here like to draw the attention of Mrs Schleicher to two matters .
First of all , several Member States , including the German government , have voted against the common position .
Next , the fact that a product has been used for a very long time does not make it harmless .
For very many years we used asbestos and now everybody agrees that it should no longer be used .
I do not see how the fact that because no proof of direct ill effects has been produced for a particular additive it should be regarded as harmless .
You know very well that indirect effects are possible and , indeed , quite probable and that in the case of many additives , it is exceedingly difficult to take circumstances into account .
Therefore , I think that it is vital for us to support the amendments tabled by the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection and I would urge Mrs Schleicher and her group to reconsider their position on this matter .
Mr President , a European Union framework directive has been in force since 1989 on the approximation of the laws of Member States on additives authorized for use in foodstuffs .
The Commission has proposed to amend the directive in the light of recent scientific developments .
A common position was adopted by the Council on 23 March 1998 . Of the twenty-six amendments presented by the European Parliament at first reading , eleven were accepted in full while a further four were accepted in part .
The Commission 's proposal also underwent a series of changes specifically designed to safeguard the needs of the food industry , namely the inclusion of flour treatment agents and authorization to treat mascarpone with nisin and to treat peaches and pineapples with wax .
In our evaluation , we sought to reconcile the interests of the food industry with the - in our view - priority aim of safeguarding the health of our citizens .
This comes at a time when product quality must be safeguarded more than ever , particularly when we consider that the small-scale retail trade with its emphasis on quality is sadly disappearing throughout the Union and giving way to large-scale distribution which is able to put products of increasing sophistication and refinement but questionable wholesomeness on the shelves .
The need to protect the health of European consumers therefore leads us to authorize only those preservatives that actually safeguard product quality and properties .
We oppose the use of new additives for pasteurized cream and sterilized milk , mainly because no fewer than thirty-eight additives are already available on the market .
We also oppose the use of new additives that tend to extend the shelf life of certain vegetable products and sugar additives that serve the sole purpose of appealing to child consumers .
The existence of a standard community additive authorization system will certainly benefit the consumer .
We also emphasize the need to introduce a form of labelling for food products containing additives : such labels should provide as much information as possible . The main aim of this would be to protect people with allergies , newborns and more vulnerable citizens who are in the greatest need of protection .
With specific reference to Amendments Nos 1 and 2 , we are against the use of additives that are classified as flour treatment agents in Annex 1 .
With regard to Amendment No 3 on the use of sulphur dioxide and sulphites , we believe these substances are no longer necessary from a technical viewpoint .
The labelling system should in any case provide information on all relevant indications and contraindications .
Mr President , I would like to thank Mrs Breyer for her hard work during both readings and in the Environment Committee .
She is an admirable member of the committee and will be remembered in that committee for the work she has done , particularly on the protection of infant foods .
I would like to be able to say that all the amendments now being redebated here will go through to conciliation , though I rather doubt it given the majorities that are needed .
I want to confine myself , therefore , to just three of them : Amendments Nos 4 , 5 and 7 .
I come to Amendment No 4 first because I tabled it and it was passed in the Environment Committee on reconsideration .
It concerns the use of sucrose esters in canned liquid coffee and tea which are now being sold hot direct to the consumer .
Whether happiness can be found in a warm can of caffeine I do not know - it would not be my favourite tipple .
What I do know is that sucrose esters stabilize milk proteins against the process of destabilization which occurs during storage .
As a nation of tea drinkers , the British would rather like to know why it is that sucrose esters are not approved of by the Commission .
We are not actually told that in the small print which accompanies its decisions .
It is always the case , and it is one of the problems as we reach the second reading , that one knows a good deal more about what the Commission will approve than what it will not .
Secondly , I would like to mention Amendment No 5 which Mrs Dybkjær has already discussed briefly , that is , the use of beeswax as a preservative for surface treatment of peaches and pineapples .
I cannot understand any more than she why these two fruits are labelled together .
There are a number of others which are not mentioned .
One thinks of melons as somewhere halfway between the two , but the distinction between them is surely that one does not consume the exterior of a pineapple - unless one is very stupid indeed ! - whereas one would usually eat the skin of a peach .
I would therefore agree very much with the rapporteur in saying that it would be dangerous to have this coating on peaches , but I do not see the reason why we have to remove it from pineapples where it is a genuine preservative .
My last point concerns Amendment No 7 .
On balance I support the rapporteur in her amendment to strike out the use of triacetin as a product for chewing gum , but again we do not know very much about why it appeared in the first place .
We owe it to those who argue that this particular emulsifier is not necessary and desirable to ensure that the case is set out as to why it is so essential and so desirable .
I hope the Commission will be able to tell us , because clarity should always be our watchword in these matters .
Mr President , I should like to thank Mrs Breyer for her hard work as well , but I must go on to say that I shall be opposing all the amendments , as will quite a number of the Members of the PPE group - as we did in committee - with the exception of Amendment No 4 .
This is a very technical issue to do with food additives and the permitted additives in food throughout the European Union .
It raises the question of how the European Parliament can best deal with such a technical question .
Mrs Breyer has tackled it from an ideological angle , natural to her group .
But there are two questions we have to consider as yardsticks .
One is that we must ensure the continuing health of the European population is safeguarded when adjustments to the permitted additives are discussed .
What guidance do we use ?
Do we use our own judgement ?
Well , I am a historian , Mrs Schleicher was a harpist .
That may be a useful qualification for the next life , as it were , but it is not necessarily the best qualification for dealing with food additives .
We are , to some extent , amateurs in this field .
We have to be guided by the Scientific Committee for Food .
I would really much rather be guided by that committee than , I am afraid , by Mrs Breyer .
Secondly , we have to ensure that European Union law is sufficiently flexible within the bounds of safety to allow new products to be developed .
I agree with Mr Whitehead that it may be a godsend for the Scottish Scouts , who are apparently here in the Gallery , if they no longer have to rub two twigs together to boil the kettle because they will be able to buy hot tea in cans - if indeed the European Commission allows that to happen .
I would like to ask Mr Bangemann , when he replies to the debate , to say whether or not he is prepared to allow tea in cans to be sold alongside the British sausage which we already salvaged from the ravages of the European Commission a few months ago .
So I do not believe that this is an issue where there is any room for extremes .
Green fundamentalism may be useful in triggering questions but it is not a view which should be allowed to prevail .
Mr President , I feel the same as Mrs Jackson .
I would first of all like to express my warmest thanks to the rapporteur .
She has obviously not only studied the material in depth but has also adopted very clear positions on the issues .
Even though I do not share these positions - neither personally nor on behalf of the Commission - I nonetheless feel that Ms Breyer has carried out admirable work on this issue .
I do not hesitate to say this to her personally .
I am not sure whether she will be pleased but I would like to tell her nonetheless !
The views expressed by Mrs Jackson and especially Mrs Schleicher correspond broadly with the Commission 's position .
I will therefore be brief .
I am , of course , not an expert in the assessment of health risks or the absence of them , but I am a lawyer by training .
For this reason , I would like to say to Mrs Breyer that there is a clear principle here which has been the constitutional position at least up to now , namely that nothing may be banned if there is no reason to do so .
We cannot say that we want as few additives as possible and ban these additives simply because we feel like it or because we want to adhere to a point of principle .
There must be a reason for us to do so , and this is what we have now defined very clearly .
It is not true , Ms Breyer , that the issue of technical need is not defined in Annex 2 .
The three general criteria are listed again . Firstly , it must be demonstrated that there are reasonable technical grounds and purpose which cannot be achieved through any other technical means ; secondly , there must be no risk to health ; and thirdly , the consumer must not be misled .
These are the three criteria .
Admittedly , not all of them have to be fulfilled in each case , as they may also apply in part .
That means that if one of these criteria applies , an additive may be banned .
We have thus stated precisely - there is more , but I do not wish to quote at length here - what technical need is and how it must be defined , also using individual criteria .
We have thus created sufficient certainty for everyone , both for the consumer and the producer .
It is quite in order for a producer to dispense with any sort of additive he chooses .
He can also use this fact in his advertising .
He can say , ' This product is pure and unadulterated ! '
This is perfectly possible .
Many producers do indeed take advantage of this opportunity , and it is quite acceptable .
However , if , on the other hand , we do want to ban something , there has to be a legitimate reason for doing so .
We can therefore not accept the eleven remaining amendments .
Given our time constraints , I do not want to explain our reasons in every case , but my previous comments apply .
I would like to answer the other questions asked , on labelling for example .
Mrs Breyer , I am constantly surprised that you want to regulate everything at every opportunity , despite the logic that you usually apply .
We simply cannot do this !
We cannot regulate general issues in all the many different directives which have a specific purpose .
Labelling is a general issue .
We regulated it in the labelling directive 79 / 112 .
This is where any possible amendments should be made .
If there is a need to do so in relation to additives , then we must amend that directive accordingly .
We cannot now simply enter into a commitment that we will include all additives here ; that would simply be a blank cheque .
We have to examine whether the general principles of labelling require a particular additive to be labelled accordingly .
The issue of labelling of genetically-modified additives was also raised .
I have already stated - and you have repeated it again - that we are looking into this .
However , it is extremely difficult , for example because the issue of proof , the issue of appropriate threshold values , and the possibility , too , of a negative list are not that easy to deal with , not even for scientific committees .
It is not a lack of goodwill on our part which has prevented us from submitting a response so far , but the issue is very difficult indeed .
As far as allergies are concerned , all additives should be labelled .
In principle , all additives should be listed on the label .
Those affected thus have access to adequate information .
Incidentally , this also conforms with the view of the Standing Committee on Foodstuffs .
The number of allergies triggered by foodstuffs is to my knowledge actually very low , as Mrs Jensen has said - far lower than one would generally assume .
It is quite inaccurate to state , as you do , that foodstuffs represent a particular danger in this respect .
We are also working on a directive on ' balanced diets ' , in other words , on additives in foodstuffs for sick infants and toddlers .
The general labelling directive will be amended accordingly .
( Interjection : What about loose foodstuffs ? )
This is regulated appropriately in all the Member States .
The Member States have the option of labelling these or not .
We do not therefore see any need to introduce a labelling regulation as one already exists .
In the case of loose foodstuffs , the Member States can introduce an exemption .
But this is something which is already a legal requirement in the Union .
I think that those were the most important questions , if I am not mistaken .
I do not want to discuss the eleven amendments in detail , Mrs Jensen , as that would take up too much time , but our reasons for not supporting them should be clear from what I have said .
I hope , then , that Parliament , or at least some of the Members , will support Mrs Schleicher 's suggestion , so that we can then conclude the procedure .
We will then have established a reasonable basis which is also in the interests of the consumer .
Mr President , I should like to put two more questions to Mr Bangemann .
I think that there has been broad agreement in the House that we have problems with nisin because antibiotics should not be present in foodstuffs .
Mr Lannoye has once more pointed out the major problems associated with resistance to antibiotics .
Antibiotics threaten to become ineffective as a means of treating disease .
I would like to know why you think that antibiotics , to which many people are allergic - in addition to the problems we have with resistance - should be permitted as a food additive .
After all , scientists are rightly concerned that the danger of resistance is becoming increasingly acute .
Secondly , Mr Bangemann , I cannot agree with your view that the issue of labelling loose foodstuffs should be a matter for regulation in individual Member States .
The point of this directive is , after all , to achieve harmonization throughout Europe .
I do not think it is right that packed foodstuffs must be labelled but loose foodstuffs , which give the consumer the impression that they are purchasing fresh products , do not need to be labelled .
Your representative on the Committee said that the Commission would repeal this provision !
I am astonished , then , that you are now saying something quite different , that you do not think that there is any need for action .
I would like to know what is actually the case .
Was what your representative said in Committee wrong , when he said that the labelling directive would resolve the situation at some point ?
After all , we have already dealt with a range of points which would fall within the labelling directive if we agree on what you say .
My final question , then , is when you intend to put forward a new draft or amendments to the labelling directive so that these loopholes and these requirements which have emerged can then be closed or covered ?
Mr President , first of all I should like to address the issue of antibiotics .
The Commission has no reason to respond to this question since no relevant amendment has been submitted .
No , it was discussed in Committee but there is no amendment .
I cannot discuss hypothetical questions here .
Then to the question which you raised once again . I will repeat : we have a regulation on the labelling of packed or loose foodstuffs .
Both must be labelled .
In other words , there is a labelling requirement .
It is just that we have a special provision which means that Member States can exempt themselves from this requirement in the case of loose foodstuffs .
As far as your third question is concerned , I cannot remember the precise timing but I think that after we commenced the debate about the general directive on foodstuffs , we did not conclude it because various points of principle were raised such as : what is the key principle of labelling ?
Unfortunately , there are various different viewpoints in the Commission as well as in the European Parliament , and an extreme viewpoint , which was initially also expressed here in the Parliament - I do not know if it is still upheld now - is that everything must be labelled , whether or not it is sensible or appropriate to do so .
I have always resisted including a mass of detail on labels since this would make the label useless to the consumer .
You must label what is useful for the consumer .
That way , you will reach your target audience .
If you label everything , you will not reach the consumer and then the label becomes useless as a tool in providing more consumer information .
This has now actually been recognized by a member of your party in Germany , who has publicly praised me for my stance .
I think that this is a signal that the debate is developing in an intelligent way and we would like to proceed on this basis .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12.00 noon .
( The sitting was suspended until 5.30 p.m. )
Question Time ( Commission )
The next item is questions to the Commission ( B4-0481 / 98 ) .
Firstly , allow me to welcome Commissioner Liikanen .
Mr President , the effect of computer piracy on our work has been very slight , because the Commission has been actively engaged in improving security on its information networks .
Commissioner , as things stand , IT piracy is doing great harm not just to the European institutions but to the whole of society in general , both in the form of the installation of illegal software onto the hard disk before a computer is sold , and by means of the production of imitation software or direct copies via the Internet .
We note that the Council recently approved its common position on the legal position against radio piracy .
In view of this , does the Commission not think it would be of the greatest interest to promote the strengthening of legislation to protect industrial property , for example ?
Let us not forget that the United States is ahead of us here too , since the extent of the piracy which Europe suffers is still 43 % .
Mr President , this is a very important question .
At the end of the 1980s and the start of the 1990s , as a result of some occurrences of hacking , the Commission 's computer system architecture was modified so that internal information systems were centred on what are called closed user groups .
Communications within and outside the building are monitored by the present telecommunications centre in the information technology directorate in accordance with the parameters that exist for security arrangements and technical facilities .
Obviously , owing to rapid developments in information technology this system requires continuous updating , and the Commission is keeping a close watch on it .
Question No 45 by Philippe De Coene ( H-0642 / 98 )
Subject : European Voluntary Service for Young People and the 1998 World Cup
I see from a Commission press release that as part of the European Voluntary Service scheme 71 young people have been assigned to the organizing committee of the 1998 World Cup in France .
The cost to the European budget is ECU 5 000 per young person .
The actual European Voluntary Service scheme is currently acting as a pilot project , assigning young people to organizations .
The texts available show that the young people involved are supposed to take part in non-profit-making and unpaid activities .
Is it the Commission 's opinion that the World Cup and the organizing committee are non-profit-making organizations ?
Can the Commission explain why the organizing committee is favoured by one Commissioner , via the Community budget , while another Commissioner has condemned the organizing committee in plenary because of its discriminatory ticket sales policy - a form of discrimination which was confirmed in the ruling of the Tribunal de Grande Instance of Paris on 5 June ?
Mr Liikanen , I invite you to reply to Mr De Coene 's question .
Mr President , as Mr De Coene has said , a part of the European Voluntary Service scheme for Young People involved 71 European volunteers participating in projects connected with the World Cup .
The volunteers worked for more than five months in local host organizations in those cities and towns where the matches were staged .
In addition to this , the volunteers for several weeks helped in the organization of the World Cup Games .
This voluntary project was only indirectly connected with the World Cup Organizing Committee , as all host organizations tended to be non-profit making agencies from the cultural , physical education , environmental and social work sectors .
For this reason the pilot project was of no benefit to the Organizing Committee as an organization , but assisted the project 's social , cultural and environmental aims through local non-profit making service agencies .
The business activities of the Organizing Committee are covered by EU sports regulations , which is why the Commission , on the basis of many complaints , are investigating allegations of discrimination in its sales of tickets to the public , The average contribution made by the Commission in connection with these six-month projects was around ECU 5 200 , which is the same amount paid out for other voluntary work in pilot projects .
Commissioner , I know that you received the question very recently , but please do not take it amiss , in Dutch we call that a Jesuit 's answer .
It is very clear that young people have participated with the help of Community funds in an initiative which has been condemned twice by a Commissioner , a fellow Commissioner , in this Chamber , firstly because of the violation of the principle of equality of citizens and secondly because of the violation of a number of economic rules , because the Commissioner found that the whole of the organization was purely and simply an economic matter and was therefore subject to the rules on economic activities .
Now we are being told that it was actually for the CFO , and at the same time that it was not for the CFO .
I must say I really am not satisfied with this answer .
I think that it is an improvised answer , and I would actually like you to tell me precisely what the activities carried out by the young people were .
If you say they were socio-cultural activities , then I want you to tell me exactly what they did .
Mr President , as with other part-funded pilot projects , local host organizations tended to be connected with the social work sector , culture , physical education or the environment movement .
The organizations were involved , for example , in the youth movement , youth employment and improving the urban environment .
The experience the young people got from taking part in the project has been beyond comparison .
Through the World Cup volunteers from eleven Member States and Norway worked in partnership with thousands of French people .
This provided opportunities for cultural learning and increased mutual understanding .
I wish to join with others in this House in congratulating France on their victory in the World Cup .
It is wonderful to see a European team doing so well and particularly such a brilliant performance by France .
But our joy at that result should not overshadow the fact that there were many serious problems in the organization of the World Cup , some of which one of the Commissioner 's colleagues is currently looking at .
I would ask the Commissioner to look very seriously at the question raised by Mr De Coene .
The question hinges around the status of the CFO .
The Commissioner needs to investigate what the status of the CFO is in the Commission 's view and whether the use - or abuse , as we believe it to be - of this system in supplying assistance to the CFO merits investigation .
I would ask the Commissioner to come back to Mr De Coene and myself in writing with a more thorough investigation of this matter .
Mr President , I would like to add my congratulations to France .
I was in the Champs Elysées on Sunday night and I had a chance to witness the immense delight of a nation .
As for this question of sports regulations , I am going to report this discussion to my colleague responsible for sports policy .
I know my colleague will investigate the matter thoroughly .
This is a typical case of the Commission approaching the same subject from two angles .
One is voluntary work and the other is sports policy .
I obviously understand the concern among Members that the Commission 's position should nevertheless be a coherent , harmonious one .
That we shall endeavour to preserve .
Thank you very much , Mr Liikanen .
It is now the turn of Mr James Nicholson 's question on conditions for Objective 1 status for Northern Ireland .
Mrs WulfMathies is with us , but Mr Nicholson is not here .
I dare say the special situation in Northern Ireland at the moment must have demanded Mr Nicholson 's presence there .
I am extremely grateful that Mrs Wulf-Mathies is here , which is always valuable , but without the Member who tabled the question we cannot proceed .
I am sure it would have been very interesting to listen to Mrs Wulf-Mathies speak on this question .
Furthermore , ladies and gentlemen , you know that Mr Nicholson takes his responsibilities very seriously , but I should imagine that perhaps the situation in Northern Ireland has detained him at such an important and , if I may say so , dramatic time as this .
So as the author is not present , Question No 46 lapses .
Question No 47 by Juan Izquierdo Collado ( H-0708 / 98 )
Subject : LEADER II programme in Spain
To judge by the answer given to questions H-380 / 98 , H-383 / 98 , H-384 / 98 and H-385 / 98 , the Commission is aware of the difficulties currently being experienced by the LEADER II programme , particularly in Spain .
Does the Commission believe these to be caused by the requirement for convergence plans to be adhered to ?
Does it consider that the Spanish Government 's failure to implement the LEADER II programme 's financial framework constitutes a responsible attitude ?
What view does the Commission take of the refusal by the Employment , Economic Affairs and Agriculture Ministries to cofinance their share of the ESF , the ERDF and the EAGGF-Guidance Section , as they formerly agreed to ?
Ladies and gentlemen , we are awaiting the arrival of Mr Fischler , who is a few minutes late .
It is understandable , because we were hoping to have been able to discuss the question addressed to Mrs Wulf-Mathies first .
The Commission 's services say he is on his way .
What we do not know is whether he is coming far or not , or whether there are any problems en route .
Ladies and gentlemen , as its name suggests , this Parliament is for talking , but a few minutes ' silence is no bad thing either .
There is a Catalan poet , Joan Brossa , who says that silence is so important that it should only be broken for matters which are even more important .
So while we wait for Mr Fischler , I suggest we respect the extraordinary value of silence .
We welcome Mr Fischler .
We shall let him sit down in peace and open the right file .
Mr Fischler , I invite you to reply to Question No 47 by Mr Juan Izquierdo Collado on the LEADER II programme in Spain .
Thank you very much , Commissioner .
Mr Izquierdo Collado would like to put a supplementary question .
I shall give him the floor now , and I should also warn you that I have received requests for three more supplementary questions .
Unfortunately , however , the Rules of Procedure only allow me to grant two .
So I will tell you now that after that I shall give the floor to Mr Camisón Asensio and Mrs Redondo Jiménez .
I am very sorry , but I shall not be able to let Mr Rübig take the floor .
You have the floor , Mr Izquierdo Collado .
Commissioner , why are we trying to confuse the issue when it is so clear ?
This question contains my express request for your help , and I am extremely grateful for your presence here today .
So let us tackle the subject clearly : there is a splendid programme , lovingly nurtured by the Commission and yourself , called the LEADER programme , for investment in rural areas , specifically for vital aid in fields such as small businesses , tourist accommodation , crafts , the marketing and valuation of agricultural products and , in these contexts , it is being blocked , stopped , paralysed in Spain .
Why ?
I am asking you for help .
I am asking you to help us unblock it .
But why is it blocked ?
It is blocked because the Spanish Government refuses to finance what it has signed up to in the cofinancing agreement .
Mr Rato , the Minister of Economic Affairs , says he will not pay a penny , a peseta or an ECU to this programme through the ERDF ; Mr Arenas , the Employment Minister , says he will not give a penny or an ECU through the European Social Fund ; and the Minister of Agriculture says she will not cofinance even half of what was agreed .
Will you not help us unblock this dreadful situation ? It has left Spanish mayors totally embarrassed , local action groups in a state of depression , and so on .
Mr Izquierdo Collado , it is not a question of the President 's generosity . It is a question of the time you allow yourself , because I informed you when your minute was up .
I must warn you that any extra time you use up means that less is available for the other questions .
So you are the ones who have that responsibility , not me .
Mr Fischler , you have the floor to reply to Mr Izquierdo Collado 's supplementary question .
Mr President , Mr Izquierdo Collado , I think that there is actually no fundamental discrepancy between us .
You and I , and the Commission generally , are interested in ensuring that the LEADER programmes which have been agreed for Spain can in fact be implemented .
This must be our first concern , for this will help the private initiatives which want to carry out programmes of this kind .
It is also clear that cofinancing is required and that this cofinancing must be provided in accordance with the regulations governing the LEADER programme .
However , the Commission is flexible in the sense that we do not necessarily demand that these funds be provided exclusively by the Spanish government .
In principle , it is also possible - and this is an internal matter for Spain - for other public bodies to provide this cofinancing .
One thing is clear , however - if no agency is able to provide cofinancing , then the entire LEADER programme is in doubt .
According to the information at our disposal , there is a willingness on the part of other public bodies to provide this cofinancing instead of the Spanish government .
If this takes place , the programmes will then , as I have said , be implemented .
If not , then the programmes cannot be carried out .
That is the situation and the reality , and it lies within the power of the Spanish authorities at various levels to make this decision .
I must speak on this question , to try to fill in the whole picture .
The local action groups were selected in 1995 - under the previous Spanish Government , by the way - and they were selected badly .
That is shown by the fact that they do not work properly .
LEADER II is not in a state of stalemate in Spain , as can be seen from the fact that in 1997 the utilization rate reached 36 % , and that it has increased in 1998 .
Before 1996 it was practically nil .
As regards the central administration 's contribution , in 1995 and 1996 the relevant headings were not provided , perhaps because people were mistakenly awaiting the accumulation of aid .
That big mistake was revealed when Mr Legras of DG VI ruled that the accumulation of aid was not acceptable , and that shows that the model lacked the slightest trace of rigour - the model of the previous administration , that is .
Moreover , the vast majority of the autonomous communities have now reprogrammed their financial frameworks , except for Andalusia , Estremadura and Castile La Mancha - what a coincidence !
Mr President , Mr Camisón Asensio , I have heard your comments and your views on this situation , I have not heard a question .
I therefore cannot answer a question .
Thank you very much , Mr Fischler .
Mrs Redondo Jiménez , do you wish to put a question to the Commissioner ?
I am specifically asking whether you wish to ask the Commissioner a question .
Under no circumstances shall I allow Members to enter into debate among themselves . In any case , the debate should be between the Members and the Commissioner .
You have the floor , for a question to the Commissioner .
I am going to address a few comments to the Commissioner , but I am not going to begin any sort of national debate here because I do not think this is the appropriate place . Anyway , my colleague who spoke before me has already given the relevant explanations .
I am grateful to the Commissioner for saying that these programmes can be cofinanced by any public body . I am repeating it again now , because cofinance is not the sole right of the central government .
Cofinance can also be provided by the competent regional bodies , and private cofinance can also be added , which is also signed by these local action groups .
I would like to ask the Commissioner whether the initial funding envisaged is going to be increased for these LEADER programmes , which he described to us in his Agenda 2000 presentation as extremely important .
I think the important thing is to open up the budget line but perhaps the funding is a bit low , because it is extremely important for the development of rural areas IN all the Member States of the European Union , of the Europe of the Fifteen .
As to the question put by Ms Redondo about the intentions of the Commission regarding Agenda 2000 in relation to LEADER , I can say that we are planning a successor programme for LEADER-II .
Because - and I agree with you on this point - the LEADER initiative is so important , the intention is that in the next planning period , more funds will be available for this successor programme as a Community initiative than in the current period .
Thank you very much , Mr Fischler , for your presence and your replies .
Question No 48 by Ursula Stenzel ( H-0670 / 98 )
Subject : Own resources
At the Cardiff summit the Heads of Government undertook to reach a decision on Agenda 2000 by the end of March 1999 .
Austria 's objective in this connection is to prevent the net contributors ' position from deteriorating by the following means : fair allocation of net burdens , strict compliance with EU budgetary discipline and reserving a clear margin for the new Member States , as well as taking into account the temporary nature of the Cohesion Fund and incorporating it into structural policy .
Will the Commission be observing these principles in its evaluation of the own resources system ?
Mr Liikanen , I invite you to reply to Mrs Stenzel 's question .
Mr President , the Commission is fully aware of the issues that Parliament is now raising in its questions .
Austria is not alone in saying that it estimates its budgetary burden is too great .
These questions , which the recent proposal for a corrective mechanism supported by Austria also recently shed light on , will be included in a planned report on the own resources system .
At the same time it must be stressed that the Commission 's proposals contained in Agenda 2000 and reforms in EU policy might have a considerable effect on common expenditure among the Member States .
The Commission 's proposals are compatible with rigid budget discipline and sufficiently broad margins to allow for the funding of enlargement .
The Commission intends to examine these matters thoroughly in its report on its funds and resources .
Mr President , the Commission has already assumed in its proposed budget for next year that expenditure must be kept below funding limits .
Accordingly , expenditure under next year 's budget is 1.11 % , while the own resources ceiling is 1.27 % .
In addition , the Agenda 2000 proposal for the period 2000 to 2006 is so structured that expenditure will not rise to the 1.27 % level , but that the fifteen EU Member State level should even see a downward trend , expenditure reaching 1.13 % by the year 2006 .
In this way we will attempt to guarantee a sufficiently broad margin for enlargement .
This will require adaptability and rigid budgetary discipline .
Mr President , I already have the answer to what I wanted to ask .
- My question to the Commissioner is - and I am going to ask four complementary questions - first of all , whether there is now a solution to what own resources are , particularly for transit goods from the ports , and especially Rotterdam .
Secondly , whether the Commissioner is aware that in the Dutch coalition agreement includes a reduction in the contribution of NLG 1.2 billion .
Thirdly , whether the Commission 's new plans take account of the contribution per head of population .
Fourthly , whether the fact that the United Kingdom received a reduction is being taken into account , which is in any case a net limiting factor , and that this should also apply to other Member States , and whether it can already be considered that a like-for-like treatment now applies .
All these issues will be raised in the Commission report which will be produced in the second half of October .
As far as the British rebate is concerned , back in Edinburgh the Council asked the Commission to report on that issue and we will do so in the second half of October .
Secondly , the report will also provide a basis for the Member States to assess their expenditure .
There are areas where it is easier and areas where it is more difficult .
That is why we should be careful not to talk about the juste retour .
There are areas of common interest but allocation cannot be on a country-by-country basis .
Sufficient information will also be provided on that .
Thirdly , on the Rotterdam effect , as the honourable Member knows well , this issue has been discussed a lot in Holland and in Belgium recently .
We have asked for a specialist study and that has been produced .
Not all the conclusions have been totally uncontested by the different parties but this report is a basis for further discussion .
As to the matter of the NLG 1.2 billion in Holland , I am not totally certain if I quite understood what the honourable Member wanted to ask .
At any rate , the Commission report will respond to the debate on the position of net contributors which has been taken up by four countries , in particular - Germany , the Netherlands , Sweden and Austria .
Mr President , I think that Agenda 2000 is a particular challenge for us all , especially in the accession strategies of the candidate countries .
It is certainly the case that the EU Member States and the candidate countries which share a common geographical border will of course have particular challenges to face .
My question is this : does the preaccession strategy actually contain any approaches to finding a solution to the special problems which arise as a result of this geographical proximity and the naturally intense nature of these problems ?
The whole Commission paid a visit to Austria a while ago when Austria was to take over the presidency and this question was raised then .
Of course , in all these programmes , especially in the programmes which are connected for example to INTERREG and PHARE , it is very important that the border areas get particular attention .
It is usually where the difference in standards of living is highest that political and economic tension is created .
We will discuss the matter in the Commission and I hope that we can act appropriately .
Question No 49 by Eva Kjer Hansen ( H-0720 / 98 )
Subject : Implementation of democracy programmes
How does the Commission intend to implement the planned democracy programmes under Chapter B7-70 of the Budget following the European Court of Justice 's decision to freeze appropriations for programmes which have no legal basis ?
Mr Liikanen , I invite you to reply to Mrs Kjer Hansen .
Mr President , regarding those sections of the budget dealing with the funding of action in the interests of human rights and democracy , the Commission proposed to the Council on 24 July 1997 a regulation for the purpose of developing and reinforcing democracy , the principle of the rule of law , human rights and basic liberties .
We must also point out that the Commission appoints itself to the position of legislature when it proposes any legal basis .
The Commission has many times asked the competent institutions , mainly Council , but also the European Parliament , to speed up the process of approving legal bases , which are required to put the vital work of the Community into effect .
In any situation brought about by a court decision the Commission has hoped that the legal process would advance as speedily as possible .
So that the work of the Community should not stagnate , the Commission , which under the Treaty is responsible for setting the budget , has in today 's meeting approved a list of actions it considers itself able to continue funding , and a list of activities which it has not been able to endorse for continued support , for the time being , pending further clarification .
These lists are publicly available and are intended for debate today by the Committee on Budgets .
As for the sections of the budget devoted to greater democracy and the protection of human rights , regulations on regional programmes of cooperation have been agreed as alternative legal bases for sections of the budget in respect of the following areas : central and eastern European countries , third countries in the Mediterranean region , countries of the former Soviet Union and Mongolia , former Yugoslavia , and developing countries in Latin America and Asia .
Regarding the budget over the coming years , the Commission has kept in touch with both the institutions which hold budgetary power , Parliament and Council , and is doing everything it can to see that the debate on legal bases progresses quickly so that agreement among the institutions can iron out those differences of opinion that have led to the current situation .
Finally , I wish only to add that we have a trialogue between Parliament , Council and the Commission on Friday 17 July , and we will do everything possible to achieve a long-term solution there .
I would like to thank the Commissioner for his answer to the question and , at the same time , I would like to follow up by asking how the Commissioner intends to inform the parties concerned about their situation - that is , those on the list of programmes to be continued and those on the list of programmes that cannot be continued .
How will these individuals find out what the position is ?
NGOs will in fact be very much affected , because they feel trapped , not knowing what to do from here on .
In other words , has the Commission planned its information strategy ?
I am looking forward to following up this debate in the Committee on Budgets , but I would like to ask the Commissioner to clarify whether or not the democracy programmes will be able to proceed unhindered .
And finally , my last question to the Commissioner is this : why did the Council not adopt the motion that the Commission obviously tabled as far back as a year ago ?
Could it be that certain countries in the Council are blocking the continuation of the democracy programmes ?
I fully agree with the honourable Member that we must be careful to inform all the parties concerned , especially the NGOs .
That is why we are now making public today 's decision unfreezing a large number of the budget lines .
The next attempt to find a solution to the legal basis to release further budget lines comes on Friday .
I will do my best along with my services to ensure that all the NGOs concerned are informed in the next few days .
As far as the legal basis is concerned , the Austrian presidency made a very positive effort yesterday by raising the issue in the General Affairs Council .
The General Affairs Council has mandated the Committee of Permanent Representatives to try and find a solution to the problem this week .
In the past there have sometimes been political difficulties .
Sometimes the legal basis has not been accepted because of issues of comitology and so forth .
But I hope that the seriousness of the situation , about which many NGOs throughout Europe have expressed their great concern , will also put pressure on the Council to act more rapidly to get the proposed legal basis accepted .
I have listened very attentively both to the questions and to the answer given by Commissioner Liikanen .
You are still referring to the necessary legal basis for the payment of loans in the budget of the European Union .
I cannot help thinking that the various small initiatives taken by this Parliament and which relate to the most vulnerable groups which NGOs support with small actions - intended , in actual fact , to stimulate some Community initiative - cannot be successfully accomplished so easily with a legal basis .
At all events , it seems inconceivable to me that a separate legal basis can be created for all these separate initiatives .
Does the Commissioner have any proposal on a more general solution to this kind of problem of non-significant - though I know that this is a controversial term - actions which are nevertheless so important to the image of the Union ?
The Court of Justice decided that any significant action required appropriations in the budget and also a prior legal basis .
In the case of significant actions , we have no choice but to follow the decision of the Court .
But there are areas where there is more scope for interpretation .
They are : firstly , autonomous actions of the institutions ; secondly , pilot projects ; and thirdly , preparatory actions paving the way for further actions .
We have studied all the budget lines from this angle .
We have tried to unfreeze all those which we find not to be incompatible with the Court decision .
It is important to try to find a solution within the budgetary authority and to arrive at a definition of non-significant actions .
There , the discussions between the services have gone reasonably well .
We just hope that , at political level , the same will happen this week .
The factor to bear in mind is that , according to the Court decision , these pilot projects must study the possibility of Community action later on .
So they cannot be permanent support schemes .
They must be in preparation for something new .
If they come to the conclusion that something new could be done , then we will take preparatory measures and make real legislative proposals .
If the studies conclude that is not the case , then we will stop them .
But they cannot be a basis for permanent activity funded from the Community budget .
I hope , however , that we will find a solution on Friday .
Mr President , I have one more precise question .
I think I understood you correctly , Commissioner , but I would like to ask whether the issue of the Office for Minority Languages which was initiated by the European Parliament in 1982 is thus secure or whether you take the view that such a long-term project still has no legal basis , and how , in your opinion , this legal basis can be created .
Promoting minority cultures is one of the most important democracy programmes within the European Union , especially in view of the forthcoming enlargement , in which context we are constantly demanding minority rights from the candidate countries .
It would be quite scandalous if we were to end a programme which has proved its worth within the European Union over the last 15 or 16 years and cut its budget line .
This budget line is one for which it is difficult to find a solution .
The Commission has not proposed a legal basis , so we cannot blame the Council for the lack of action .
We are continuing to study that issue but there is as yet no solution to this matter even though we have been able to find one in the majority of cases .
There are many activists in different countries who have contacted us on this matter .
Ladies and gentlemen , allow me to thank Mr Liikanen once again for being here with us today and answering our questions .
Question No 50 by Carlos Carnero González ( H-0623 / 98 )
Subject : Dismissal of trade union representatives belonging to the Comisiones Obreras trade union by the company Fábrica de Bisagras , S.A. ( FABISA ) in Burgos ( Spain )
On 26 May the company FABISA , which is owned by the German group EDSCHA , dismissed the workers Gilberto Alonso Poza and Segundo Fernández Pardo , members of the works committee and the Comisiones Obreras trade union .
As I was able to ascertain during a visit to the protest campaign mounted by these workers outside the factory , this decision has caused widespread unease among the people of Burgos , who feel it is an unwarranted and repressive measure against well-known trade unionists .
Does the Commission not consider that , as part of a genuine European social policy , the principle that workers ' representatives must be able to perform their duties freely and not be subject to coercion in so doing must be fully guaranteed ?
Accordingly , does the Commission not consider that , given the failure to abide by this principle , the decision by FABISA to dismiss the trade unionists should be withdrawn ?
Mr Flynn , I welcome you and invite you to reply to Mr Carlos Carnero González ' question .
At present there is no Community legislation on individual dismissals of employees in general or trade union representatives in particular .
The issue raised by the honourable Member is primarily a matter for national law and practice .
However , in some situations Community law lays down rules which prohibit the dismissal of an employee on certain grounds , such as nationality , gender , the taking of parental leave , transfer of an undertaking or a worker 's refusal to transfer from full-time to part-time work or vice versa .
If a dismissal does not fall within one of these categories , the issue falls entirely within the responsibility of the Member State concerned .
If the company in question has a European Works Council or the dismissed trade union representative is a member of a European Works Council , Article 10 of Directive 94 / 45 lays down that : ' Members of European Works Councils and employees ' representatives exercising their functions under the procedures referred to in Article 6 ( 3 ) , of the Directive shall , in the exercise of their functions , enjoy the same protection and the guarantees provided for employees ' representatives by the national legislation and / or practice in force in the country of the employment . '
So , according to the information available to the Commission at this time , Spanish legislation provides for extensive protection against dismissal on account of activity as a workers ' representative .
I fully understand the answer Mr Flynn has so kindly given us .
We are certainly aware that there is no Community legislation which could serve as a basis for the Commission to intervene and state its opinion on the sort of situation mentioned in my question .
That is the unfortunate thing : that there is no Community legislation in this area , because there is no doubt that the matters we are talking about should be the central focus of a social Europe - the chance to have , alongside the single currency , rules to guarantee workers , for example , the opportunity to exercise all their rights , and even more so in the case of their trade union representatives .
This matter is assuming great importance in Castile and Leon .
A demonstration is to be held tomorrow to support these workers , and various social and political groups within the city of Burgos have promised to take part .
Debates have taken place within the regional government of the province of Burgos and in the town hall of the provincial capital .
Mr Flynn , despite the fact that the legislation does not exist , my question to you is whether you do not think a broad message could be sent from here to discourage this sort of situation from being repeated .
I appreciate the fact that the honourable Member recognises the limits imposed on the Commission in this instance .
He is quite right , and it is clear that there is no Community legislation which lays down detailed rules on the protection of workers ' representatives against dismissal .
I have taken his point , and the Commission is considering how to deal with the question when pursuing future Community action as regards information for and consultation of employees in general .
I am studying the matter .
Question No 51 by Bernd Posselt ( H-0645 / 98 )
Subject : Family policy studies
Further to my suggestion at Question Time on 31 March 1998 , has the Commission already hired an external consultant to carry out a study on provision for old age for persons who devote their lives solely to bringing up their children ?
Does it believe that it should conduct or hold , and finance , a survey or specialist conference on the proposed " parenting wage ' ?
Mr Flynn , I invite you to reply to Mr Posselt 's question .
As I explained in my reply to the honourable Member on 31 March of this year , the Commission is aware of demographic trends and changes in family structures , but the Community has very limited powers in the whole area of family policy .
The Commission has considered the situation in the Member States as regards enforcement of Directive 79 / 7 relating to equal treatment between men and women in statutory social security schemes .
The directive applies only to the working population , so people who devote themselves to bringing up their children fall outside its scope .
The Commission proposed an amendment to the directive in 1987 to fill the gaps in equal treatment in the social security field .
The matter is still pending before the Council .
The points covered include old-age benefits granted to persons who have brought up children .
Within the next couple of months the Commission intends to replace the 1987 proposal with a new proposal to amend Directive 79 / 7 .
I believe that the new proposal should take account of the gender balance and new developments in family structures in general .
I hope that this reply will help the Member .
Mr President , thank you , Commissioner , for your very precise reply .
I should like to ask a supplementary question about studies - I know that the Commission has no immediate responsibility , but it does carry out studies - whether , perhaps , a study into the issue of a parenting wage could be planned , as this is being discussed more and more intensively within the European Union at present .
You are aware that in May a conference on this issue took place in Frankfurt , which was attended by the Prime Minister of Saxony , Kurt Biedenkopf , and the Prime Minister of SchleswigHolstein , Mrs Simonis , in other words it was a cross-party event .
I would like to ask whether you feel that it is possible to arrange or fund a conference or a study of this kind at European level too .
The honourable Member might be interested to know that we have arranged , in cooperation with the Austrian presidency , a major conference on demography and the impact that it will have on the whole social fabric of the Union .
While it is not specifically targeted at the point you made , a wide-ranging general discussion will take place in October at that conference on the whole question as regards its impact on the Union .
As regards carrying out studies , I am afraid that the point made by my colleague , Commissioner Liikanen , applies specifically here , too , namely the budget line problem , insofar as the family policy project line is currently blocked .
Perhaps if you returned to this matter when these matters referred to by Commissioner Liikanen had been finally agreed , we might be in a better position to give you a more positive response .
Question No 52 by Anne Van Lancker ( H-0648 / 98 )
Subject : Transfer of unused ESF appropriations from Objective 4 to Objective 3
At the beginning of the current programming period , there was a shortage of appropriations for Objective 3 , while it was barely possible to allocate the appropriations for Objective 4 .
Members of the European Parliament asked the Commission to allow the Flemish Community to transfer Objective 4 appropriations to Objective 3 .
The Commission said it could not allow this because the initial problems would ultimately be solved .
It left the possibility open that it might permit such a transfer in connection with the mid-term evaluation .
In its resolution of 4 December 1997 on structural policy in Belgium , the European Parliament observed that Objective 4 appropriations were under-utilized and reiterated its call for unused resources to be transferred from Objective 4 to Objective 3 when undertaking the midterm evaluation .
One year before the end of the current programming period , it has become apparent that the resources available for Objective 4 will not be exhausted , although the situation has improved significantly , while the shortage of resources for Objective 3 persists .
In view of the enormous needs which exist and the approaching end of the programming period , can the Commission allow a transfer of appropriations from Objective 4 to Objective 3 ?
Mr Flynn , I invite you to reply to Mrs Van Lancker 's question .
I should like to say to the honourable Member that Objective 4 , as she knows , foresees a preventive approach to maintaining employment , in particular by anticipating labour market and industrial change and also reinforcing stability of employment through vocational training and qualifications .
The programmes for Objective 4 are therefore directly in line with the development of an active and preventive labour market policy in accordance with the European employment strategy which was just recently put in place by the European Council at the Luxembourg employment summit , and subsequently in employment guidelines which have been adopted for 1998 .
The national action plans for employment have now been drawn up by the Member States to put all these guidelines into effect .
The Belgian action plan refers explicitly to the intervention of the European Social Fund Objective 4 with a view to increasing the possibilities for training for workers to promote employability and to develop possibilities for lifelong learning . The plan actually supports that point of view .
Given the importance that the European Council , as well as the Belgian authorities , attach to prevention of unemployment , to lifelong learning and to active labour market policy , the Commission considers a reduction of the available budget to Objective 4 through a transfer to Objective 3 as inappropriate .
The Commissioner knows , of course , that I myself am a particularly strong champion of European agreements on employment and also a very keen advocate of prevention .
However , the reason why I am asking the Commissioner this question is as follows : I do not want to claim that the preventive training courses in Flanders are the best in the world .
There are Member States that do it even better .
But I would certainly claim that they are better than the average in Europe .
On the other hand , the long-term unemployment situation is particularly bad in Flanders , and I would therefore like to expand my question somewhat and give it a more general scope .
In view of the fact that the Commissioner has no more scope for changes in this programming period and is also putting forward substantive reasons for this , can he assure me that Member States will have somewhat more flexibility and somewhat greater margins within the priorities of the European Union to adjust their own priorities to a specific situation in the forthcoming programming period with the future Structural Funds ?
I have to agree with the honourable Member I am well aware of her particular point of view and her very supportive attitude towards both the employment strategy and the preventive approach .
That has been stated here in the House many times by her and I appreciate it greatly .
I am aware of the difficulties of long-term unemployment in the Flanders area .
The key thing is how to make best use of the money , to cater for the very problem that the honourable Member mentions .
Expenditure can be accepted until the end of 2001 so there is some time left to cater for the expenditure .
In fact , between 1995 and 1997 we had about ECU 6m of real expenditure in that particular area .
I am satisfied from discussions I had just yesterday that the 1998 out-turn may be even somewhat stronger than that .
Taking that into account together with the possible situation over the next couple of years , I am reasonably satisfied at this time that this expenditure can be applied for the purpose for which it was intended and in support of the very point of view that the honourable Member put forward .
As she says , later on when we come to renegotiate all these things her point of view will be very much taken into account .
Question No 53 by Alfred Lomas ( H-0653 / 98 )
Subject : Racism in Brussels
On 19 April 1998 a constituent of mine , a British citizen , together with her husband , a Tunisian national who lives with her in Britain , and a friend who is a Belgian citizen of Tunisian descent serving in the Belgian army , visited a bar - Au Laboureur , Place de la Constitution 3 , Brussels .
Her husband and the friend were refused a drink on the grounds that they were " Arabic ' .
They informed the police who took no action and even refused to give their names .
This incident caused great distress .
Will the Commission urge the appropriate authorities in Brussels to take action against this overt racism ?
Commissioner , I invite you to reply to Mr Lomas ' question .
The honourable Member refers to a racist incident experienced by one of his constituents and her Tunisian husband .
They were refused service in a bar in Brussels .
The Commission and the House deplores this incident .
At the same time , while deploring it , the Commission is not in a position to take action in this regard .
The fight against racist incidents is first and foremost the responsibility of Member States and complaints must therefore be addressed to the competent national authorities .
The body responsible for such matters in Belgium , the role of which is very similar to the Commission for Racial Equality in the United Kingdom , is Centre pour l 'Egalité de Chances et de Lutte contre le Racisme , that is the Centre for Equality and the fight against Racism .
The honourable Member is advised to take the constituent 's complaint to this body and they will be pleased to hear about the complaint .
I thank the Commissioner for his reply and the very helpful information he has given me .
Of course I will do what he says .
However , the EC has frequently commented on such matters , and the Commission in particular has made some excellent statements .
Since the Commissioner may have a little more influence than me , I wonder if besides me taking the matter up , the Commissioner could advise this body - I know it can do no more , it cannot interfere - that a Member has raised this matter and that the Commission is disturbed about it .
There should be an inquiry into both the bar and the police and it would be very helpful if the Commissioner could assist in this way .
I appreciate what the honourable Member has said .
We are launching a wide debate on Article 13 as you know .
I would hope that with our Action Plan we can provide ourselves with a legal framework as to how we can combat racism better in Europe .
The last survey on racist attitudes was very disturbing and it is as well to put this on the record of the House .
When the survey was carried out in Belgium , 22 % of the people interviewed regarded themselves as ' very racist ' and 33 % regarded themselves as ' quite racist ' .
Therefore , 55 % of the total population of Belgium was quite or very racist .
That says how much support we need for the proposed Action Plan .
The figure for Europe was a whole was 33 % .
So , a third of the total population of Europe - 120 million people - regard themselves as either ' quite racist ' or ' very racist ' .
It gives some indication of how great the need is to pursue incidents such as this .
I am rather pleased that one of the successes of last year was the setting up the Observatory .
We will be able to get better data on the whole aspect of these incidents - what brings them about and hopefully some of the causes - so that we can deal with them properly under Article 13 when the Treaty is ratified .
I know that unanimity is required but it is my intention before the end of this Commission 's term of office to introduce a proposal dealing with Article 13 .
I know that the Commissioner , as a champion of the fight against racism and discrimination , is very well aware that a lot remains to be done at European level as well .
However , I must tell Mr Lomas , for example , that thanks to funding from the European Commission for Belgium itself with its Centre for Equality and the fight against Racism , training projects are being set up by the police .
If it would help Mr Lomas , I would be pleased to help him in filing his complaint , which will then ultimately have to be taken up by the Observatory mentioned by the Commissioner .
The two honourable Members will be pleased with one particular aspect .
On the matter of the budget , we will be able to have our Action Plan and the question about the budget line for racism cleared .
Thank you very much , Mr Flynn .
That comment brings us to the end of the time allocated to the block of questions addressed to Commissioner Flynn .
So Questions Nos 54 to 57 will be dealt with in writing .
As they deal with the same subject , the following questions will be taken together :
Question No 58 by Anne McIntosh ( H-0604 / 98 )
Subject : Common Fisheries Policy
Will the Commission confirm that the 6 / 12 mile limits contained in the present Common Fisheries Policy will be maintained beyond 2002 ?
Question No 59 by Robin Teverson ( H-0687 / 98 )
Subject : Twelve mile fishing limits
The Council Regulation EEC 3760 / 92 allowing Member States to maintain restrictions on access to waters under their sovereignty or jurisdiction within a maximum limit of 12 nautical miles is due to cease on 31 December 2002 .
Is it the Commission 's understanding that all Member States want this derogation to be maintained and when will it bring forward a legislative proposal to the Council to allow the derogation to be renewed ? Welcome , Mrs Bonino .
I would suggest you reply jointly to the questions by Miss McIntosh and Mr Teverson .
It is the Commission 's opinion that the amended common fisheries policy for 2002 should retain the current system governing access to the 6 / 12 mile zone .
According to Articles 6 and 14 of the Council Regulation , the Council must decide whether to keep the current system by 31 December 2002 .
In its 1996 report on the application of the Community system for fisheries and aquaculture , the Commission informed the European Council and Parliament that , as things currently stood , no application had apparently been made to alter this aspect of Community law .
The response the Commission received to its recent questionnaire on the amendment of the common fisheries policy confirms the Commission 's view that current provisions on the 6 / 12 mile zone should be upheld .
I am most grateful to the Commissioner for that decision .
However , it did not say very much .
Could the Commissioner please confirm that if a request is made to overrule the 6 / 12 mile limit beyond 2002 , that will be decided by qualified majority voting in the Council of Ministers ?
That is the first point .
Could she also reassure my fishermen in north Essex and south Suffolk that they will be free to fish in that zone up to the 12 mile limit beyond 2002 , because that was the agreement we had when Britain signed up to a common fisheries policy ?
In her view , what is the legal status of a letter sent by Jacques Santer , as President of the Commission , to Tony Blair , Prime Minister of the United Kingdom , guaranteeing the 6 / 12 mile limit would be kept beyond the year 2002 ?
Does that have legal status and can our fishermen rely on it before the European Court of Justice ?
I can answer two of those points .
Certainly , any decision by the Council of Ministers to overrule the present system has to be taken by a qualified majority .
I think what President Santer 's letter to Prime Minister Blair means is that the Commission will not make any proposal to the Council to change the current system .
Decision making is in the hands of the Council of Ministers and it can overrule the arrangement by a qualified majority .
But the Commission will not be arguing for this .
I also wish to thank the Commissioner for her reply .
As I understand it , in the questionnaires she refers to , that were sent back by the industry in the various Member States , there was a general feeling that , if anything , the 6 / 12 mile limit could be extended .
I wondered whether , given its wish to take notice of consultation with the industry and to work with it , the Commission might bring forward a proposal to extend the limit , say , to 30 nautical miles rather than the 6 / 12 miles at the present moment ?
Mr Teverson , you know very well that the current system is already a derogation from the Treaty .
It is true that there is a consultation process with the industry .
We have not yet analysed all the replies , so I do not know its overall reaction .
As far as the replies we have received so far are concerned , they are very largely , or I would even go so far as to say , entirely in favour of the status quo .
I will not enter into any commitment at this stage .
What I can say is that there will be no proposal from the Commission to overrule the current system .
But that is the most I can say .
I should like to thank the Commissioner for her usual frank and forthright way in dealing with these questions which sometimes prompt alarmist comment .
In addition to the reassurance on the 6- and 12-mile limit , will she also bear in mind the question of relative stability , since these are the fishermen 's two biggest causes of concern .
Perhaps she would like to give an assurance , via this House , on both these issues , that the Commission is behind the fishermen and against the scaremongerers ?
Maybe I can give a personal assurance .
We are entering into consultations and it would be unfair for me to commit myself now .
The overwhelming majority of the answers up to now have all called for relative stability to be maintained .
That is my personal view at this stage .
I do not want to commit myself further today because we are consulting and I do not want to undermine the exercise completely .
Question No 60 by John McCartin ( H-0620 / 98 )
Subject : Ban on drift-net fishing
Following the recent decision to ban drift-net fishing in Community waters , has the Commission made any proposals for some form of compensation for the people engaged in tuna fishing and who are about to lose their livelihoods as a result of this decision ?
Mrs Bonino , I invite you to reply to Mr McCartin 's question .
I believe , Mr McCartin , that the best response that the Commission can give is contained in the joint declaration by the Council and the Commission , annexed to the minutes of the Fisheries Council of 8 June this year , which states : " Anxious to promote a switch to techniques which are more reliable , selective and financially appealing for capturing the same stocks , the Council and the Commission agree on the need to introduce in the Community an appropriate range of actions and special supporting measures for fishermen serving on board and the owners of fishing vessels .
' The measures concerned will have to be exceptional in character , however , and in any event be met from the budget for the affected Member States ' existing structural programmes .
' The measures may include alterations to fishing vessels making it possible for them to convert to techniques that are more reliable and selective , in particular for taking the same same species and avoiding those that are being overexploited ; compensation enabling fishermen on board and the owners of vessels to face the economic consequences of having to give up drift-net fishing activities ; schemes to retrain fishermen for jobs in areas other than fishing or to provide them with new skills ; and decommissioning of vessels involved in drift-net fishery ' .
It is still premature to detail the exact nature of the supporting measures because they are currently the subject of bilateral talks with the competent authorities in the Member States , who are , in turn , consulting professionals in the sector .
For the time being , it is impossible to predict the outcome of these talks and still less to predict what the Commission will propose to the Council .
It is very likely that the measures will be more or less the same as the measures adopted for swordfish , that is to say they will involve payments for owners of fishing vessels and fishermen who give up fishing altogether or who continue fishing for tuna using other methods .
Parliament will naturally be consulted on the proposal as required by Article 43 of the Treaty .
I should like to thank the Commissioner for her reply .
Would the Commissioner not agree that there is considerable discontent amongst the fishermen involved who feel that they have been displaced , not because of any scientifically based conservation programme , but simply for political reasons , to enable their catches to be exploited by others who have a different traditional way of exploiting stocks ?
I cannot work out whether there is a proposal to provide new moneys to compensate the displaced fishermen or whether the Commissioner is saying that the governments of the States concerned - be it France , the United Kingdom or Ireland - should propose a compensation programme using the resources already provided and no new money and resources are available .
The answer is yes .
There is no new money , but there is a possibility of using the money currently available in the Member States , of rescheduling the present funds .
We are discussing this with the authorities .
We really feel that for Ireland , the UK , France , etc , taking into account the average of what has been spent up to now , there is room , frankly , to cover this new expenditure .
Again , the European budget provides 50 % to some Member States , and 75 % to Ireland .
We are looking into this calculation in some detail .
But let me assure you that there is a way to reschedule and reprogramme the present fund .
There is a great confidence - rightly or wrongly - that the driftnet fleets of the Atlantic will disappear because of this Community regulation that has now been agreed .
Is the Commissioner confident that the Mediterranean driftnet fleets will also disappear and that we will no longer have driftnet fishing in the Mediterranean , from EU waters , as we will now in the Atlantic .
Will there really be equality of enforcement in European waters ?
I do not know if all seas will have the same treatment but I am confident that all of the European fleet will have the same treatment .
I cannot prohibit driftnets from being used by Japanese-flag vessels or others .
That is another dynamic that is now under discussion in the CGPM in the Mediterranean where the Commission has just recently become a member .
But I am confident for many reasons , one being the financial incentives , that before the deadline of 1 January 2001 , even in the Mediterranean , the fishermen will finally realize that it is even more convenient for them to take this opportunity .
I have no reason to doubt the effectiveness of enforcement , though I would stress again that , while the Commission will be very vigilant , enforcement is first and foremost the responsibility of the Member States .
The Finno-Swedish Border Rivers Commission has banned salmon fishing in river waters as a result of a 1997 resolution , passed by the International Baltic Sea Fisheries Commission , that called on all coastal states to adopt a moratorium on wild salmon fishing in internal waters as part of the strategy to rebuild wild salmon stocks - otherwise known as the salmon action plan .
I would like to remind you that the European Community embarked on this action plan only after discussion with Member States and that it intends to implement the plan in all areas .
We must also consider that salmon is a fish that migrates from feeding grounds in the sea to breeding grounds in inland fresh waters . In order to protect it throughout its life cycle , we must adopt measures that apply to both coastal and internal waters .
These measures must be added to measures already adopted for the open sea , where catches have already been halved compared with 1993 figures .
In rivers where stocks of wild salmon are almost depleted , the moratorium should be fully observed for several years . In other rivers , very prudent catch levels could be gradually reintroduced when experts confirm that the stock situation has improved .
I would like to thank Commissioner Bonino for her answer which I had not really expected .
As I understand things , the decision which the Border Rivers Commission has taken is based on the EU 's earlier rules .
Therefore this is not a national issue , but a Union issue .
This is a very big problem on the River Torne .
If nothing is done about it , it will grow into a very , very big border dispute .
I wonder whether the Union could not in some way divide the salmon fishing fairly between Sweden and Finland .
The issue concerns both of these countries .
I can assure Mrs Ahlqvist that there is an ongoing process of dialogue and discussion on salmon fishing in rivers between both States involved .
I was referring , in procedural terms , to the decision taken by the International Baltic Sea Fisheries Commission .
Although this Commission is responsible for regulating fishing in international waters , we thought it was appropriate to involve the Baltic Sea Commission because salmon swim into inland river waters to breed .
Having said this , the Union is naturally negotiating with both Member States to reach a solution , with the agreement of both if possible . The aim is of course to avoid the conflict Mrs Ahlqvist referred to .
Although the situation is frankly quite difficult , the Commission has not given up hope of reaching a mutually acceptable solution .
I am pleased that Commissioner Bonino quite rightly asserts that wild salmon have recovered in many places in the Baltic Sea , and that she is also well aware of the fact that we have many difficult regional conflicts and conflicts between different types of fish . This means the problem is not so much one of a border conflict between Sweden and Finland , but one of regional conflicts .
Since we know this is a difficult question , I wonder , firstly , how long the Commissioner thinks the action plan for salmon will have to continue with the tough restrictions which exist ?
Secondly , I understand that there is an idea of marking salmon so that people can distinguish between wild and farmed salmon .
Does the Commission intend to proceed with the question of marked salmon ?
Finally , I wonder whether there are any measures which the Commission could take to promote the position of professional fishing .
It is having great problems .
We have hardly any salmon fishing left along the Gulf of Bothnia coast in Finland .
The quantity of sea catches has been halved , in other words cut but 50 % , compared to 1993 . The aim of this is to help stocks recover .
There is a total moratorium for the time being .
The Commission is naturally willing to adopt a more flexible approach once the scientists tell us that stock levels have recovered .
For the time being , however , the Commission has not yet received any official reports that indicate that stock levels have recovered sufficiently in river waters .
Thank you very much , Mrs Bonino .
Ladies and gentlemen , it is now 7 p.m. We have come to the end of the time specified in the agenda for questions to the Commission .
Therefore Questions Nos 62 to 114 will be dealt with in writing .
That concludes Question Time .
( The sitting was suspended at 7.00 p.m. and resumed at 9.00 p.m. )

Towards sustainability
The next item is the report ( A4-0275 / 98 ) by Mrs Dybkjær , on behalf of Parliament 's delegation to the Conciliation Committee , on the joint text , approved by the Conciliation Committee , for a European Parliament and Council Decision on the review of the European Community programme of policy and action in relation to the environment and sustainable development ' Towards sustainability ' ( C4-0382 / 98-96 / 0027 ( COD ) ) .
Madam President , today we are seeing the fruits of work that has been going on for 2 ½ years , and I would like to begin by thanking the members of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection for their very active efforts .
Allow me briefly to remind you of the background . In Committee , we were seriously discussing whether to throw the Commission 's draft assessment of the Fifth Community Action Programme on the environment back in their teeth .
That is how dissatisfied we were with it .
It was just not good enough .
However , a majority within the Committee felt that this would delay the whole process too much , and we had precious little guarantee that we would get anything better .
Thus , we chose to continue working with the text , but using the influence of Parliament to the maximum .
The result was that some 100 amendments were voted through by the Committee .
Then we did something rather unusual in the plenary .
We agreed to take control of the process and withdrew 50 of the amendments in advance .
That is almost unknown in parliamentary history , but the strategy paid off .
Our prioritized amendments were voted through .
Neither the Council nor the Commission had much time for our amendments .
They could not accept very many of them , and therefore , we had to present virtually all of them again at second reading , whereupon the majority were adopted .
Then I would like to say a big thank you to the British presidency .
Their will to negotiate , their flexibility and professionalism allowed us to achieve a reasonably positive result together .
It was difficult at the start .
Council only accepted three of our amendments , but things did improve .
Then , finally , my thanks go to the Commission .
It took them a while to get on board , but they did so in the end .
Naturally , the result is a compromise .
The European Parliament would have preferred to see all its amendments implemented without modification , but we are living in the real world .
So what have we achieved ?
Generally , the programme has become more legally binding .
It has been registered that the new Member States - Austria , Sweden and Finland - will not be forced to lower their environmental standards after the end of their transition periods , not even if the EU has not by then managed to raise the EU 's present standards , as promised .
It is now quite clearly enshrined in the programme that EU legislation will have to be adjusted so that the high standards of the new Member States can be maintained , and this will be done in full public view .
However , we will face environmental problems from quite the opposite end of the spectrum with the next enlargement of the Community .
When the countries of central and eastern Europe join , it is important to ensure that the dynamics and perspectives of this do not disappear .
The new Member States will have to respect regulations already in force and those pending , and we have ensured that the Community will assist them in this major task .
They cannot do it alone .
Parliament has always taken the approach that the EU should take the lead in global , sustainable development .
The action programme underlines this ; for example , more will be done to get the WTO to start taking the environment seriously .
However , none of this would be of any use at all without monitoring to ensure that legislation is actually adhered to .
Parliament has helped reinforce those provisions of the programme that deal with the implementation and monitoring of EU regulations .
For example , the Commission will be preparing a report on joint minimum standards for environmental inspection in the various countries .
The success or failure of the individual Member States in observing environmental requirements will also be made public .
I could mention many other things that have also been implemented , but in this summary , I will just say that as an old chemical engineer , I can but rejoice that not only are chemical substances mentioned in the Council 's original text , but that there are also details of a specific plan of action to be prepared so that we can quickly evaluate all chemical substances , and greater emphasis is also given to tighter controls on the phasing out of CFCs .
Overall , I think Parliament should be pleased with its efforts .
Not only have we considerably improved the Fifth Community Action Programme on the Environment , we have also ensured that the entire reevaluation process was an open one in which many different interests came to the fore .
The European Parliament is the green institution of the EU , and the European Parliament does make a difference .
Of course , we have not achieved enough to make the EU sustainable overnight .
What we have is a compromise , as I said , but it is definitely a compromise in the right direction .
The result may not be worth celebrating with champagne , but it is surely worth a glass of good red wine .
And after that we will need a strong black coffee , because now the results must be put into action .
What is the value of an action programme if it is not put into action ?
Let us look on the revised Fifth Community Action Programme on the Environment as a step towards sustainability .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the fact that we are today able to discuss the approval , by the Conciliation Committee of Council and Parliament , of a text in relation to the environment and sustainable development in the European Union , is thanks to the persistent efforts - persistent seems to be a much better word than sustained - of the rapporteur , Mrs Lone Dybkjær , and of the chairman of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection , Kenneth Collins .
With this persistence and great wisdom they persuaded the Council to be open to Parliament 's ideas and to accept the proposals on a far broader basis than we could have hoped at the beginning of the negotiations , and in particular at the beginning of the first reading .
On behalf of my group , I thank you very sincerely for this .
It is clear to all those involved with environmental issues that this programme can only be the beginning of sustainable development in the European Union .
For this reason I am particularly pleased that the objectives of this Fifth Action Programme already state that still more progressive priority objectives and measures will be necessary beyond the year 2000 , so that the Community action does not lose its momentum and , of course , so that we can succeed in including the applicant countries in this environmental process .
I would need much more speaking time than I have , if I were to discuss all points on which there was agreement and which could contribute to an improvement in environmental legislation .
Therefore , I can only mention a few key points relating to some of these .
It is particularly important that environmental policy is included in agricultural policy , and I am very grateful to the Commission that this additional statement on the common agricultural policy has been included in the decision by the Conciliation Committee .
I am also very grateful to the Commission for stating that it will make proposals regarding ways in which environmental liability really could be legally regulated .
We talk about this regularly in the House and we will certainly publish a White Paper on it at some stage which we can discuss and which can take into account national differences , to such an extent that we can finally achieve a good pan-European directive on environmental liability .
I consider it very important that a system of green accounting should be introduced in the individual Member States so that we can carry out a form of environmental accounting - the German term is not very beautiful - once the individual Member States have reported back .
This is particularly important as , in precisely those places where we can integrate environmental protection very well , in operational processes and other processes , this integration of a system of green accounting into general accounting has many advantages and is excellent for transposing environmental provisions into national law .
Transposal is a very important catchword .
We must also have more effective monitoring , as Mrs Dybkjær has already said , and this will lead to us finally having better health protection ; this was also established more firmly in the Conciliation Committee than ever before .
There is no time to go through everything .
I would like to conclude with one point .
Many of us concerned with globalization and international trade issues see how much more difficult it is if environmental and precautionary aspects are not dealt with adequately within the framework of the WTO .
This text also states that the Commission will continue to do its utmost in the negotiations which are supposed to be concluded the year after next , but which will at least be very advanced by then .
Once again , I thank everyone involved .
Even if it is a compromise , it is a compromise which brings us further forward on environmental issues .
Madam President , Commissioner , Mrs Dybkjær , it is of course a little sad , considering how hard , how magnificently Lone Dybkjær fought in her report , that the report was originally much better , but we have to accept that , where environmental issues are concerned , small steps forward must be accepted gratefully here in Europe , in the European Parliament .
But perhaps the Member States will then actually grasp these small steps .
That , also , is Europe .
The joint text by the Conciliation Committee notes that the new Member States - Sweden , Finland and Austria - are not required to lower their environmental standards .
So far , so good , and I am very much in agreement with this .
Of course , it would be catastrophic if the Union were seen to be even trying to force Member States to lower their environmental standards .
This would certainly not happen .
But we all read it slightly differently before lunch .
Commissioner , is it not true that you discussed the possibility of checking or rather reviewing whether the Union could not adopt the stricter standards of the three new Member States ?
And was it not also discussed that you personally - and here I believe you - would make every effort to support this and to present a result to the House ?
I once heard from an official at the Commission that there had not been any really specific discussions with the individual countries .
Nevertheless , it was obvious , the official said , that these countries would not adopt our environmental standards , so there was no point in even trying to discuss it !
A classic case of jumping to conclusions .
I think it is a pity for the Commission . It think it is a pity , Commissioner - I hold you in the highest regard , and I would have expected a little more from you here .
It is also a pity for the Union , and a pity for the citizens of Europe .
Madam President , Parliament has once more obtained a marvellous result for the environment and for the European citizen with the outcome of this codecision procedure on the review of the Fifth Environmental Action Programme .
I admit that it has been an extremely painful process , but when we look at the result of the conciliation procedure it has undoubtedly been more than worth the trouble .
This is the second conciliation procedure under the British presidency in which Parliament has been able to exercise a considerable influence on the end result , with which it can be highly satisfied .
I am referring to the Auto-Oil Programme and now the review of the Fifth Environmental Action Programme .
My congratulations to the rapporteur , Mrs Dybkjær .
I experienced at first hand how much energy she put into her efforts to achieve a better review of the Fifth Environmental Action Programme for our citizens and the environment .
She deserves every praise for this .
It is very important for Parliament 's monitoring of compliance with Community legislation to be tightened up .
Article 4 on implementation and compliance has been completely rewritten to reflect Parliament 's amendments .
I emphasize that it is chiefly the Member States that have to accept responsibility for compliance , but the Commission too must improve compliance monitoring by means of a European network of environmental inspectors .
I am also very pleased that the Commission , with the support of Parliament , has made its intentions clear with regard to the integration of environmental objectives into the common agricultural policy .
This is of great importance to a sustainable future for Europe .
The much-needed reforms for sustainable agriculture have to be put in place as quickly as possible .
I shall myself be making concrete proposals in the context of the budget to integrate environmental objectives into the common agricultural policy .
I also need to take a look at my own country , which is making far too little use of the opportunity - I am thinking of agricultural and environmental regulation 2078 / 92 - to make agriculture much more environmentally friendly through cofinancing .
Finally , the guarantee given to the states who joined most recently - Austria , Finland and Sweden - that they will be able to maintain their strict environmental standards , is of great importance to them .
I will conclude by asking the Commission what preparations it currently has in hand to give the Environmental Action Programme a fresh start after the year 2000 .
Madam President , I agree with what Mrs Flemming said .
At both first and second reading , Mrs Dybkjær , we considered your report to be absolutely first-rate and a real ray of hope for the European Parliament .
But was it not precisely for those reasons that we did not agree with the outcome of the Conciliation Committee ?
We believe that it is not even worthy of red wine , but at most a glass of seltzer - what remains , after all , of the ten points submitted by Parliament ?
Where is the agreement that the White Paper is finally on its way or , even more importantly , that environmental liability is finally being regulated ?
For years the Commission has been putting us off , and so it goes on . I fear it might just happen on twelfth of never .
As Mrs Flemming already said , where is the very clear statement that we will finally look at the regulations in the three new Member States and take very best points over from them ?
There should be a whole series of such achievements .
Or where is the management plan for radioactive waste which we , as Parliament , requested ?
None of this is in the outcome .
For this reason I believe that Mrs Bjerregard , who has already described us as a Mickey Mouse Parliament in connection with the Fifth Action Programme , will continue to make a joke of Parliament .
I would have liked to know what , in concrete terms , will become of environmental liability , what new points the Commission is planning .
We fear that in environmental terms this result is much too poor , and for this reason we did not vote for it .
Madam President , Parliament received the text on the review of the Fifth Environmental Action Programme in February 1996 .
Today , we are discussing the outcome of the conciliation procedure .
More than two years have passed in the meantime , and that is a very long time for an action programme that is to be implemented in the year 2000 .
The next time , everything possible must be done to accelerate the process , otherwise the programme will be overtaken by events .
We are very happy with the contents of the joint draft text .
It proved possible to include many more concrete proposals from the European Parliament in the final text .
As a result , the text has been strengthened .
My congratulations to the rapporteur and the other participants in the conciliation procedure .
It is a pity that more did not come out of it in the area of agriculture .
Of course , we have Agenda 2000 , where a lot of scope has been built in in terms of environmental policy , but we still have to await its implementation .
We are very happy about the priority given to better enforcement of environmental legislation .
This really is an area which needs to be paid more attention in the years to come .
The Commission seems to have been getting more interested in this recently , but things could still be improved .
I thought the additions by Parliament to the joint text about this priority were very good .
In particular , the use of the legal instruments which the Commission possesses to spur on the Member States is important .
It is simply disgraceful to see how the deadlines for implementing environmental legislation are being exceeded .
Just make the Member States come before the Court a bit more often , to explain why it is so difficult to implement laws , and perhaps then they would get a bit more of a move on .
Madam President , I wish to thank the rapporteur Mrs Dybkjær very warmly for her success in explaining so clearly that the three most recent Member States should not be penalized because the European Union has not been able to keep to its agreement .
When the three new Member States joined , it was agreed that the EU would amend its legislation to fit in with that of the new Member States , in which case this transition period would not have caused the new Member States any grief .
At the same time it would have also enabled EU environmental standards to rise .
There is really still a great deal of work to be done in this field .
The European Parliament has done much to put matters on the right track , and a good example of this is this achievement on the part of the Conciliation Committee .
Agenda 2000 is an important tool , but it is worth bearing in mind that when we quite justifiably insisted , in the context of enlargement , that future Member States must observe the European Union 's strict rules , at least strict in the opinion of the newcomers , we also have to see to it that the EU for its own part honours its agreements and commitments .
But it is specifically in the area of enlargement that it is vital to make sure EU environmental legislation is not weakened , but that it is continually improved .
I believe that the important thing about this report is that we have to honour commitments already in existence today .
Madam President , the disappointment is obvious to anyone reading the final report of this conciliation procedure .
After the major inroads made in committee , we now find the document presented by the Commission to be absolutely unacceptable . Although this document talks about sustainable development , it actually suggests a form of development that seeks to adapt environmental needs to the current system of production .
All this is done , naturally , without tackling the indefensible policies that destroy natural resources and without any real moves to carry forward the limited progress made as a consequence of the actions of the European Parliament .
I can give examples : there is agriculture , but there is also Agenda 2000 , which fails to meet these requirements .
Also , the document on agriculture does not mention genetically modified organisms .
My colleague Mrs Breyer has already mentioned the topic of radioactivity .
As far as consumers are concerned , we have already debated labelling as a means of providing safeguards , but nothing at all has been said about labelling genetically modified organisms .
These were just examples , but what do they tell us ?
They tell us that we have switched from a proposal for sustainable development to a proposal aimed mainly at preserving the status quo .
The changes to the original text are simply windowdressing and do not alter the gist .
We cannot therefore say that we appreciate the spirit in which the European Parliament has attempted to give substance to an empty proposal presented by the European Commission .
Madam President , without intending to do so , this report raises two problems .
Firstly when talking about harmonization between the Member States , we are also talking about the risk of levelling down .
I do not have any problem at all with the exception which allows Austria , Finland and Sweden to retain their own standards , but the fact remains that this exception was not clear at the outset .
Furthermore , there is no point whatsoever in raising and harmonizing our environmental standards in Europe if , at the same time , we do not keep a critical eye on what is coming in from outside .
The question of sustainable development is one of those issues which provides the best arena for euro-globalists to be faced with their own contradictions .
Here industry and commerce play a clearly dominant role .
Specifically , how can the Member States develop a policy of sustainable development in a global commercial context in which free trade would like to prohibit our countries from inspecting the quality of imports from third countries ?
And I refer here to products manufactured under frequently deplorable social and environmental conditions which , in the absence of compensatory taxation , is slashing prices in Europe and nudging unemployment figures upwards .
Ladies and gentlemen , these issues seem irreconcilable to me and lead us to choose between two very different concepts : the best offer and the lowest offer .
If we really want to have an ambitious environmental policy , we must push our thinking as far as it will go and keep control of those precious filters which our borders represent .
If this happens and we permit only those products to enter our Community which respect human beings and the environment , third countries would certainly work more quickly to raise their standards .
However if the opposite happens , and the law of the jungle takes over , unfortunately our efforts towards sustainable development would be worth little .
The same applies to farming methods . For example , even if it is less expensive in terms of cost price to raise cattle on the ashes of the Amazon rainforest , it would be catastrophic for the environment and for employment to sell beef from this source , which admittedly would be much cheaper , in competition with beef produced on the grasslands of Europe .
In this context , I think that aiming for higher standards seems a particularly difficult objective .
Madam President , I would like to congratulate Parliament on the outcome of the conciliation procedure pursuant to the resolution on reviewing Community policy and action in connection with the environment and sustainable development entitled " Towards Sustainability ' .
This result has been made possible thanks to a constructive and realistic approach on the part of Parliament and the Council of Ministers .
My special thanks go to the rapporteur , Mrs Lone Dybkjær , and to Mr Ken Collins , chairman of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection , as well as to the British presidency for their energetic approach to tackling this issue .
The Commission is of course delighted to have played a part in the overall compromise by contributing a large number of proposed wordings and communications on the minutes of the meetings .
The Commission will now do its part for the duration of the programme , tabling motions for measures that will be required to implement the result we now have before us .
I trust that the implementation of this resolution will further promote the integration of environmental considerations into other sectors of policy , as required by the Treaty and upheld at the Cardiff Summit .
In addition , please allow me to make a few individual comments on some of the issues raised in today 's debate .
Several speakers , including Mrs Dybkjær , Mrs Flemming and Mrs Myller , touched on the matter of the new Member States .
I can only confirm what I have said many times in response to questions and debates in Parliament : in my view , standards for the three new Member States should not be lowered .
I would also like to say to Mrs Flemming that the entire proposal on pollution strategy and the subsequent proposal on sulphur in petrol have taken direct account of spreading the standards of the new Member States to the rest of the Community , so we have most definitely been inspired by the new Member States .
I can also confirm that at the Council meeting in Chester in April , I promised we would come up with a plan of action on chemical substances .

As regards agricultural policy , mentioned by Mrs Graenitz , Mr Eisma and Mr Blokland , I must say I share Mr Blokland 's view that a stronger statement on agricultural policy would have been good , but we do have the option of coming back to this , because we will be discussing the relationship between agriculture and the environment in the context of Agenda 2000 .
The debates we have had on this clearly demonstrate what an important issue it is .
Finally , as regards liability , I would just like to emphasize that I am still hoping for and working towards presenting a White Paper on this before the year is out .
Madam President , with these few remarks , I would just like to say thank you once again for the result achieved .
Thank you , Commissioner Bjerregaard .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12.00 noon .
Epidemiological surveillance
The next item is the report ( A4-0276 / 98 ) by Mr Cabrol , on behalf of Parliament 's delegation to the Conciliation Committee , on the joint text approved by the Conciliation Committee for a European Parliament and Council Decision creating a network for the epidemiological surveillance and control of communicable diseases in the European Community ( C4-0383 / 98-96 / 0052 ( COD ) ) .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , because of the grave , sometimes mortal threat to the people of the European Union from communicable diseases , in April 1996 the Commission proposed the creation of a Community surveillance network to respond more effectively to recurrences of such serious diseases .
Parliament had long called for this .
Nevertheless , the Member States ' response in the Council to this initiative was very disappointing .
In its common position adopted in July 1997 the Council seemed to be doing its utmost to restrict effective action , that is , action which could be taken at Community level , by retaining as many as possible of individual Member States ' prerogatives and by having decisions in every case taken not at Community level but at the discretion of each government .
In its second reading amendments of January 1998 Parliament sought to restore the effectiveness of action against recurrences of communicable diseases .
This triggered a conciliation procedure .
In a series of official and unofficial negotiations with our delegation and its chairman , Mr Ken Collins , we fought a hard battle in the course of which we secured the essential guarantees .
Firstly , public recognition in each Member State for an officially designated national centre charged with gathering information on the communicable diseases currently evolving and on measures for controlling them .
Secondly , the creation of a Community network linking all the national centres , with the job of assimilating the data gathered and operating in both directions , from the national centres to the network and vice versa .
This is Amendment No 13 .
It was much more difficult to obtain a centre whose job is to classify and analyze the data and also to provide an early warning system in order to push through the required measures .
This was gained only on condition that the European Commission took responsibility for it .
This is Amendment No 5 .
In an effort towards Community cohesion , we succeeded in drawing attention in all the stages of data gathering to the need to use consistent definitions and data gathered in accordance with previously established methodology and to encourage the use of appropriate language and technology .
It was an uphill task to obtain the financing for this purpose .
The text only allows for the possibility of Community financing .
This is Amendment No 4 .
In selecting the diseases which might be covered by the network , we have managed to avoid establishing arbitrary criteria and we have raised recognition of the need to record not only the clinical but also the microbiological characteristics of the diseases in question .
In addition , the list of communicable diseases is now real and no longer only indicative . This list can be modified with the approval of Parliament .
In terms of the steps to be taken , the concept of guidelines at Community level has been adopted , as opposed to decisionmaking as the exclusive domain of the Member States as called for in the Council 's common position .
On the contrary , each Member State must consult the other states before taking any steps , except in cases of extreme urgency .
Controls will also be permitted at the external frontiers of the European Union .
There will also be a periodical evaluation of the operation of the entire system - national centres , the network and European centres - within a reasonable time scale .
In conclusion , the joint text we now have may not be perfect , but it would be difficult to achieve more given the current state of the European constitution .
Your parliamentary delegation recommends , therefore , that Parliament adopt the decision in accordance with the joint text approved by the Conciliation Committee .
Madam President , after the daylight drama that we had in Mr Cabrol 's last report on the tobacco advertising ban , it is sad to be back to the late shift for health workers in this Parliament tonight .
I find it rather ironic that we have been relegated to this time , given that the Commission rates this network on communicable diseases as one of the most important pieces of the post-Maastricht health framework , and also that the UK presidency gave its successful completion at conciliation a particularly high priority .
Nevertheless , the work of Mr Cabrol in bringing some complex negotiations to a conclusion deserves a wider audience and our congratulations , as well as the vote of approval which it will undoubtedly achieve tomorrow , with the full support of my group .
At second reading some formidable obstacles remained to be cleared .
Principally those related to the budget - which seems to be a perennial health risk - , to the questions of external frontier control responsibility and , particularly , to the rapporteur 's own initiative , over and above the Commission proposals , concerning a dedicated centre at the heart of the network .
A recapitulation of previous readings will remind us that I harboured doubts then that this could be achieved in the current political and economic climate , despite the undoubted strength of the rapporteur 's argument and the enthusiasm of this House at two readings .
That suspicion has proved well founded .
But if some see that as a cloud , then the annex appended to the final text by the Commission must be seen as a very significant silver lining to that cloud .
To have extracted a commitment that the Commission will take particular care to set up a clearly identified structure , with sufficient staff to ensure application of the decision , is a major achievement of negotiation by all three institutions .


Tonight we particularly praise Mr Cabrol - and Mr Collins , as the committee Chairman - but the diligent work of Commissioner Flynn and his team in DG V F plus the Chairman-in-Office of the Council of Permanent Representatives , means that another success can be chalked up to add to the growing numbers of welcome conclusions to consultations , particularly those carried out in the manner which Mr Cabrol referred to .
What will all this mean to our citizens ?
We must be vigilant to ensure it is implemented thoroughly and urgently .
But it is a further recognition that the EU is well placed to enact measures to protect the health of its citizens .
Of course the WHO has a role , with its cascades of information ; of course national and local health bodies have a clear role in control and surveillance ; but now so does the EU , and rightly so , when millions of our citizens choose to move across the continent to work , to study , or , crucially at this time of year , to go on holiday .
The French people celebrating Bastille Day with fireworks tonight in the centre of this city have a right to expect that they are at not at preventable risk in the crowds of people who will also enjoy the celebrations .
The hundreds of thousands of World Cup fans now heading home have the same rights and responsibilities , on European soil , to the highest standards of health protection , whether they come from Germany , Jamaica or wherever .
It is to those structures , which the decision now puts in place , that those citizens can confidently look for reassurance that the sort of killer diseases re-emerging to sometimes worrying degrees in other continents , as well as here , are less likely to strike them down .
That is good for our citizens ; it is good for their health and it is good for their democratic rights too .
Although few will know it as the fireworks explode outside tonight , it is a very good reason for those of us here to enjoy some quiet celebrations for the introduction of what is a modest but important measure , and to thank all those responsible for achieving it , which I now do .
Our common goal is to promote and protect the health of individuals and our populations .
In this context , today really is a landmark in the development of a Community health policy .
Parliament is poised to adopt the decisions setting up the network for the epidemiological surveillance and control of communicable diseases in the Community .
The adoption of this decision will be a major step forward in the fight against diseases .
I support both contributors in that regard .
It really is an important evening .
It will enable further concrete initiatives to be undertaken , as well as further surveillance and control .
It will set up a network intended to respond effectively and in a coordinated fashion to epidemics or outbreaks of communicable diseases in a Community without internal frontiers .
It will not be confined simply to the transmission of surveillance data .
I am pleased to acknowledge the key role that Parliament has played in shaping this decision and the requirements that will accompany it .
Members of Parliament and , in particular , the rapporteur , Mr Cabrol , and the chairman of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection , Mr Collins , deserve full credit for their efforts and their success in fashioning a major legal instrument of cardinal importance for Europe 's public health .
I welcome the positive way in which Parliament and the Council approached the conciliation phase and played their respective roles to the full to secure adoption of this decision .
I wholeheartedly support what Mr Needle said in this regard .
The conciliation meeting itself was conducted in a most efficient and cooperative manner and the delegations must be given full credit for a job well done .
For the record , I would like to reiterate the two statements of the Commission made at that meeting so that they are properly entered in the Minutes because I think they are important for the record .
On Article 1 , the Commission will pay particular attention to providing an adequately staffed and appropriately identified structure so as to ensure the implementation of the decision , taking into account the availability of resources .

On the implementation of the provisions of Article 7 - the point that Mr Needle referred to and that Mr Cabrol is extremely interested in as well - the Commission will pay particular attention to ensuring that expenditure relating to the committee which will assist the Commission is determined in strict application of the rules of financial prudence , in particular as regards the number of experts deemed necessary for the proper implementation of this decision .
I thank you for you support .
Thank you , Commissioner Flynn .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12.00 noon .
Women 's health
The next item is the report ( A4-0260 / 98 ) by Mrs van Dijk , on behalf of the Committee on Women 's Rights , on the report from the Commission to the Council , the European Parliament , the Economic and Social Committee and the Committee of the Regions on the state of women 's health in the European Community ( COM ( 97 ) 0224 - C4-0333 / 97 ) .
Madam President , in the name of the Group of the European Liberal Democrat and Reform Party I should like to ask for the Mrs van Dijk 's report to be referred back .
I would like to make it very clear that we all know Mrs van Dijk as a hard-working and motivated champion of women 's rights , but that this report , which contains 90 proposals to the Commission and the Member States , is not the right report to promote women 's health .
An interminable shopping list is being presented .
The European Commission needs a clear and concise signal from Parliament , and we want action to be taken .
There are a large number of proposals included which do not lie within the powers of the European Union , such as national authority concerning abortion .
For all these reasons , my group requests that the report be referred back to the Committee on Women 's Rights , so that we can present the Commission with a short , concise report as quickly as possible in September or October .
I regret that it has to be this way , and I would like to state that in person , too , because it is Mrs van Dijk 's last sitting .
I would have much preferred it to be otherwise .
She has a lot of good reports to her credit , and I will personally help to ensure that the reports come back to the plenary soon , but in a shorter and more concise form with clear priorities .
You have now tabled a motion pursuant to Rule 129 .
We can now have one speaker each to speak for and against the motion .
Who would like to speak in support of it ?
Frau Heinisch .
Madam President , I would agree with Mrs Larive .
We discussed this at length , tabled many motions and have had some really good discussions with Mrs van Dijk .
But we did not manage to reconcile our positions on many points with those of the other groups in order to achieve a satisfactory outcome .
I personally , as a pharmacist , am interested in the issue of women and health .
There are , however , many amendments which we simply cannot allow in the report because they have nothing to do with the issue of women 's health .
For this reason I support the Group of the European Liberal Democrat and Reform Party in asking that it be referred back to committee .
Thank you . Who would like to speak against this motion ?
Madam President , I wish to oppose the request of the Group of the European Liberal Democrat and Reform Party since , firstly , this is Mrs van Dijk 's last session and it would be a real pity if we could not see this matter through .
Secondly , if there is quite a lot to cover in this report , it is no doubt due to the fact that women 's health is not awfully well charted as a separate issue .
For example , there is a dearth of statistical information , and , given this , I believe the report , in the shape it is in now , will act as a sort of catalogue of those issues that ought to be systematized and considered later on .
I think it is highly regrettable that there should be a desire merely to attribute all this to the wishes of the rapporteur .
The Committee certainly participated as a whole in the drafting of the report , however , as 96 amendments were presented in Committee , if I am not mistaken .
This number has now been whittled down to 34.The matter is clearly being resolved .
Besides , it is quite obvious that there is never unanimous agreement over abortion in this Chamber .
Before we proceed to the vote , Mrs Roth wishes to speak on a point of order .
Mrs Roth , on which Rule do you wish to speak ?
Madam President , I refer to Rule 112 on the quorum .
I would like to ask that the quorum be established .
If Mrs Roth makes this request , at least 29 Members must rise to support it .
You cannot request it alone ; you need the support of 29 Members of the House .
I ask those Members who support Mrs Roth 's request to rise from their seats .
( 8 Members rose from their seats ) Thus , the request for the quorum to be established is rejected .
I beg your pardon , Madam President , but Rule 112 ( 5 ) , also says that you , as President , can establish whether there are actually 29 people here in the Chamber .
You yourself can establish whether the quorum is present .
The request for the quorum to be established was rejected .
( Protests from Roth ) Mrs Roth , I am chairing this sitting and I have said that the request was rejected .
We shall now proceed to the vote on the motion of referral back to the committee .
( The matter was referred back to the committee responsible )
I was disregarded earlier .
I do not know whether it would have turned out that way , but you said that I requested that the quorum be established .
However , in my second point of order I referred to Rule 112 ( 5 ) , because I wanted to know whether there were actually 29 people in the Chamber , and that was before the vote , before Mr Posselt and Mr Bourlanges rushed in .

You did not permit this ; if you had , you would have been able to establish the quorum .
This is no longer relevant , but I was referring to something else .
Mrs Roth , I understood perfectly well what you were asking for , but such a request is not possible .
The VicePresident may do it , but he does not have to .
I beg your pardon , but you must read your Rules of Procedure very carefully .
In any case , the vote on referral back to committee was passed successfully .
Thus , this agenda item is closed , as the report was referred back to the committee .
Mrs García Arias wishes to speak on a point of order .
Madam President , I am sorry that Mrs Roth 's point of order has not been heeded .
I just want to state that I do not understand why an allusion to abortion under certain conditions - those which apply in all our countries - should have provoked this sort of reaction .
I would remind you all of the conditions which regulate abortion in practically all our countries : rape or incest , serious foetal deformity , and danger to the mother 's health .
I do not understand this discussion .
Unfortunately my attitude differs from that of my committee , but for the record , Madam President , I think this situation needs to be brought to people 's attention .
Mrs García Arias , the debate is closed .
The Members have voted , and the vote was very clear .
I deliberately held an electronic vote so that there could be no confusion .
Environmental taxes and charges
The next item is the report ( A4-0200 / 98 ) by Mr Olsson , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection , on the Commission communication : Environmental taxes and charges in the Single Market ( COM ( 97 ) 0009 - C4-0179 / 97 ) .
Madam President , this report has given me with a lot of interesting work .
It is based on a communication from the Commission which is in fact only a legal framework for the scope for introducing environmental taxes in the Member States .
I suspect that Commissioner Bjerregaard , who unfortunately is not present , had initially hoped that there would be a little more policy in this communication .
However , there was no policy , only a ' framework ' .
From my side , with great help from the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection and other committees which have provided opinions , we have tried to ' put a little meat on the bones , ' since this is a very important issue .
An awful lot of environmental problems are in fact transnational .
That is why joint measures are required to deal with them .
In this context , financial instruments are often effective , but to increase their effectiveness in use , the ability to decide on common environmental taxes in the EU must be improved .
Our proposal contains a number of measures .
I shall not go into all of them , but , among other things , we would like the Commission to present proposals to use financial instruments to reduce pollution and unsustainable use of natural resources in all the Member States .
We also think that minimum levels of environmental taxes should be set according to the polluter pays principle .
In addition we say that the EU should also help to shift the tax burden from labour to environmental consumption , in other words a restructuring of taxation .
At present , countries that introduce various environmental taxes are very often criticized by , amongst others , their own business community .
There is a counter-argument that environmental taxes create worse competitive conditions for your own industry or your own agriculture .
The criticism is justified to the extent that an environmental tax involves an additional cost which competitors in other countries do not have .
However , this reasoning means that there are great difficulties in introducing any environmental taxes at all .
I am very pleased to see Commissioner Bjerregaard return .
I shall quickly repeat what I said initially , that is that I believe the Commissioner had originally wanted there to be a bit more than just a framework for environmental taxes , that there should also be some policy substance .
We have now received only a ' framework ' from the Commission .
We have tried to put a little policy meat on this framework , and that is what we are presenting and debating this evening .
If we are to succeed within the European Union in maintaining a level playing field between countries in a single market , it is necessary to have cross-border cooperation on these issues .
Unfortunately many of the world 's international forums are quite toothless .
There are no opportunities to agree on binding rules which have to be followed .
We try to do so in various contexts , such as within the UN and in various groupings all around the world .
In fact , today there is only one organization which might have the power to create such common rules , and that is the European Union .
The EU 's need for unanimity for decisions on tax questions represents a political obstacle to this being able to work .
The Committee regrets that no advances were made in the Treaty of Amsterdam with regard to taking decisions at the EU level on the question of introducing environmental taxes .
Madam President , let me conclude by saying that environmental taxes at EU level would not only improve the environment , but also remedy the current situation in which the best punish themselves .
A restructuring of taxes would increase the competitiveness of European industry and make Europe more competitive in a tougher world market .
A ' green ' tax reform could help to bring the structure of European industry closer to sustainable development .
Madam President , the Committee on Research , Technological Development and Energy was unanimous in its conclusions .
We want to stress how important this issue is .
We recognized that minimum levels should be set at EU level to help speed up the polluter pays principle . That is a very important first step .
Then we also talked a great deal about how things currently stand in the Member States .
Certain Member States have a lot of environmental taxes and charges , while others do not .
There is , in other words , a large degree of freedom for the Member States .
The important thing in this context is that Member States should be able to share their experiences with other Member States so that they can do the same things .
Research can be a great help here .
Research has to be very advanced in this area for other countries to be able to learn from good examples .
That is also why we on the Committee on Energy stress that we must bear in mind the principle of subsidiarity , so that detailed rules should not be imposed , and it is possible to have different solutions .
Furthermore , when the EU Treaty was drawn up , environmental taxes and charges were not considered at all .
Because of this , all the legislation in the EU is lagging behind in this area , while consumers and companies are clamouring for change .
That is why it is important that Community legislation should not obstruct the developments taking place in many Member States , including the Scandinavian ones , which are aimed at developing better environmental taxes and charges so that these can spread and be applied and so that the EU 's objective of an environmentally sustainable EU and society can be achieved .
At the same time , Community legislation must not be allowed to prevent this .
Madam President , I think this move towards imposing environmental taxes throughout Europe is an important one .
It is important to note , however , that environmental problems will not be resolved merely by using environmental taxes .
We need an effective combination of good environmental legislation backed up by environmental taxation .
Only through such a combination of forces and cooperation will it be at all possible to achieve results .
The fact that a harmonized approach to environmental taxation in different countries is now being considered and must be considered , will mean that those countries that have already voluntarily imposed environmental taxes will no longer have to bear the pressure that presently comes from industry , which claims that they are freely giving away a competitive edge to their competitors .
I do not think the issue can be looked at in such simple terms .
Besides , the fact that production methods which protect the environment and environmental taxes exist at all can be considered a competitive edge .
In my opinion , the whole of the EU , as a single market area , should aim to achieve a position whereby Europe 's competitive edge is the very fact that we have instruments available to us to control production and consumption so as to protect and improve the environment .
In my opinion environmental taxes offer a sensible way of controlling consumption and production .
It will suit the market economy splendidly , because it fits in with that very principle , although we cannot merely rely on the market economy .
It is essential for political decision-makers to have a genuine desire to acknowledge the importance of environmental matters , and for tax controls to be on the right course in this respect .
When we say , and I think it has to be said , that by increasing the use of environmental taxation we can reduce other taxes , for example , income tax , it should not then in any way be imagined that environmental taxes and the money they raise should be at all tied just to investment in , and care for , the environment .
Whereas we may see changing the focal point of taxation as a means of achieving better environmental protection , at the same time it is evident that it is also a means of amassing the resources society needs to produce welfare services ; in other words , environmental taxes must be seen in the context of the overall tax system .
We should not just aim to create a better environment in concrete terms through environmental taxation . No , by using environmental taxes to achieve better , more sustainable production , we can also deliver better , more sustainable social services , and an improved standard of living for our citizens .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , Commissioner , first of all , I would like to thank the rapporteur , Mr Olsson .
He made every effort with this report in the course of the procedure , and I believe that he has presented a good report .
We need to take action in the environmental field , even if at the moment it is not popular everywhere to talk about the environment .
We have many unsolved problems .
To name just one , there is the issue of how the European Union and the Member States intend to carry out their Rio and Kyoto obligations in terms of CO2 reduction .
There are various possible ways of tackling these problems .
We can use administrative law or we can allocate state subsidies .
These are all necessary , but in my opinion they are not the ultimate pearl of wisdom .
It is better to use the market economy in this area also , because it not only provides the most efficient solution to the problem , but it also allows the polluter pays principle to come into play .
Of course , we must now ask the general question : why are environmental taxes and duties not much more widespread in Europe and in the world , in our Member States and at Union level ?
This is partly due to the fact that if we want to impose environmental taxes we expose ourselves to suspicion that we are doing so to finance new public services .
Unfortunately , the previous speaker was not very precise either about this .
She said that we could do new things which the State could provide for .
We , the Group of the European People 's Party , reject this concept .
We want environmental taxes in order to reduce taxes and duties in other areas .
In Europe we need less taxes overall , not more .
We need a redistribution of taxes and charges , increased taxation on use of the environment and a reduction in the burden on the labour factor .
But I would ask my colleagues to beware of using pushing this instrument too far it is intended to create new income for the State .
That is why we tabled the corresponding amendments .
These instruments should be tax neutral , not a means of increasing the tax burden .
Otherwise , I consider the report to be very good .
It rightly says that it is better to introduce a charge of this kind , a tax of this kind at European level .
However , as long as this is not done , the Member States must , of course , be encouraged to use such instruments and must not become discouraged .
Unfortunately , we have had cases in the past , for example the introduction of an ecological car tax in Germany , when the Commission hesitated for a long time to promote environmentally friendly technology , and this must be different in future .
States which wish to use such instruments must be supported in this .
In conclusion , I would like to suggest an amendment to the Value Added Tax Directive , as I believe that some Member States would be very willing to introduce an increased value added tax on energy-related emissions , for example .
Certainly , the European Union 's existing VAT Directive allows the application of a lower rate of VAT on energy but not a higher one .
The Commission should consider whether it should not be exactly the opposite .
Energy consumption should be reduced and taxes on labour should also be reduced , and it is for this reason that this should be considered .
Madam President , my colleague , Mr Olsson , has produced a very good report , and there is not a lot to add to it .
I believe that here in the Chamber too there is broad agreement on this report .
However , I would like to correct what my colleague Mr Liese said just now .
He in fact claimed that Mrs Myller wished to increase the tax burden on the Member States .
I understood quite otherwise .
I understood that Mrs Myller said environmental and energy taxation would provide a way of lowering income tax , which is a very important issue .
This was a principle contained within Mr Monti 's energy tax proposal , for example .
Environmental taxes and charges are really one of the best instruments we have to protect the environment .
But it must be said at the same time that it is one of the most acrimonious examples of how difficult it is at Union level to make any sort of headway .
And the Amsterdam Summit did not made it any easier .
As I understand it , in Amsterdam Germany 's Chancellor Kohl right at the last minute rejected attempts to ease the decision-making process on the question of environmental taxation .
Let us now turn our attention to the fact that the Group of the European Liberal Democrat and Reform Party has produced an excellent draft amendment to Mr Ollson 's report .
They actually suggest that environmental taxation might be decided on the basis of Article 130 of the Treaty , which would certainly also facilitate the decision-making process .
I am pleased to say that Austria has indicated that she intends to develop the issue of energy taxation , which has remained in abeyance for so long .
We in Parliament can certainly hope that other Member States will unite in this effort .
The aims of Kyoto are going to remain unachieved unless the EU starts to draft a common energy taxation policy .
Many Member States stressed the importance of this when they themselves approved bases for a combined share of the tax burden at the last meeting of the Environment Council .
Madam President , this is a good report .
The free market economy includes elements which lead to a better environment .
It is necessary to be economical with input goods , not least for reasons of cost and competition .
Open debate also makes consumers environmentally aware .
They are choosing products with a low environmental impact and are even willing to pay a higher price for such products .
However , it may still be appropriate to use financial instruments to correct the market for an environmental impact which consumers find difficult to judge .
Environmental charges which properly reflect the environmental impact of an emission can be an effective method of correcting the market economy .
Nor can it be wrong to use the income to rectify the damage caused by the discharge .
Another advantage of financial instruments is that they create incentives for technical development and the development of methods which produce a lower environmental impact .
It pays for companies to invest in environmentally friendly technology .
In cases where environmental charges threaten competition between the Member States , tax concessions could be an acceptable alternative .
It is important for environmental charges to be set in a proper way and to be based on solid factual foundations , such as in the form of life-cycle analyses .
The report takes up environmental taxes on emissions of carbon dioxide .
Such taxes are necessary in order to achieve the Kyoto targets .
Countries which have already introduced this obviously have a great interest in seeing these taxes harmonized within the EU .
One financial instrument not mentioned in the report is transferable emission rights .
This means you can set a level of emissions which the environment can cope with and then you can have trading in emission rights . This is beneficial for the environment at lower cost .
Madam President , unfortunately Mr Liese , who advocated environmental taxes so passionately , is no longer here .
I would have liked to ask him why the Federal Republic is not setting an example and why it has been blocking it for 16 years .
I think that we should not just talk about environmental taxes this evening ; we should also ask ourselves what has become of them !
Even before the Rio Summit we had requested that there be a tax on energy , and we are still a long way off it .
We also wonder why we agreed on a zero rate for consumption taxes , which is basically only a zero figure .
After all , if we say zero rate , and the Member States can do with it what they wish , then it is more than a zero figure , it is a joke figure !
We should also ask ourselves why a two-thirds majority is adequate for the introduction of the euro and unanimity is required for environmental tax .
I would like to know whether environmental taxes are less important to the European Union than the euro !
In view of climate change worldwide and also of the worsening of the European Union 's climate , is it not be urgently necessary to follow words with deeds ?
An absolutely essential question is what has become of the combined CO2 energy tax .
Why do we not take up the proposal or the model of the then Prime Minister of the Netherlands , Mr Lubbers ?
He talked about introducing an exemplary model which would involve our agreeing to a climate reduction target , that is defining the target but leaving the method open for now .
Those Member States who never tire of claiming that they are in favour of an environmental tax , an energy tax , must commit themselves to it , in particular the so-called friends of the eco-tax , who committed themselves to it informally in the Environment Council .
Then we would say that as from a specific date those Member States who cannot achieve this using other instruments would be included .
I think that if we were to do this we would achieve something important in that we would finally stop playing hide-and-seek and passing the buck , that is hiding as a nation behind Brussels and thus causing a deadlock .
What we need is to revive the corpse of the CO2 energy tax .
We must finally begin to introduce an environmental tax , and the environment-CO2 -energy tax would be a start .
Madam President , it is essential for us to add an environmental and a social dimension to our fiscal instruments .
It makes no sense to have direct competition between products which are apparently equivalent but may have very different impacts on the environment .
The same argument applies for social impacts , as I said earlier .
It is completely unacceptable that tools manufactured in Chinese prisons , for example , can be sold for a tenth of the price of those manufactured by Europeans who are paying pension contributions , health insurance and unemployment insurance and so on .
This situation guarantees slavery in China and unemployment here .
We must resolve this situation and , though the solution to it may indeed be fiscal , the proposed concept of an environmental tax is not the correct approach .
This is looking at the problem from the wrong angle .
If we cobble something together which would end up increasing the already excessive tax burden on individuals and companies it would have a negative impact on the economy .
However , I said that the approach may be a fiscal one .
But wait - not in terms of additional taxes , but by looking at tax in a fresh way through a far-reaching fiscal reform which combines social and environmental dimensions within the very bases of fiscal calculations .
So I say no to extra taxes , but yes to a different form of taxation with a fixed budget which favours employment , local economic activities , the environment and health .
Madam President , the Commission communication on environmental taxes and duties in the single market currently before us is extremely interesting .
However , because environmental legislation is very complex , we need to examine the situation clear-headedly in order to see how we can simplify matters .
It is worth remembering that at the time the Treaty on European Union was drawn up , no-one had thought of this type of fiscal instrument .
The fact that the instrument now needs to be applied in accordance with Community law makes everything extremely complicated .
It might be useful to treat this communication as a common environmental policy tax incentive , and thus evaluate its components as Community resources .
More extensive use of tax incentives would undoubtedly enable us to increase the efficiency of environmental policy and also improve the cost / benefit balance to prevent renationalization that would certainly not help us achieve the required coordination between the various sectors involved .
I feel it is fundamentally important for the Commission to tackle the problem of the huge economic impact of environmental taxes and duties , and also their effect on job creation or suppression and international competitiveness .
One of the amendments presented by our group is concerned with this very subject .
Madam President , Sweden and the Swedish Green Party have a lot of experience of environmental charges . The aim of these is that what is bad for the environment should be expensive and what is good for the environment should be cheap , in order , of course , to guide the consumer in the right direction .
However , this must also be done by introducing minimum rules at EU level rather than by harmonizing rules on environmental charges .
A country must be free to introduce higher environmental charges to demonstrate that it is possible and to show the positive effects this step can have .
The Scandinavian countries are well placed in the study which has been made .
In this debate , the Scandinavian model of having many environmental charges can serve as a good example of the fact that it is possible for other countries to introduce similar environmental charges , and that it has positive effects not only on the environment , but also on employment and the economy .
It is interesting to hear certain Members here in Parliament speaking so favourably about environmental charges .
But if you look at their parties in their own counties , both in Germany and in Sweden , they act in precisely the opposite way and refuse to introduce anything going by the name of an environmental charge .
We want to see some positive action for environmental charges , not just empty words here in an empty chamber .
Madam President , an environmental policy involves pursuing aims .
For human beings the most important aim is to be healthy to an old age .
For this we must see that our environment is in order .
We can achieve this by two methods , either by punishment - and tax is also a punishment , as it were - or by incentives , that is by reducing the burden or achieving tax savings .
It is important within the European Union and worldwide that we achieve common legal bases for tax and uniform labels for fiscal concepts .
Our aim must be to reduce the burden on our citizens in order to have to take away as little as possible of their wages .
One extremely positive example I would like to cite is efficient transport pricing , where the Commission pointed the direction in which we should go .
We must all hope that this efficient transport pricing will be implemented as soon as possible .
Madam President , I would like to begin by saying how pleased I am to see environmental taxes and charges on the EU 's agenda .
I believe environmental taxes and charges to be a key way of combating pollution and overexploitation of natural resources .
Hence , I am rather disappointed that the Commission communication does not go further with regard to extending the capacity of Member States to make use of this excellent instrument for protecting the environment .
Instead , the Commission largely just cites current practice in the Court of Justice , where the prime consideration is and remains the free market , not the environment .
The Commission is somewhat lacking in vision in this area , despite many years of discussing with us the need for external aspects to be given consideration in fixing pricing levels .
Against this backdrop , I find the Olsson report very positive .
It draws attention to the fact that environmental problems often arise from market failures , when the market actually fails to take into account the cost of pollution and exploitation of the environment .
Set at the right level , environmental taxes and charges serve to enforce the extremely important polluter pays principle .
This principle is important because we can only reverse the trend if producers and consumers are aware of the consequences and costs of their choices in terms of production and consumption .
The report is sympathetic to the need to provide scope for political intervention in the market , if we are going to save our environment .
However , I think the Commission should await the findings of studies into the efficacy and effect of environmental taxes and charges before pursuing initiatives to introduce such charges .
I also think the report should focus more on the possibility of coordinating environmental taxes and charges in a broader international context , perhaps under the auspices of the UN .
Finally , here is my strongest reservation : if we are to pursue the initiative on EU environmental charges , it must be on condition that tax revenues will be ploughed back into the Member States .
One characteristic of a tax is the sovereign right to require taxes from one 's citizens .
This right has the indirect support of citizens through the democratic legitimacy of the State , a legitimacy not shared by the EU .
The EU is not , and must not become , a State .
Madam President , I would like to begin by thanking Mr Olsson for the work he has put into the report on the Commission communication on Environmental taxes and charges in the single market .
The Commission has repeatedly advocated increased use of fiscal instruments to promote an environmental policy that would have greater impact while also being more cost-effective .
Two years ago , we saw clearly that Member States wishing to apply environmental taxes and charges would need further clarification on the legal position .
Many were uncertain as to whether environmental taxes and charges were really compatible with the single market .
The employment aspect has also taken on greater significance , as emerged from the conclusions of the Cardiff Summit .
In debating the situation of the labour market , the need for tax reforms to reduce work-related taxes is often a key issue .
Environmental taxes and charges could become an important source of finance for such reforms .
The communication on environmental taxes and charges addresses the legal framework applicable to Member States , together with the possibilities and limitations on the use of environmental taxes and charges in the single market .
Thus , the communication could serve as a kind of guideline to Member States .
The reactions to the communication that have come back to us demonstrate that it is a useful instrument for political decisionmakers in Member States and applicant countries alike .
I note with pleasure that all Member States are , in fact , considering increasing the use of environmental taxes and charges .
Mr Olsson argues in favour of the increased use of economic mechanisms .
I would endorse the view that setting the correct pricing levels for goods and services involving environmental costs is an important key to sustainable development .
I share Mr Olsson 's conviction that society would benefit from a green tax reform both in terms of employment and in terms of the environment .
The conclusions of the report focus on the ongoing work of the Commission , with concrete proposals for measures and further details about the situation , tailored to the Member States .
With regard to specific proposals , DG XI has already begun studying the potential for introducing EU-wide levies on pesticides .
In reaching a decision on further measures , the Commission will give consideration to the proposals in the report . However , in the short term , I cannot promise that detailed studies could be carried out in all the sectors cited in point 25 .

As regards drawing up further guidelines , this is more difficult , because Member States have quite extensive powers in this area .
We are also aware that most Member States are somewhat hostile to the idea of their free agency in fiscal matters being restricted by more stipulations over and above those already enshrined in Community legislation and described in this communication .
I fully agree with what the report says regarding the desirability of a more effective EU decision-making process in this area .
However , we are all well aware that fiscal matters require unanimity in the Council .
And as long as the Treaty contains this prerequisite of unanimity , it will remain difficult to speed up the decision-making process .
With regard to the Council 's position on the communication , it is a matter of regret that the Council has not as yet put this forward for consideration , and it does not seem to be on the current presidency agenda either , although I did note that Mrs Hautala seemed to think otherwise .
However , I do not think we should underrate the value of the communication as a manual for Ministries of the Environment and Finance Ministries in Member States .
I would like to touch on point 2 of the motion for a resolution , because it is alleged here that we failed to take account of the ramifications of the proposal on energy charges .
However , the Commission did undertake a wide-ranging study of the consequences ; this is also attached to the proposal and it shows that the proposal would have a positive impact on the environment and on employment .
I do , of course , fully endorse point 27 , favouring the adoption of the proposal on energy taxes .
I would also like to take advantage of this opportunity to emphasize the importance I attach to the Commission 's proposal for a framework directive on water , which is already before the House .
Water charges for the purpose of ensuring that costs are fully covered are an essential element of this directive , and I hope I can count on your support in the debate on this subject that we can expect to have with the Council .
At the same time , I would like to thank Mr Olsson for his very valuable contribution .
His report does not only contain practical proposals for the ongoing work of the Commission , it also gives the Commission - and this is very important - a significant political signal to take concrete steps towards further integration of policy on the environment and on taxes and charges .
Thank you , Commissioner Bjerregaard .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12.00 noon .
( The sitting was closed at 10.35 p.m. )
Approval of the Minutes
The Minutes of Tuesday , 14 July 1998 have been distributed .
Are there any comments ?
Mr President , I will not delay matters because I am concerned with the Minutes , the unconstitutional compulsion to vote , the unconstitutional imposition of financial obligations and the disastrous fiscal consequences ; but you are a renowned lawyer and instead of having my say here I will this morning write you a letter and place it on your desk .
Thank you very much for your cooperation , Mr Janssen van Raay .
( The Minutes were approved )
Welcome
On behalf of the European Parliament , I want to welcome to today 's sitting the members of the Hungarian Parliament Delegation to the EU-Hungary Joint Parliamentary Committee , led by Dr Jòzsef Szájer , who have taken their seats in the official gallery .
Programme of the Austrian presidency
The next item is the statement by the Presidency-in-Office of the Council on the programme of activities of the Austrian presidency .
I am going to give the floor to Mr Schüssel , who will speak on behalf of the Council .
I want to extend a special welcome to him on the occasion of the opening speech of the first Austrian presidency . I am sure we all wish him the greatest success in the task of exercising , for the first time , the Presidency of the Council of the European Union .
Mr Schüssel has the floor .
Mr President , Mr President of the Commission , Members of the European Parliament , Austria is assuming the Presidency at an exciting and momentous time for Europe .
The Union is in the process of implementing two projects that will have a decisive impact on the face of our continent in the 21st century .
With the advent of the euro , Europe is taking a great stride towards economic and political unity , and , as the largest integrated economic area in the world , it is simultaneously becoming one of the key players in the world economy .
At the same time , the enlargement of the Union should mean that stability and prosperity will be exported to a greater Europe .
Not long ago , a wise person wrote in one of the major European newspapers that the completion of monetary union will reinforce Europeans ' identity , and enlargement will test their limits .
The founding fathers of the European Community dreamt of a greater Europe that would bridge the deep gap between east and west in our continent .
They dreamt of a Europe that would uphold democracy and human rights on the basis of common values , and which would guarantee lasting peace and freedom .
They dreamt of a Europe that would not need bureaux de change and border posts , and which would thus no longer prevent Europeans living and working together .
We now have a historic chance to turn yesterday 's dreams into tomorrow 's reality .
The European Union has not been unsuccessful in these endeavours .
Let us briefly recall what has happened since it was founded : the Community of Six in 1958 had a population of 160 million , now it has 370 million , and with the candidate countries it has 500 million people .
Today 's EU has a gross domestic product which in real terms is nearly six times as great as that of the European Community in 1958 .
The Union now accounts for one third of world trade .
But at the same time it is the world 's greatest donor : 60 % of development cooperation and 80 % of the aid flowing to the countries of the former Soviet Union come from the European Union .
It is perfectly justifiable to say that we now have a chance to make yesterday 's dreams come true .
The euro is Europe 's answer to globalization , enabling us successfully to face up to this challenge .
The single currency will improve the functioning of the internal market and help to safeguard jobs , but it will also give an impetus to market-oriented structural reforms , which are urgently needed in order to guarantee our own competitiveness .
The conditions for the introduction of the euro are better today than most of us expected , including even the most ardent optimists , to whose ranks I normally belong .
This House , the Europeans ' parliament , the European Parliament , by taking part in the appointment of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank and by holding hearings whose value has been acknowledged on all sides , has exercised a significant democratic control function .
In the coming months , under the Austrian presidency , attempts will be made to achieve stronger economic policy coordination and preparations will be made for the final setting of exchange rates .
There is no doubt that one of the most important tasks for the Austrian presidency is to help get the euro off to a good start on 1 January 1999 .
I would like to make another comparison , which I think is even more important than positive economic and monetary indicators .
Since 1945 there have been over 200 armed conflicts around the world , excluding lesser conflicts .
According to international statistics , there has never been a four-week period during which there has not been a major military engagement somewhere in the world , but the territory of the present European Union has been spared such conflicts .
At this point I would like to quote Baron Friedrich von Gentz , Prince Metternich 's Secretary , who was , as it were , the notetaker of the Congress of Vienna .
He believed that any political system that could give Europe a hope of avoiding just three or four wars in a century would deserve the very greatest respect .
Ladies and gentlemen , we have that system !
We have got a system like that , we do have such a system : it is called the European Union !
If we want to ensure lasting peace , stability and economic prosperity in Europe , then it is my deeply held conviction that in the long term there can be no better way than to integrate our neighbouring countries into the European Union .
Of course there is a need for very thorough preparations because of the large number of candidate countries - never before have we talked with a total of 11 countries and negotiated at so many different levels - and because of the wide variation in economic development .
In the resolution it adopted last December , the European Parliament rightly recognized that the next round of enlargement would represent a completely new stage in the European integration process , requiring an in-depth examination of all the institutional , political , economic and social consequences for the Union and for the applicant countries .
You do not need me to tell you that Austria shares almost half its borders with four candidate countries .
I would particularly like to thank the European Parliament for the understanding and sensitivity it showed in its resolution of 18 July on Agenda 2000 , which took account of the particular impact on regions with borders adjoining applicant countries , and which addressed the need to give them support , in particular under the Interreg programme .
However , I should like to add that precisely because of our special position - which was formerly on the periphery and is now at the core - we in Austria have an almost unique interest in the success of enlargement .
We have to be honest with our citizens .
Enlargement has a cost .
But these enlargement costs , set down in the pre-accession strategy and in the pre-accession aid , which were accurately and with every justification addressed in the Commission 's proposal , are probably the best investment in our own future .
Allow me to make a comparison : in the period after the Second World War , the Americans helped us .
At that time they transferred just under 2.5 % of their gross domestic product to Europe , to the countries of their former enemies , for four years .
The interesting thing is that the Commission is now proposing that we should put around 2.7 % of our gross domestic product at the disposal of these countries , and I think this is absolutely right , and I hope that there will be no objection whatsoever to this aspect . I must say that so far I have not heard any real argument against it , even during my tour des capitales .
It is a twofold Marshall Plan , an investment in our own future and in the future of the candidate countries for the 21st century .
I welcome this , and the Austrian presidency , on the basis of these proposals , will try to ensure that this really is uncontroversial .
The decisions taken at the Luxembourg European Council have laid the ground for the enlargement process , an inclusive process with 11 candidates .
The British presidency was very much marked by the formal opening of this process .
We Austrians now believe that it is up to us to maintain the political momentum , and my Minister of State , Mrs Benita Ferrero-Waldner , and I - you could say that it was our innovation - also included the applicant countries in our tour des capitales . We included all 11 of them , because we wanted to send an important signal to these countries from the outset , the message that they now belong to the European family and that we will treat them and keep them informed on equal terms and as partners .
They are , of course , affected by all the decisions that we have to make , be it on Agenda 2000 , institutional reform or the enlargement strategy , or on other important foreign policy issues .
We want to initiate substantial negotiations on individual chapters during our presidency .
The Commission is making good progress with ' acquis screening ' and we hope that by the end of the year about half of the chapters will have been checked , so that we can really get started with substantial negotiations at a meeting of ministers in November .
I will say quite openly here that it is very important to support the reform process in the applicant countries as well .
We should not have any illusions about this .
Of course , all the candidate countries - and we visited them together - have Eurosceptic political parties , populists and critics who are opposed to enlargement .
It is our job to help and be a source of strength to those people who advocate moving closer to the European Union in a meaningful way and who are arguing for a bold but sometimes also painful process of preparation for accession .
( Applause ) Enlargement will not just demand great efforts on the part of our future partners ; the Union itself is not yet in a fit shape for these accessions .
I am being quite candid with you about this .
The reforms grouped together under the ' Agenda 2000 ' banner - agricultural reform , structural reform and the Union 's financial framework - are of course particularly important .
Despite the criticisms quite rightly levelled at some individual points by many Member States , they are necessary .
But I believe that the Commission 's proposals nevertheless provide a good basis for the political discussions due to start this autumn .
We are certainly aware of the challenges presented by these proposals and by the pressure of time involved .
In Cardiff we essentially decided to bring forward the discussion by nearly nine months .
If we genuinely want to have a package ready by March under the German presidency - and that is also important because we should , if it all possible , have discussed it and reached decisions before the European Parliament elections - , it will really require an incredible effort to get away from nonspecific rhetoric and prepared speeches about principles , and to get really stuck into the grinding work of tough and difficult decisions .
I know that this is not a simple matter , because the programme for 2000-2006 will after all cost a total of 10 000 billion Austrian schillings , and it covers two full parliamentary legislatures .
If you consider how difficult it can often be in nation states to secure an overall programme just for one legislature , then you will see that this is no easy task .
However , we know that if we want to stick to the timetable , we will have to make considerable progress by the Vienna European Council .
The task of finally completing the package and securing agreement on it will fall to the German presidency .
However , we agreed upon a very ambitious and precise timetable at the General Affairs Council on Monday .
This Council is responsible for horizontal coordination and it has to be that way , since all the specialized Councils naturally and quite justifiably bring their special concerns to the negotiating table .
We must be prepared to negotiate at every meeting and to find time for this .
The inclusion of the European Parliament in the legislative decision-making process was one of the hallmarks of the British presidency .
I think it is excellent that over the coming months Parliament will be working intensively on all aspects of Agenda 2000 so as to help ensure completion on time .
I would like to thank you for your willingness to do this and I wish to stress that we in the Council need to be aware that we cannot manage without the support of both our national members of parliament and the directly elected Members of the European Parliament .
Ladies and gentlemen , the Amsterdam Treaty will help to make Europe fit to face the future .
Despite its well-known shortcomings , this new legal framework for the Union will nevertheless result in genuine improvements .
Many people say that this Parliament is one of the winners under the Amsterdam Treaty .
It is true that its role in the codecision procedure was reinforced .
I would just like to remind you that during the Intergovernmental Conference , Austria was , from the outset , always in favour of maximizing the role of the European Parliament and the involvement of representatives of the European Parliament in the negotiations . To sound a critical note , I must add that President Hänsch , who was of course present throughout , was not always sufficiently firm on that .
I think it is a pity that Amsterdam did not take the final steps needed to round off the institutional reform process .
In Cardiff we decided that as soon as the Treaty was ratified , which I hope will be soon , negotiations would begin on the outstanding institutional issues .
We also have to take some important decisions concerning the common foreign and security policy in Vienna ; I will return to that later .
Furthermore , we have to prepare for the integration of the Schengen conventions and the Schengen Secretariat into the European Union .
The preparatory work on the implementation of the new codecision procedure , on the revision of the comitology procedure and on proper involvement of Parliament is particularly important .
Work has already begun in this House on a common voting procedure for the European Parliament and on a uniform statute for Members .
I am pleased that some of these subjects are on the agenda of the first part-session during the Austrian presidency .
Seldom in the history of European integration has the European Union faced so many challenges , and for most of them we need our citizens ' support .
We therefore welcome the British initiative to institute an in-depth discussion on the future of the Union , and we intend actively to continue this dialogue in the second half of the year .
All too often , we just pay lip service to the concepts of the efficiency of the Union and of its institutions , bringing the Union closer to people , subsidiarity and democratic legitimacy ; they are just clichés churned out in soap-box speeches .
( Applause ) However , and I shall be quite frank , we will never fire people 's enthusiasm for the European cause if we are half-hearted .
I therefore welcome the fact that a special meeting of the Heads of State or Government on this subject is to be organized under the Austrian presidency .
I should say immediately that is a subject that probably cannot be solved in one debate .
It will remain on the agenda , and I regard that as a good thing .
We should all search our own hearts , and in my capacity as President of the General Affairs Council I intend to take this subject seriously and ask our colleagues to consider how we ourselves can help to increase efficiency and achieve greater European coordination .
Everyone needs to consider how all the structures of the Commission and the Council can be improved .
Do we have too many Councils now ?
Is the European cause not sufficiently coordinated at European level ?
How can we use the European Council to achieve clearer and more precise decision-making ?
What role can the European Parliament play in this very important interinstitutional dialogue ?
Subsidiarity is an interesting subject - and we provided for and prepared a very good protocol on it in the Amsterdam Treaty - as it can clear the decks for true European work .
There are a lot of subjects that clutter our agendas and prevent us from devoting enough time to the really important issues .
But I will also be quite honest with you : subsidiarity cannot be used to undermine the European cause itself .
The institutions must not be weakened .
( Applause ) I also consider that subsidiarity and solidarity should not be set up as opposites . In an ideal world , they should complement each other .
They are both vital elements of tomorrow 's civil society .
Without Europe , the nation states can no longer respond to global challenge . I personally am totally convinced of this , and anyone who knows me will tell you that I always say this , no matter where and what I am speaking about , not just in front of the European Parliament ; I am always consistent about this .
Without Europe , there is no way of solving the major issues of the future that really interest our citizens : environmental protection , employment policy , respect for human rights and global security .
In those areas we need more Europe and not more nation state or even lower levels , with these clichés about subsidiarity .
( Applause ) The best way of firing European citizens with enthusiasm for Europe is to listen to what is important for them , and to put those priorities at the top of our agenda .
It is very interesting that these priorities are pretty much the same in every country in Europe , with employment at the top of the list , followed by concern about a clean environment and a safe home .
And safety , and once again I will be very frank , needs to be understood in the widest possible sense , including security : safety in the face of organized crime of course , secure protection and even security in the military sense .
So this must include everything from security in the social context of solidarity to nuclear safety in the context of dangerous power stations .
( Applause ) With the average unemployment rate still over 10 % , creating employment is therefore still the Austrian presidency 's number one priority in Europe .
It is a priority for us now , it was a priority during the Intergovernmental Conference , and its concrete implementation will be a priority .
Until now , it has just been part of the lyric poetry , as I like to call it , in many European speeches .
What is new is that we now have tools available to us .
For the first time 15 precise employment programmes have been published , which the Commission has examined with a very critical eye , which I welcome . We can and should learn from each other here in terms of what another Member State has done better than ourselves , where one is ahead of another , and we can also learn from adverse experience .
Many good ideas do not quite work out as planned .
Sir Karl Popper once said that the essence of developed humanity was this : ' Our advantage is that we can let our ideas die in our stead ' .
It is important to learn and gain just as much from the failure of our ideas as from success stories .
What is new about the employment guidelines to be agreed in Vienna is that for the first time they will be based on 15 specific and binding national action plans .
Secondly , for the first time this provides a basis for decisions concerning the successful implementation of the single currency .
Eleven countries are taking part in this process , and a further three could participate - as they meet the criteria - if they have the political will and take the necessary political decisions .
I will go even further .
Europe could also do more for employment in very specific areas : on the world stage , in negotiations with the World Trade Organization - which is extremely important - and as regards research and development .
Although as President I should not really be saying this , I shall not conceal my sympathy for many of the European Parliament 's ideas about the Fifth Framework Programme , which is of course the springboard for the job concepts and opportunities of tomorrow .
The whole issue of trans-European networks , not to mention proper implementation of environmental technology , equality of opportunity for men and women , improved conditions for small and medium-sized enterprises , education and training for workers , are all key points in our programme .
Regarding the environment , lasting protection of our environment and living conditions are equally important for citizens everywhere .
We therefore quite deliberately intend to implement an active environmental policy , with high environmental standards at home .
Above all , we also intend to play a leading role in international negotiations on global environmental problems .
I very much welcome the White Paper on renewable energy .
It is very interesting indeed !
It points to direct and indirect job opportunities for about 800 000 people , such as the Auto-Oil programme , the reduction of the petrol and diesel programme ; this is all extremely interesting .
One question that needs to be addressed in the context of enlargement is , of course , nuclear safety standards .
This is highly important and we Austrians are of course particularly affected because of our geographical location .
I will say this quite openly , because I know that some Members would have liked this point to have been officially addressed already ; we do not intend to misinterpret this as a bilateral issue .
It should not prevent anyone from joining the European Union .
We do , however , want newer nuclear power stations that can be rehabilitated to meet the highest Western standards , and we want old power stations that can no longer be rehabilitated - like Bohunice , a few kilometres from Vienna - to be closed as quickly as possible , whatever it takes , in the interests of the people there and in the interests of our own citizens .
( Applause ) A study has been published today on safety standards at Mochovce .
I do not have a copy myself yet , but I undertake to ensure , either this afternoon or tomorrow , that this safety study is forwarded straight away to the groups in this Parliament , because it will probably be of great interest to the European Parliament .
The Union has to convince its citizens that open borders will not lead to a loss of security .
Internal security will therefore be a real priority for our presidency , in other words , combating organized crime and traffic in human beings .
We are , by the way , preparing an international convention on land and sea at UN level , with all 15 Member States .
We need to strengthen the Union 's ability to act on drug trafficking .
I know , from our contacts and visits to central and eastern Europe , that the subject of internal security is also a central issue for the candidate countries .
I would like to make a plea to the Commission in this context : the 11 candidate countries have borders totalling 6 600 km with third countries .
Just imagine that !
These are the external borders of the 11 candidate countries , not borders with the Union , not with our neighbouring countries , where we know exactly what problems exist .
It is so important for us to help these countries as regards the environment , trans-European networks and building up institutions , that we should consider - and these countries are calling for this as a matter or urgency - if we could not do more to help them secure their borders , so that we export security and do not end up importing instability .
( Applause ) The launching of Europol in the second half of 1998 should , of course , provide a major impetus in this area .
We are also proposing a fair distribution of the refugee burden and the elaboration of a common Union strategy on migration policy .
I would like to touch on another subject that is particularly important to me , namely child protection .
Nothing says more about the standards of a society than how it protects its weakest members .
We have planned some interesting activities .
We want to tackle this issue at UN level .
The subject of child labour is of course extremely significant within the International Labour Organization , and further work on the UN Convention on Children 's Rights is equally important .
We must urgently combat the sexual abuse of children - a particularly distressing and painful subject - and the horrifying effects of child pornography on the Internet .
40 % of landmine victims are children , and I believe that the Union can play a major part in this area .
I have followed the action plan proposed by the Commission and approved by the European Parliament with great satisfaction .
Respect for human rights , in theory and in practice , is particularly important this year , in which we are celebrating the 50th anniversary of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights .
We intend to mark this by arranging an appropriate official event .
There is one subject I would like to mention that is currently highly sensitive and urgent : the financing of NGOs and unblocking finance and budget lines .
At my insistence , we devoted a lot of time to this over lunch at Monday 's Council meeting .
560 million ecus or euros are still affected .
200 million of this relates to human rights and this will have devastating consequences if we do not act quickly .
( Heckling from Mr Samland : Tell the finance ministers that ! )
That is why I particularly wanted to point out that we decided in Council - and I would also like to thank the Commission for its proposals , which were agreed yesterday - to bring great pressure to bear tomorrow in COREPER so as to resolve this matter , if at all possible .
The Budget Council is on Friday .
We have asked every individual foreign minister to press his cabinet so as to achieve a positive resolution of this problem .
I am also asking for interinstitutional problems to be put slightly to one side here , particularly with a view to unblocking funding for 1998 , as hundreds of NGOs are of course highly anxious about the outcome .
I know that the European Parliament takes a very positive view of this .
Foreign policy is naturally a very significant challenge for every Council President .
Compared with other major nations , the European Union is certainly the most important world power after America , in terms of potential .
The EU is far more than a regional power .
It is the driving force of the reshaping of our continent in the post-Soviet era .
It is strategically responsible for its own 500 million members , for 250 million people in the Mediterranean area and for 250 million who live in the territory of the former Soviet Union .
Werner Weidenfeld says that Europe 's weakness lies in the current gap between its potential and its political infrastructure , and this combination of potential and weakness make Europe look like a world power in waiting .
To my mind , that is a very fine and significant phrase , and we should forearm ourselves as planned .
During the Austrian presidency I intend to take important measures to ensure that the Planning Cell on foreign policy is really translated into reality .
In Vienna , agreement should be reached on the Secretary-General , who should be a visible personification of foreign policy .
We intend to pursue the foundations laid in the Amsterdam Treaty for closer contact between the EU and the Western European Union ; the possibility of an eventual merger has even been touched upon . And internally we need to give some thought , first and foremost , to how we can alleviate conflicts in neighbouring countries .
Just look at the reasons for the various conflicts - Kosovo , which I will return to later if you wish - Bosnia , Transnistria , you find the same pattern everywhere , in other words , unresolved ethnic conflicts , minority disputes , the issue of what degree of autonomy can and will be granted , and the general disintegration of state systems .
The Union must put forward some ideas here .
Kosovo is a subject in its own right , so I shall say nothing here .
As for the Middle East peace process , we are deeply concerned about the continuing standstill in the process for a considerable time now .
We will support every initiative to strengthen trust and cooperation , and we also intend to increase the visibility of the Union in this area .
We also believe that the economic and social situation in the Palestinian territories demands the greatest attention and concern .
The resumption of the Syrian and Lebanese problem is an important factor .
With regard to Turkey , the Austrian presidency has a keen interest in this country 's stability and pro-European stance .
We will work towards the normalization and continued development of relations , but this will have to cover all areas , including , of course , human rights , the Cyprus question and the Aegean .
It is important for us to implement the European strategy for Cyprus drawn up by the Commission .
On Cyprus , we intend to offer the United Nations every assistance in resuming the peace process , which must in any case remain open to the Turkish-Cypriot linguistic community .
We must continue to seek their participation , because I believe that joint negotiations would give both ethnic groups an enormous impetus for the peace process .
I know very well that six months is a short time .
You cannot change the world that quickly , and even Europe is slow to move .
We will therefore make a deliberate effort to involve the previous presidency , with which we have maintained very close contact , including contact at a personal level .
I wish to take this opportunity to thank the British presidency , and also the forthcoming Germany presidency , with which we also wish to encourage intensive and harmonious cooperation , so that we can make as much progress as possible in all these important issues .
We have a good many things to complete that were started by the British .
Likewise , the Germans will take many things over from us , and the more efficient the Austrian presidency is , the easier it will be for them to do so .
This presidency is naturally something rather special for us , as it is our first .
For many of you from founding states it is quite routine .
My friend Jacques Poos calmly told me that he had lived through four presidencies and that he would be glad to offer me advice .
But for us it is , of course , the first time .
We have therefore prepared ourselves well and we need the support of our partners in the Council .
We need and are seeking cooperation with the European Parliament and with the European Commission .
We do not have any historic or dazzling events lined up , but that does not worry us at all .
A lot of people keep referring to the Congress of Vienna , but I shall not , because you know what they said about the Congress of Vienna in 1815 : it did not work , it danced .
The Congress danced , but it did not achieve anything .
It is our ambition to celebrate as little as possible but to work all the harder .
There is one important difference : the Congress of Vienna of 1814-1815 was in fact dominated by the big five , who essentially carved up Europe at the expense of the smaller countries .
Things are very different now .
The new idea of Europe is that there are 15 equal partners , each of which is equally important , even if some are larger and some are smaller , and they have to live with each other .
That is our task .
So we have a working presidency ahead of us , and we hope that you will support us in this work .
( Applause )
Thank you very much , Mr Schüssel .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office , Mr President of the Commission , I would like to begin by congratulating you very warmly , Mr President-in-Office , on the statement you have just made on behalf of Austria , and to support you .
If you believe that you can achieve and adhere to everything that you have promised us here , then you will certainly have my group 's support as well .
There are five points that I would like to single out , on areas where my group will be following the Austrian presidency with a particularly critical eye . Of course there are also many other points that other speakers will raise .
First , I will look at the issue of security .
You quite rightly said that we find ourselves in an exceptionally difficult situation .
We need an extended security system in Europe , a true common foreign and security policy .
I hope that you will be able to make what you have described here a reality , and that will be able to make a decision about the long overdue institutional reforms in Vienna , so that we can make forward estimates and create an efficient security policy .
I shall return to the subject of Kosovo later .
However , I firmly believe that many things discussed within Austria in recent months - you know what I have in mind - should now be put to one side . The message of the Austrian presidency should now be ' Yes , we must make progress in building a common European security system ' .
I fully support what you said about the Mediterranean area , given that Austria , as a non-colonial power and in view of its friendly relations with that area , is especially well placed to make some headway .
My second point is enlargement , on which I have only a few words to say .
Here too , I would like to express my clear support for your comments .
We need to adopt a realistic course .
However , we cannot tolerate any interruption in the enlargement process .
I also hope that you can ensure that negotiations with our neighbouring countries will start .
Admittedly , that will be the easiest part , but we need to make some progress and to give a signal that although enlargement is a difficult process , it is one that nevertheless needs to be initiated now in the interests of Austria and all the Member States of the EU .
Thirdly , as regards Agenda 2000 , no major decisions will , of course , be taken during the Austrian presidency .
But it was , after all , the Austrians who said that decisions need to be well prepared for .
The Austrian presidency will be judged by the quality of its preparatory work .
The reason for the rumours buzzing around Parliament over the last few days about a slight delay in the whole process is of course that there are a lot of people who would like to delay all kinds of things , perhaps even until after the election , because Agenda 2000 will have many painful consequences .
I would like to make my own and my group 's position on this crystal clear : we want quick decisions ! I am assuming that Klaus Hänsch will have a lot more to say about this .
Our citizens need quick decisions .
The key points need to be prepared so well under the Austrian presidency that the relevant decisions can be taken without delay next year .
My fourth point concerns the citizens ' Europe .
I also wish to give my clear support to your comments on this subject .
It is not a matter of weakening Europe .
I know that even some of your colleagues are keen - and I shall say it slowly in good Viennese - to get their own back on the Commission , because it interferes so much !
But the internal market has not been completed yet either , there is still a lot to be done there .
We need a common foreign and security policy , and that can only be a European foreign and security policy .
And of course it goes without saying that we also need to make further progress with employment and economic policy .
I am very much of the view that this House could delegate a great deal , because we go into too much detail on a lot of things .
I also firmly believe that the Council , right up to head of government level , should consider whether a little more transparency and openness would not be more people-friendly - and the Council is after all a quasi-parliamentary decision-making body .
My last point relates to employment , which is of course particularly important for us because of the appalling number of people out of work .
This will also be an important yardstick by which we social democrats will judge the Austrian presidency .
Can we expect to hear just platitudes and wishy-washy statements about the employment situation at the end of the year , or will you also address sensitive issues ?
Even if you upset some countries , including your own maybe , we need clear statements !
We need to forge ahead with employment policy .
It is not the only way , but we really need to make progress on employment policy now .
Perhaps it would be interesting to check what decisions remain to be taken out of those specified in the Delors White Paper .
Mr President , I would like to conclude by stressing once again that if only 80 % of what the President-in-Office of the Council has presented to us today can be achieved , then you can certainly count on congratulations from my group at the end of the year , Mr President-in-Office !
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Mr President-in-Office , we welcome your presidency .
The priorities of the new presidency are for some a routine question .
The dossiers left by their predecessors or those honourably passed on from one European Council to another are merely taken over .
I have to say that the response from the public to the Cardiff Summit was probably not more than one thousandth of that for the World Cup football .
However , we must take the issues which you will deal with seriously .
We are convinced that you will not look upon them as continuous and monotonous , but that you will want to make progress .
You have emphasized that our fellow citizens have shown a growing interest and a growing confidence in the stability of the euro .
We would confirm that and we say that this confidence should be strengthened , as there is a clear link between monetary union , the relaunch of economic growth and the creation of new jobs .
Three urgent priority issues await you .
Your first task consists of implementing the Amsterdam Treaty .
We expect you to implement the installation of the unit for policy planning and early warning , as you said , and to appoint Mr ' CFSP ' .
Your second urgent priority concerns Agenda 2000 .
The common agricultural policy was discussed in Cardiff , but the funding for the years 2000-2006 proved an obstacle .
You will not , of course , be able to find a solution as if by magic for what would seem to be a problem of squaring the circle .
Some Member States want to spend less , others want to retain their profits and everyone agrees that the candidate countries must receive financial support .
We expect considerable powers of imagination and diplomacy from you , in order to resolve this difficult issue and to prevent the election campaign from being poisoned by national selfishness .
In this connection I would like to ask three questions .
Should we consider the working hypothesis of the Commission to leave the present ceiling of own resources until the year 2000 alone , like a taboo ?
Is such a restriction of the resources of the Union in accordance with the dynamics of its internal and external development ?
Would it be possible to transfer new resources to the Union without increasing the total tax burden ?
The acquis communautaire has proved in any case that it is possible to spend a little less and to spend more carefully by acting in unison .
Your third urgent task is enlargement .
You have announced that you wish to negotiate with six countries on the chapters which have passed the screening stage .
This must be an encouraging signal for the countries which have made the greatest effort to incorporate the acquis communautaire .
But no ambiguous situations should be created or weak compromises concluded which mortgage the future .
The Commission , as well as the Council , must carefully ensure that the candidates not only have good intentions , but that they are also able to comply fully with all Community achievements .
Mr President , two further tasks await you which will influence the future in the long term , and the members of the PPE Group are convinced that you will make progress on these .
The first is a matter of great importance to your country , which is situated in the geographic centre of the continent , which sees much transitional traffic and exchanges and which has become very aware of the nuclear risks .
I am referring to global safety and domestic security , the battle against crime , immigration policy , the so-called third pillar which our fellow citizens are so sensitive about .
Free movement of traffic and internal security are two sides of the same coin .
Insufficient progress has been made in the crucial field of integration , due to bureaucratic suspicion on the part of national governments and surpassed misery concerning state sovereignty .
You , as President-in-Office , are in a position to be the moving force with your own initiatives , you are able to see that decisions are taken which immediately increase security and which strengthen the fight against crime .
We are set to celebrate the 50th anniversary of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights under your presidency .
Let us send out a signal that it is a fundamental human right to live in a peaceful society , where persons and goods are protected and where children are also defended .
Your second task which will affect matters in the long term is the restructuring of the European Union .
An informal summit is planned for October ; the President of the Commission will be invited . We welcome this .
Would it not be wise and proper to also invite the President of the European Parliament ?
Our group has some ideas on this and we will present our suggestions at the appropriate time .
The time for patching up and half measures has gone .
If we do not have a clear comprehensive vision of the main institutional balances , of the ambitions and the role of the Union in the world , with 25 Member States , then we are feeling our way ahead in a fog and we risk colliding with a wall .
No society can develop in a positive fashion without a vision .
There is not much time left to make a collective statement on the kind of Europe we want .
Your commitment and that of your government , along with your ambition strengthen our conviction that a smaller country can be a good President .
We are convinced of this and we wish you all the best .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office , every Council presidency is of course faced with the problem of being both able and required to promise a great deal .
I hope that you will be able to achieve as many as possible of the things that you have presented today .
You are dependent on other people 's help .
In most cases , you can count on the support of the Group of the European Liberal Democrat and Reform Party in this House .
I would like to mention two points in particular .
The first is enlargement .
I would especially like a debate on the issue of the timing of enlargement .
I believe that there should be only one criterion for the admission of these applicant countries : as soon as these countries have implemented their democratic and human rights reforms , and as soon as they have made their economy capable of competing in the internal market , then they should have the right to accession .
They should not be denied this right until the Western Member States , who have a great lead , decide that their own economy is fit to face competition from the economic systems of our eastern neighbours , which have been weakened by decades of planned economy , when they decide that they are willing to be exposed to this competition .
That would be an absolute disgrace for Europe !
I expect the Austrian presidency to make it perfectly clear that these countries have the right of accession as soon as the requirements are met , and not just when it suits us !
Secondly , institutional reform got short shrift both in your speech today and also in your written programme .
Yes , there is a reference to the , as I see it , rather strange summit in October , which will not perhaps be pointless if the Heads of State or Government hold an exchange of views on subsidiarity and bringing Europe closer to its citizens , or even a quite general discussion on the future of Europe . However , the initial pronouncements , the reasons for having the summit at all , bode ill .
The most powerful Heads of State or Government in the European Union probably intend to cut back the powers of the Commission and , in particular , the Commissioner responsible for competition , who takes his job very seriously .
I think it would be disastrous if that happened !
Small countries have only legal stability and the Treaty on their side .
The Commission is the guardian of the Treaties ' observance .
So everything must be done to prevent this pruning of the Commission 's authority in this central role ; I hope that you will live up to your remarks today , and that you will succeed in this .
In any case , I believe that the Intergovernmental Conference or rather the institutional summit in Austria in October will only have one purpose , and that is to continue the work in which the Heads of State or Government so recently failed , by which I mean institutional reform under the Amsterdam Treaty .
The most important task here is to get over the blockade preventing further steps towards integration by abolishing the unanimity rule .
This is an area where the Council and the European Union in general cannot start thinking soon enough , and they should take advantage of the extraordinary summit in October .
Bringing Europe closer to its citizens means more democracy in the European Union , more Parliament and more democratic structures .
This is what institutional reform should aim to achieve , and I hope that you , too , will accept responsibility in this area .
I hope and expect that you will commit all your goodwill and your good intentions to achieving this , and I am convinced that you will !
( Applause )
Madam President , Mr President-in-Office , ladies and gentlemen , it is first of all a pleasure to be able to welcome someone who is presiding over the Council for the first time and who has done so today in such an authoritative way with that very important speech .
However , the tasks that await the Austrian presidency are so ambitious , as the President himself said , that naturally there will be a tremendous amount of work to do .
There is first of all the question of a political Europe , Mr President-in-Office : the euro 's introduction is clearly a major step forward towards the integration of European countries , but it has made Europe look technocratic , with an operation that has started at the top and that has not involved citizens at the bottom .
This , Mr President-in-Office , is the first point that you will be able to tackle : a citizens ' Europe is created through the democratic control of the decisions taken , not through a technocratic Europe .
The second point is the common foreign and security policy .
Too often we have heard in this Parliament that Europe needs to be represented in the world with one strong , uniform voice that carries .
Well , what kind of image has Europe been projecting these past few months , these past years ?
A divided Europe , a Europe bordering on ridicule when it intervenes in the crisis areas of the world , a Europe that carries no weight , that is forced to ask its American friends to help it solve the problems in its own back yard .
So , Mr President-in-Office , enough with a Europe of 15 political dwarves ; we want a Europe that carries real political weight at European level .
As for the issue of enlargement , well , we cannot deal with that using accounting methods .
We are not accountants , we should not be pointing our finger at some economic index of the various countries that have asked to join us .
Enlargement means political enlargement , and we must look at the underlying reasons for this .
Europe is a dream of freedom and democracy for these countries that are asking to join what for them has been for so long precisely only a dream of freedom and democracy .
The last point and the most important concerns unemployment .
Mr President-in-Office , there is too much rhetoric here , but the figures on unemployment in Europe show that Europe is on the wrong road , with a welfare state that is too cumbersome , too rigid , too excessive and unjust ; one that takes resources away from investments .
The message we should give is one of flexibility , less taxation , less bureaucracy : we therefore want freer trade , a larger market and more competition .
Only when the consumer citizen is able to choose a service , the best service at the lowest price possible , will Europe become genuinely more social and interdependent .
Madam President , our group wishes the Austrian presidency success in its first term at the head of the European Union , but that success will depend on achieving results in the management of the affairs which have been declared priorities : employment , enlargement and the environment .
As regards employment , we hope that the Vienna European Council in December will verify the effectiveness of the national plans , and that they can be coordinated in order to fulfill the hopes raised in Luxembourg .
Since Austria has the second lowest unemployment rate in the EU , we hope its experience can be used to achieve results , especially to combat youth unemployment and to promote equality between men and women as regards job access .
In the field of enlargement , the presidency will have to work quickly to study the compatibility between the candidate countries ' legislations and that of the EU , so as to be able to initiate discussions during this term of office on some of the 26 chapters of the negotiations , in the knowledge that transition periods will have to be established to avoid causing shocks in such sensitive sectors as agriculture or the free movement of workers .
We value Austria 's role as a bridge between the EU and the countries of central and eastern Europe , but we also want to remind the presidency of the importance of negotiations with the legitimate government of Cyprus , which should include , if possible , a representation from the Turkish Cypriot community , without any interference or blackmail from the Turkish government .
Before enlargement , we think it is essential to achieve the institutional reform which failed so resoundingly at the Amsterdam European Council .
That means that decisive steps need to be taken in the informal summit planned for October , within the framework of a debate which should be attended by the President of the European Parliament .
We think the public should be aware of the proposal for institutional reform at the time of the 1999 elections , so it can be debated and legitimized .
There would be no sense in talking about public opinion and public participation if , at the same time , at the most important moment of commitment between the citizens and their representatives , we were unable to inform public opinion of the proposals of the Council and the European institutions as regards institutional reform .
Furthermore , we have to address the difficult subject of simultaneously funding enlargement and the internal solidarity of the Member States .
We could talk about the North-South solidarity of the countries of the EU .
An own resources ceiling of 1.27 % of GNP is totally inadequate to maintain the objective of economic and social cohesion , and that is what defines the current Community budget and its great limitations .
It is essential to exceed 1.3 % of GNP , and in order to do so consideration should be given to the setting up of a fifth resource which takes account of the relative wealth of the Member States .
With respect to the environment , we are pleased that the Austrian presidency 's position supports respect for the Community acquis in the enlargement negotiations , and takes account of the sensitive issues of nuclear plants .
It is also necessary for the environmental dimension to be incorporated into all the policies of the EU .
It must be pointed out to the Austrian presidency that there is concern over a possible acceptance of low environmental standards in the candidate countries .
Finally , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , we hope the Austrian presidency will ensure the presence of the EU for a fair solution to the Kosovo problem .
We also hope it plays an active role in ensuring that the self-determination referendum takes place in Western Sahara , under the auspices of the United Nations , not just because it is important to allow the Saharan people to express their will , after 20 years of war , but also because it guarantees European security from the southern shore of the Mediterranean .
I especially want to congratulate the presidency on its concept of security , which includes not only defence but also the environment and social cohesion .
That is what many of us believe in , and for that reason we are very happy to support the presidency and wish it success .
Madam President , Mr President-in-Office , ladies and gentlemen , Mr Schüssel has presented his menu .
What makes Austrian cuisine world famous ?
The way it wraps things up !
Apricots in dumpling , schnitzel in breadcrumbs , mince in stuffed peppers .
I am afraid that today Mr Schüssel has only served us with a delicate outer case .
But it is the filling that matters ; Europe will not be satisfied with just an empty case !
Europe is hungry for democracy .
More Europe , but less democracy , that is the recipe the chefs , the Heads of State or Government , have in mind for our special diet .
But we should not be slimming down , but feeding ourselves up , to make Europe strong , powerful , robust , courageous and healthy , to restore its joie de vivre .
There is a great appetite for social justice , for fair distribution and participation , for fundamental and human rights , for equality of opportunity , for ecological restructuring and for a policy of peace .
So you cannot just open an old can , we want something fresh !
Mr President-in-Office , do not let them fob you off with something ready-cooked .
Kohl , Chirac and Klima 's subsidiarity soup may satisfy a lot of people , but not everyone : this rehashed renationalization makes my stomach turn , and so does all this paternalistic talk about being closer to the citizen .
It is not whipped cream we want , it is citizens ' rights .
That is the sort of cooking we like !
Make your presidency a culinary high spot and serve up democracy , because people cannot get enough of that , it is the only thing that cures serious deficiency symptoms .
It is well known that strudel came to Austria via Hungary and Bohemia .
So who , if not Austria , should put enlargement at the top of the menu for the sake of old ties and proximity ?
Not as a special offer , mind you , but as the speciality of the house !
But , Mr Schüssel , you cannot stretch it out like strudel pastry until it is ready .
We cannot be indifferent about enlarging Europe , and say we do not give a fig .
So the key challenges in your menu should include enlargement and freedom of movement of workers ; key challenges like pushing ahead a genuine employment policy with initiatives for reducing and redistributing working hours , like a coordinated economic policy with initiatives for fiscal harmonization , like the implementation of a long-term environmental policy with initiatives for environmental impact assessments and for withdrawing from nuclear power , and like a home affairs and legal policy aimed at achieving legal certainty rather than extending authority structures under Europol .
The people of Europe will thank you , because they will finally remember why they are supposed to want Europe in the first place .
If democracy is on offer , people 's appetite grows .
It is well known that the way to the heart is through the stomach , Mr Schüssel , but not every dish is as tasty as it promises to be .
So please dish up something better !
Europe now needs more than a soufflé full of hot air that collapses as soon as you touch it .
Bon appetit !
Thank you for having whet our appetite in this way , Mrs Roth .
Madam President , Mr President-in-Office , Austria is taking on the presidency of the Council of Ministers of the Union for the first time and this raises a great deal of interest and also some very pleasing images .
Personally , I feel extremely confident as I have good memories , very good memories , of our collaboration with Austria when I was Secretary-General of the Council of Europe .
Your knowledge of central and eastern Europe , your concern for a balance between East and West , and the broad experience of the Austrian diplomatic services are all qualities which lead us to have high expectations .
Mr President-in-Office , let me pick up on a number of your priorities .
Firstly , enlargement of the Union may not be the highest priority of the next six months , but it is probably in this field that your geographic situation , your history and your political experience can help us to overcome many obstacles .
More than anyone else , you know why it is essential that central Europe joins us and more than anyone else you also feel anxious in the face of an enlargement which risks both disrupting employment in your country through an excessive influx of workers and competing strongly with your agriculture , to mention but two issues .
But Austria is also well placed to be a link , a bridge between central Europe and countries such as my own , which are not adjoining the CEECs and which , when all is said and done , know very little about them ; yet without them enlargement would be a failure .
This enlargement cannot be reduced to a privileged one-to-one encounter between neighbours even if , culturally and economically , Germany and Austria are in the front line .
Secondly , although for our citizens it is the major preoccupation , during your presidency you are going to have to continue efforts at encouraging employment .
For pity 's sake , Mr President , do something !
If only we could mobilize ourselves around employment as we have done around the euro .
I know full well that we cannot force companies to take people on , but the Union could create a favourable environment and mobilize the means it has at its disposal .
Some progress can be observed , but there remains so , so much to be done .
Lack of time prevents me from going into detail on the other priorities of your presidency , such as the necessary institutional reforms or the perfecting of Agenda 2000 ; on this subject I , too , am concerned with regard to the ceiling on expenditure as proposed by the Commission . However , I would like to conclude by mentioning the choice you have made in giving Vienna a special place in the 50th anniversary celebrations for the Universal Declaration of Human Rights .
This is an excellent choice .
When I think back to the role of Austria within the Council of Europe , I can bear witness to your country 's deep commitment to the defence of human rights and I wholeheartedly wish that this role may now be continued to the benefit of the European Union .
There is one last point which seems to me to augur well : the invitation to the Turkish President , Mr Demirel .
Whatever the difficulties in our relations with that great country , there are gestures which need to be made in order to iron out regrettable mistakes .
I recognize with pleasure the traditional role of Austria in this , just like during Chancellor Kreisky 's time , with the hand held out to all .
Madam President , on behalf of the Group of Independents for a Europe of Nations , I would like to congratulate Austria on assuming the presidency .
I hope the statements by Austria and the Foreign Minister on the principle of subsidiarity will turn out to be more than lip service .
Five years down the line after the Maastricht Treaty , we now have 50 % more regulations to keep track of in Brussels .
The Union has reached the Orwellian stage of language covering the opposite of content .
Subsidiarity now means that 20 Commissioners in Brussels have sole rights to propose whether a decision should be made by themselves or by the citizens and their elected legislators .
A proposed legal basis can only be changed if all 15 countries agree .
Can 15 foxes agree to protect a chicken ?
One single special interest on the part of one country can prevent power from being handed back to Member States , national and regional parliaments and elected representatives .
I will make a gloomy prognosis that when Austria hands over the reins to Germany , and when Germany in turn - after much talk about the principle of subsidiarity - hands over the reins yet again , the mountain of legislation will be stacked as high as the Alps .
What is said is one thing , but what actually happens is the complete opposite .
Another example is the recent adoption of the proposed rule governing Members of Parliament , giving us a uniform , higher salary .
The proposal would make us the representatives of Brussels in the Member States .
In the Group of Independents for a Europe of Nations , we believe it is better for us to represent the Member States in the EU .
Where in the Member States can you find people who would advocate paying ECU 1000 for a ECU 500 trip ?
Who has been out demonstrating for us to have higher salaries ?
In its present form , the proposed rule would distance us further from the electorate and it would not conform to the principle of subsidiarity .
Madam President , Mr President-in-Office , Austria , Sweden and Finland joined the European Union just over three years ago .
Austria is the first of these countries to hold the presidency .
This is a highly responsible job , a difficult job , which , if it is done well , can earn great respect .
Some of the themes in the presidency 's programme are bound to be dictated in advance .
Agenda 2000 represents an enormous project which needs to be negotiated .
President Santer hopes that this project will move forward apace under the Austrian presidency .
It is hoped that during the Austrian presidency we can establish not only options but also specific elements for constructive completion of this project , which will involve the difficult task of reconciling various different interests .
One specific example of this , because we all know that the devil lies in the detail , is structural reform of the Cohesion Fund .
Three of the four cohesion countries are participating in the third stage of Economic and Monetary Union .
This suggests that the basic requirement for this Fund no longer exists .
What is the presidency 's position on this issue , and how does it intend to negotiate an agreement ?
My second example is : how does the presidency intend to achieve a settlement of the so-called net contributor debate ?
It is obvious that there is a wide gulf between Germany 's demands for fair burden sharing and the Spanish proposal to tap new sources of income .
My third example is institutional reform .
The future of the Union and its scope for enlargement very much depend on this complex subject , and yet it scarcely features in the written presidency programme at all .
So I am all the more delighted that you have promised today to take on this subject , Mr Schüssel , in contrast to your previous statements .
My fourth example is this : many of you may not think it all that important that a country like Austria , which immediately borders onto the eastern European countries , is inevitably concerned about high safety standards in nuclear power stations near the border .
This is by no means a minority problem or a peripheral subject in Europe .
I could continue with this list of subjects almost ad infinitum , but my speaking time is limited .
When Austria assumed the presidency , there was a lot of talk in our country about how much scope the presidency offers to really influence things .
In their initiative at Cardiff , Jacques Chirac and Chancellor Kohl reminded us of the importance of bringing Europe closer to the citizen .
The Austrian President , Dr Klestil , also touched on this subject in this House a few months ago .
Transparency , bringing Europe closer to the people , the question of what powers Brussels should reasonably have : these are vital issues in building the ' House of Europe ' .
Apart from today 's solemn declaration of intent , there is also the question of what specific contribution the Austrian presidency will make to it .
Only when we get a concrete answer to this question will we know to what extent Europe 's citizens are prepared to carry on building the ' House of Europe ' .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen . Mr President-in-Office , you said that the Union itself has to become capable of enlargement .
We , the European Parliament , will be doing everything we can to ensure that Agenda 2000 is adopted by the end of this legislature .
However , let me ask the Council not to forget that there are deadlines to be observed , and that Parliament must have an opportunity to have its say at the end of the whole process .
The final whistle will blow in May !
You said that the German presidency would table the decision in March .
All well and good , but that is the last chance if Parliament is going to decide by May .
After that , time is up .
So , and I am saying this as a German , do not leave too much to the Germans !
My second comment is that thanks to Kohl and Chirac you now have a extraordinary summit .
It will talk about making the Union more efficient , more able to act , bringing it closer to the people , and demarcating its powers more clearly .
It really reads like a list of jobs not done in Amsterdam .
You should have been able to get all that done in Amsterdam !
( Applause ) But you did not get it done .
Well , it is good that we are talking about it now .
I am reminded of Schiller 's Wallenstein , ' The Piccolomini ' , Act One , Scene One : ' You have arrived late , but you have arrived ! ' Well , that is something at any rate .
If the discussion at the extraordinary summit simply leads to some improvement in the Council 's work , that alone would be an excellent outcome of the summit .
Thirdly , I will mention subsidiarity .
I would like to stress that your own comment means that the European cause has to be taken seriously .
Subsidiarity does not mean less Europe ; it means more Europe , with Europe really achieving something .
Let me give you two examples . Our citizens expect that with the introduction of the euro , Europe will now agree on a common fiscal , budgetary and economic policy .
We need a sort of economic government .
But it is not only Bonn that is balking at that , but others too .
It is not enough and it is wrong to constantly complain about Europe 's impotence in the Balkans and at the same time to refuse to give Europe more power .
That applies to the foreign ministers as well .
Nevertheless , I wish that governments would stop talking about what Europe cannot do - especially at the extraordinary summit - and instead talk about what Europe should do !
Finally , Mr President-in-Office , it is not so much a question of uniting Europe to avoid history repeating itself , but rather a question of making it clear to our citizens and to ourselves that we must unite Europe so that Europe can assert itself in the world of the future !
( Applause )
Madam President , Mr President of the Commission , Mr President-in-Office , people 's expectations of any new presidency are great , especially when a young member of the EU is taking on the job for the first time .
As you have heard here today , the confidence we have in Austria is equally great .
As the presidency changes every six months , which many justifiably consider to be an inherent weakness in the EU , we need to keep our feet on the ground and neither exaggerate nor play down these expectations .
The scope for action is dictated in advance .
At the Cardiff Summit the Union imposed a deadline on itself .
The intention is to deliver the reforms of the common agricultural policy and of the Structural Funds , and to lay the foundations of the future financial framework , by March next year , in other words just before the European Parliament elections .
It will be up to the Austrian presidency to present an overall package with options for a definitive solution .
This is a mammoth political task and you have had a taste here in Parliament of the immense differences of interest within the European Union .
You will have to reconcile the differences between net contributors and net recipients , between those afraid of being milked and those afraid of being short-changed .
The need to achieve a consensus is therefore the order of the day , together with a conviction on the part of Europe that solidarity in the European Union must clearly offer something in the interest of fair burden sharing .
For this reason alone , Parliament must be involved in making a decision on Agenda 2000 in good time , as Mr Hänsch has just said .
I am delighted that you want to work on the continued development of the interinstitutional dialogue .
I hear the good tidings and I am not lacking in personal faith .
This process started under the British presidency , and it now needs to be consolidated under the Austrian presidency .
There is too much at stake to keep Parliament on the sidelines on the preparation of Agenda 2000 , which is supposed , after all , to prepare the European Union for the new millennium and the period beyond .
The fact is that our citizens are directly represented through this body .
It is here that the much-trumpeted subsidiarity can become a reality , and Europe 's citizens are expecting it to be given a fresh impetus .
You in particular were influential in calling for the employment title to be included in the Amsterdam Treaty , as a commitment to concern about jobs .
The EU should not run out of steam now that the euro is to be introduced .
The economic boost expected from the euro must be reflected in fresh growth and new jobs , especially for young people .
But that alone is not enough .
Research with applications in industry must be encouraged .
I urge you as President-in-Office of the Council to work for a high-powered version of the Fifth Framework Programme for Research .
That is no place to make savings , it would be a false economy .
The European Union , and on this I am totally in agreement with you , needs to be strengthened at all levels , as otherwise it will not be in a position to make the project of the century , the enlargement of the European Union , a reality .
If we look around , at the Kosovo crisis , at the tension in Cyprus , and at the impasse in the Middle East , then we can only draw one conclusion , and that is how important it is to strengthen Europe from the centre , and that means accelerating from the centre and dynamizing the enlargement process .
You have declared your intention to do this .
My colleagues and I in the European Parliament will support you .
This , too , will strengthen the credibility of the European Union , and you will have to play an important part in achieving this .
Mr President , I welcome the first Austrian presidency .
I sense clearly that Austria wishes to serve between the British and the German presidency .
I welcome that .
Unfortunately , the Austrian presidency will not dance in 1998 but maybe we will be able to play football , because you often find solidarity and unity in this type of innocent but profound human manifestation .
I agree with the sentiments of promoting efficiency in the Union and implementing subsidiarity , but a number of concrete measures relating to efficiency are missing .
It is and remains necessary for institutional reorganization to take place before enlargement . I have not heard much about this .
The President-in-Office has held forth extensively on security ; this is unfortunately influenced by unemployment , and , of course , by growing crime .
Would it not be marvellous if the Austrian presidency , precisely Austria , would finally bring the mafia , which advances from eastern Europe , to a halt ?
We all know that the first assaults took place a few weeks ago in Budapest .
I would welcome clear and concrete measures by the Austrian presidency .
Would a Member State , that is , the Netherlands , please finally call for the battle against crime to be taken seriously and for the arrest of the former dictator of Surinam , an internationally-wanted drugs dealer ?
As far as stability is concerned , enlargement does play an important role , but would the Austrian President not only keep the states in central Europe in mind but also support the Mediterranean policy .
I am concerned , as the negotiations with Egypt have gone on for three years now .
The country which was the first to throw itself into the peace process in the Middle East now risks not participating in the Mediterranean agreements before the end of the mandate of this Parliament .
Austria , I call on you to do something !
Austria , I see the elderly were not mentioned in your speech .
120 million citizens in Europe are over fifty years old !
The introduction of the euro should not be at their cost .
The have promoted the economic success of Europe .
Please remember the elderly !
I am pleased that you wish to protect children , but you should also protect the elderly .
In conclusion , Mr President-in-Office , with the 50th anniversary of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights , I would ask you for an initiative : there are 4000 EU citizens in prisons outside the EU .
They are deprived of all legal support and , unfortunately , sometimes of diplomatic support also .
Please take the initiative and start a fund to offer appropriate legal support to these citizens ; then they , too , will regain confidence in Europe .
Madam President , I wish to point out that the speech of the President-in-Office of the Council was both measured and forward-looking .
We are expecting a great deal from the Austrian presidency .
I noted that he mentioned the subject of the rapprochement of Turkey with Europe together with human rights and the Cyprus issue .
He has perhaps forgotten the Kurdish problem , although he mentioned the importance of promoting the Cyprus issue .
I wish to put one issue to the President-in-Office and to ask him one question .
We are entering a critical period in relation to Turkey , Cyprus and the rest .
Turkey is calling into question the right of Cyprus - an independent country - to have its own defence .
Now there are open threats of war and military measures .
Two days ago , Mr Clerides , the President of the Republic of Cyprus , met President Yeltsin and publicly announced his intention that Cyprus will not go ahead with its deployment of S-300s , since Turkey has taken steps towards demilitarization , and that progress would be made towards a solution of the Cyprus issue .
What will the Austrian presidency contribute and how will it strengthen this initiative ?
I would like an answer from the President-in-Office .
Madam President , Mr President-in-Office , as you have seen , the start of each Council presidency is a time for fine phrases and good wishes .
By the end , the praise is sparing : by the fruits of your labours shall ye be known .
Parliament and the European public will pass judgement come December .
I am convinced that at the end of the year Parliament 's palate will be sufficiently discerning to decide whether the delicate outer case that you have served up today contains a substantial filling or just hot air .
We already know what people in Europe expect and we must say it today - jobs , democracy and a fair distribution of wealth .
Those are the deficiencies that people are suffering from .
Those are the criteria by which your presidency will be judged .
Many people waiting at the gates of Europe expect to be admitted into an area of peace and stability in the Union .
The programme that you have presented today , Mr President-in-Office , gives rise to a number of concerns .
What you do not sow , you cannot reap !
If you do not recognize the existence of problems , you cannot solve them .
You have not addressed the urgent questions relating to democratic reform in your programme today .
You have not said a word about the programme for the extraordinary summit , which Parliament is pinning certain hopes on , as it is after all the continuation of a protracted debate .
As Mr Hänsch has already said , the Council has put the European Union in this position because of its failure in Amsterdam , and you have not been able to allay our fears today .
I welcome your critical remarks and reservations about subsidiarity .
However , I regret that you have said nothing about the need to overcome the democratic deficit , which lies chiefly in the Council .
Are you prepared to make sure that openness prevails in the Council 's law-making ?
Are you prepared to subject the area of justice and internal cooperation to constitutional checks , that is judicial and parliamentary checks ?
Are you prepared to use this extraordinary summit finally to tackle the institutional reform that the Council has dragged out for so long ?
These questions remain unresolved , as do questions about the future of codecision by Parliament , its budgetary sovereignty , common electoral law , a catalogue of fundamental rights , and so on .
This is no time for transitional presidencies , it is a time for vision !
It is not true that the political dynamism of Europe simply needs to be upheld .
It needs to be recovered .
This presidency needs to be an icebreaker !
As far as social affairs go , I did not hear a single word about fiscal harmonization , which is one of your own Finance Minister 's ambitions .
Not a word about reducing working hours or about a common economic policy !
I hope that these gaps can still be filled , so that we are talking about a real filling .
Unfortunately , up to now it all looks suspiciously like hot air !
Madam President , Prime Minister Blair concluded at the end of the British presidency that his presidency had been successful , because relations between the European Union and Great Britain had improved , amongst other things .
The start of the Austrian presidency is an opportune moment to formulate our expectations clearly .
The presidency of the European Union is not to be used to build better relations with the other Member States this time .
The Austrian presidency has made it known that they will devote a lot of time to the issue of work over the next six months . This is a clear policy point , and we will return to this for evaluation .
However , we hope that the presidency will not devote itself to this exclusively .
The next mini-summit in Vienna will deal with institutional reforms .
It is becoming increasingly clear that European citizens do not consider themselves to be represented by the European Parliament amongst others .
The presidency must therefore make improvements in the institutional area also .
In addition , there is another important matter which Austria should address , the European Union 's plans regarding enlargement towards the East .
This can no longer be postponed ; effective action is required here .
The presidency has also announced its priorities with regard to the environment .
The focus is naturally on the CO2 policy , as the next Conference of the Parties in Buenos Aires is imminent .
It would be splendid if the European Union would be in a position there to boast of a fine effective policy in this area .
I refer to the policy for reducing fuel consumption in cars and trucks .
Concluding international agreements with industry as happens presently is not sufficient .
I do not expect these to be effective .
The effects will be minimal in the long term .
What is needed is a range of strict legal requirements for fuel consumption for the different sizes of car engines ; in other words , a proposal for a directive .
Technically , a great deal is possible .
Then you would really steal the show in Buenos Aires .
This is the first time that Austria wields the presidential gavel .
We hope that this first turn will be a successful one and we wish Austria all the best .
Madam President , one of the main tasks the Austrian presidency faces is the formulation of the employment guidelines .
In this respect , it is nonsense to speak of a transitionary presidency .
It is a very important task .
A great many people are of the opinion that we ought to leave it at the decisions made at the Luxembourg Summit and that they should suffice for the next five years .
That is complete nonsense because one of the tasks allocated there is to ensure that the agreements are transformed into concrete guidelines for the Member States . I hope the presidency will do this with flair and that it will also reflect on the question of whether it is necessary and possible to arrive at new benchmarks .
My priority would be a new benchmark relating to investment by the Member States in training and education which is talked about a lot but which has resulted in little financial commitment .
I am pleased that the subject of the coordination of economic and jobs policy is taken seriously by the presidency .
I am also more than happy about the fact that they are organizing a so-called jumbo-meeting and I hope this will be the impulse for better coordination of these two forms of employment policy in future .
I would next like to say something about social dialogue .
The Amsterdam Treaty accorded an extremely important role to the social partners , including issues relating to legislation .
Unfortunately , they forgot to assign a role to the European Parliament .
I call on the presidency to develop concrete proposals for this and if it cannot do this , to adopt the proposals by the European Parliament .
In conclusion , I would like to say something on a subject of which you have spoken quite positively : the lack of a legal basis .
We in Parliament like to speak of the large European projects .
But in my opinion the largest project we are presently engaged in is to bring the European projects closer to the citizen .
Anyone who thinks we can do this by ourselves does not know what he is talking about .
We will have to assign an extremely important role to NGOs as these , in fact , are the cement between what we do and the confidence which must be created for this amongst the citizens .
I consider it incomprehensible that precisely those projects which might achieve this , which could lend Europe a social face , are damaged .
I have seen the proposals by the European Commission in respect of these and I hope that the European Commission will not conduct a strategy of divide and rule , where part of the projects are , as it were , blocked and where they drop some of the projects after blocking them .
I am referring , in particular , to social exclusion projects .
I cannot imagine why , on the one hand , projects such as the Schengen secretariat are started because this has already been provided for in the Treaty and at the same time social exclusion projects , explicitly permitted in the Treaty , are put on ice .
I appeal urgently to the Commission to offer the presidency the opportunity to actually formulate a resolution this week .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , Mr President-in-Office , at the beginning of your speech you quite rightly said that we need a means of preventing wars and that the enlargement of the European Union was an important component of this , as was a common foreign and security policy .
It is precisely in the area of common foreign and security policy that there is great potential in implementing the Amsterdam Treaty .
This will have to be achieved during your presidency , before the Vienna Summit .
We shall have to see whether the potential of the new troika , the planning and strategy unit , whether the decision-making potential will really lead to a higher level of European added value or whether it will just be a continuation of the classic intergovernmental approach of ' old policies in new bottles ' .
I believe that you have a key role to play here .
Much the same applies to the integration of the Schengen Agreement .
We as a Parliament will watch very closely whether national bureaucrats negotiate to keep more elements of Schengen in the third pillar than necessary , instead of transferring them to the first pillar as envisaged in the Amsterdam Treaty .
There may well be a big row over this , if my information about the present state of negotiations in COREPER and in other bodies is correct .
So I would like specifically to draw your attention to this now .
Another point I would like to touch upon is this : you are quite right in saying that we have not made sufficient progress with the institutional reforms needed for enlargement , and that at the extraordinary summit , and after it , we will have to put the necessary conditions in a context that still has to be sorted out here .
I am sure it is evident that the European Parliament must have the last word on the ratification of the enlargement treaties .
Please remember , when work is being done on preparing institutional reforms - which we regard as a condition for enlargement - , to make sure that the agenda and the conduct of the agenda are arranged in such a way that the European Parliament , too , is satisfied with the institutional reforms , so that enlargement is not jeopardized .
That is why I believe it advisable to hold the necessary dialogue with the European Parliament at a very early stage .
This should not just take the form of motions for resolutions that the European Parliament kindly forwards to you ; it must also be pursued at other levels and in a constructive manner .
Similarly , we also need to look at subsidiarity .
If you are going to deal with subsidiarity at the extraordinary summit , you need to realize that this has to be geared towards the present Treaty text .
This means that one of the two parties to the codecision procedure , namely the European Parliament , needs to have a similar view of subsidiarity to that of the summit .
If the summit interprets it differently from the European Parliament , you can forget the summit !
If that were the case , we would not follow that model , and given the possibilities open to us , the policy would continue as before .
That is why it is also important to involve the European Parliament in the preparations for the summit .
We must make it clear that we have to find new instruments , or perhaps rediscover old ones .
For instance , directives could once again be adopted in the form of framework directives , thus creating the necessary frame of reference at European level , but giving national legislatures sufficient latitude .
It is certainly not acceptable for the Council to inform us what we can do , and then cram everything it wants into its own decision-making process , and try to stop us to boot !
This needs to be done through cooperation between the Council and the European Parliament .
We also need to recognize that this will only work if the Council reforms itself properly .
Lastly , I have to say - and Klaus Hänsch has already referred to this - that the method adopted up to now by the Council in legislating on general matters is one of the biggest jokes in the European Union !
In this area , the Council , just like Parliament , needs to reorganize itself if it is to fulfil its legislative role .
If this clear division between the Council as executive and legislature is not recognized and this leads to a lack of clear guidelines , then you can decide whatever you want about subsidiarity , but it will not make any difference .
That is your homework !
( Applause )
Madam President , Mr President-in-Office , shaping Economic and Monetary Union is not a job that can be left until 1 January ; it has to start now .
That means that the form of economic policy cooperation will have to be the central theme of the Austrian presidency because - for the first time - there will be several Euro-11 Councils during this Austrian presidency .
We in the European Parliament cannot emphasize enough how important it is that , on the one hand , the reconciliation process between the countries in the euro area should work , and that , on the other hand , links with the Economic and Financial Affairs Council should be maintained .
Accordingly , it is a matter of particular concern to us that the informal Ecofin Councils and also the Euro-11 Councils should be conducted with more transparency and information for the outside world than has been the case in the past .
After all , we are all affected by the decisions taken here in these vital areas affecting the economy , growth and employment .
The stability programmes that the Euro-11 countries will have to submit will also be discussed for the first time during the Austrian presidency .
I would like to remind you that it was the European Parliament that specifically succeeded in getting investment trends in both the public and private sectors included in the stability programmes .
I would welcome an undertaking from the Austrian presidency that it will not just be a question of analysing , but also - and above all - of developing , because what the European Union lacks is the organization of growth in the private and public sectors .
We really cannot afford that if we genuinely want to fight mass unemployment .
This is a fatal weakness in the European Union , and the stability programmes are accordingly very important .
However , they should not adopt an excessively rigid approach nor should they frustrate our other political endeavours .
The stability programmes should not lead to a situation whereby the convergence plans of the ' pre-ins ' are implemented more strictly than stipulated in the Maastricht Treaty ; we do not want to end up with a split .
I would like to make one more point .
The Austrian presidency has quite rightly pointed out that the last hour of that presidency will mark the end of the 14-currency Europe and the transition to a single currency for the 11 countries in the euro area .
This old continent has actually managed to meet present-day challenges by creating a new and single currency .
In the field of economic policy coordination I would also like to see us making a start during the Austrian presidency on interinstitutional agreements , on the multilateral surveillance procedure , on the procedure for excessive government deficits and on economic policy orientation .
We need Parliament , the Council and the Commission to act as partners , and it would be good if the Austrian presidency could finally tackle this issue in the interest of democratizing the European Union 's decision-making processes .
Despite the experience of the Congress of Vienna , Austria is required to arrange the celebration of the happy event on 31 December , on New Year 's Eve , to mark the birth of that beautiful baby , the euro , to the proud parents .
I believe that the euro must be ushered in such a way that everyone in the European Union , and above all its citizens , will know it is welcome .
Madam President , I should first like to congratulate the Austrian presidency on its ambitious programme , and wish it luck and good results .
You are right , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , when you say that six months is not long enough for this presidency or any other to be able to resolve each and every one of the problems currently faced by the EU .
But what we can hope for from the Austrian presidency is that , by forging consensus , uniting wills and doing the most difficult thing of all , that is , seeing things from the point of view of the common interest , it will be possible to bring about substantial progress in all the aspects which have been mentioned by the previous speakers .
All of that , obviously , should lay the foundations to strengthen and reform EU policies , so as to be able to produce a favourable impact with enlargement , an improvement in people 's living conditions , steady growth and job creation .
As Mr Brok said , there is an obvious need for institutional reform , and I think something which particularly interests me comes under this heading : subsidiarity .
To this end , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , I am glad you have not succumbed to the biased , demagogic , manipulative use of this principle which some people use to try to achieve an emergency stop or a change of direction in the project of political union .
They are the same people who accuse the European Commission of being a bunch of stateless bureaucrats , when the truth is that without their decisive impetus and their will , the project could not have reached the stage of development it is currently at , which is of course plain to see .
There are three questions which interest me particularly in this respect .
The Austrian presidency has mentioned the importance of the principle of subsidiarity .
I would like to know how that presidency stands as regards the debate on the financial perspectives and , specifically , the recent debate on Community own resources .
The second question is whether the Austrian presidency plans a prompt follow-up to the agreements reached in May with the United States on extra-territorial legislation .
Thirdly , how does the Austrian presidency view and plan to approach relations with the countries of Latin America , and what preparations does it intend to make , in agreement with the German presidency , with a view to the forthcoming summit of the Heads of State and Government of the EU and Latin America ?
What role does it intend to give the European Parliament in that summit , given that Parliament participates in the internal summits of EU Heads of State and Government as everybody knows ?
I am just finishing , Madam President .
As you said , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , time is the measure of all things , and I hope that in six months ' time , when we meet here again to take stock of the achievements of the Austrian presidency , the results are as good as the ambitions and objectives of the programme you have presented to us here this morning .
Madam President , Mr President-in-Office , I have listened to you carefully , and Mr Hänsch and Mr Brok have already said something about your interpretation of subsidiarity .
I must admit that I had to smile when you said that the extraordinary summit of Heads of State or Government also needed to help to fire our citizens with enthusiasm for Europe , and that this could not be done half-heartedly .
I am very keen to see how our Heads of State or Government will achieve this whole-heartedly .
I listened to your statement about the Austrian presidency , which was very much geared to foreign policy , and I was waiting for you to get to specific points , and you did indeed mention a few .
You even said a few words about environmental policy .
I greatly appreciated that .
I would like you to tell me , given that you are convinced that the European Union should become more effective and closer to the people , a point on which we all agree , what role you intend to play in achieving this as President-in-Office of the Council , as one of the Austrian presidency 's priorities is environment policy , as it always has been in Austria .
I have read that it is also to be a priority during these six months .
If that is the case , you must manage to achieve something rather more specific following the Cardiff Summit , which means integrating environmental policy into other policy areas .
I do not want to bore you and others here with limit values .
I do not want to discuss what should apply to cars and to the air with you today .
However , I would like to ask you if you will succeed in integrating environmental policy into economic policy as a vital factor in legislation relating to economic policy , both here and in individual countries .
Will you manage to make the vital link between the environment and transport ?
When I say vital , I mean vital . This is not one of those fine but empty words that you so rightly denounced .
If you do not succeed in this , we will continue to suffer from a lack of efficiency .
You quite rightly stated that the European Union needs to be efficient .
I very much appreciate that .
But if you cannot manage , for instance , to check whether what we decide here is being implemented in the Member States , in your fellow members ' countries , to check efficiency in that way , then you will not succeed .
If the European Union is really supposed to become closer to people and environmental policy is an important subject , if this is one of your presidency 's priorities , and if a presidency is only successful if it achieves its priorities , then your presidency will only be successful if you succeed in doing what I have called upon you to do here .
Madam President , I would like to congratulate the current President-in-Office of the Council for this truly political report .
I say political because , in my opinion , it is very concrete , very operative , very responsible .
This is how you earn the credibility and regain the trust of European citizens .
You said , Mr President-in-Office , that it will be a presidency dominated by work and not play .
It is necessary to be at the building site ; it is not necessary to be planning new building sites .
The site is already open and has taken a particular turn with the euro ; as President Delors said , it is time to get down to work , and in this sense I believe that , if the Austrian presidency is an operative presidency - as you promised , Mr President-in-Office , - it will be a valuable presidency that will be remembered .
I also thank you , Mr President-in-Office , because everyone knows the importance of this upcoming political period , albeit difficult , that awaits us : we are facing elections in Germany , and even the European Parliament is nearing the end of the legislature .
I thank you , Mr President-in-Office , because we were afraid that the Austrian presidency 's programme would give in to the temptation of becoming a programme at the end of a legislature : this it is not , and we are pleased that it is not the case .
In this spirit I would like to mention a few practical matters that you indicated .
I am referring in particular to one : trans-European networks .
I believe that this presidency would be a presidency remembered in my country if we could find a solution in this second half of the year to the problem of railway transport through the Brenner pass which in a way is blocking the connection of all of central Europe with the Mediterranean .
In addition to this , there is the problem of breaking the deadlock on the Malpensa 2000 airport which concerns the entire Mediterranean economy and that is , therefore , not just a national problem .
I would like to recall that there are certainly problems to be solved in Italy , but we have the impression - I say this especially to President Santer - that the Commission 's attitude also depends on the influence and pressure of a few strong interests in Europe .
You are right on unemployment : after the euro we have to translate words into action in this area .
The national states have to give up some powers , because a few problems like unemployment - and I am thinking about unemployment in the southern areas of various European countries - need a real boost at Community level to be solved .
I have a last and final question , Mr President-in-Office : you told us that the European Union is not ready to organize accession .
Let us prepare it !
We cannot have new countries join a Europe that is paralysed , that is unable to decide .
So , what we expect from the Vienna Summit is this : the Amsterdam Treaty has to be reexamined , amended and the reforms have to be made before - I repeat , before - the process of accession gets under way .
However , my question is this : how can we make these reforms ? Who do we make them with ?
Your country being a small one , Mr President-in-Office , it can allow itself to ask the larger countries these two questions that we are all aware of but do not dare raise .
Mr President-in-Office of the Council , thank you for coming here today . In my capacity as general rapporteur for the 1999 budget , I have complete confidence in your spirit of cooperation .
I would like to thank you for having mentioned one of the most important of today 's burning issues : the legal bases , - in other words , the unblocking of the budget lines currently in hand .
I also note that you have managed to convince the foreign ministers , or they have convinced themselves .
But I can assure you , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , that on Friday , 17 July the finance ministers must be convinced , because they will be the ones in charge , and we will meet face to face on 17 July .
You are also aware that the European Parliament cannot renounce its political priorities .
Nor are we prepared to accept only a few budget lines being sorted out ; the ones the Council likes .
We are going to have to come to a general , overall and binding agreement .
Above all , we are not going to accept a patching up which only settles the 1998-99 period .
We need something that aims towards Agenda 2000 and is binding on that .
Furthermore , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , both Parliament and myself would have liked to have had a budgetary procedure consisting of just one reading this year .
One reading would be the result of good cooperation , and would make that fateful game of taking things off and putting things on between the two readings by the Council and Parliament a thing of the past .
In that way , we could produce a real budget of political priorities , not just book-keeping .
I wish you a fruitful presidency and we in Parliament offer you our cooperation .
Madam President , Mr President-in-Office , I wish to thank you for mentioning a policy for children , because our children are the future of Europe .
Legal maternity protection , two years ' maternity leave , child benefit , a legal ban on hitting children : these are things I would like to see for all children in Europe .
Children need a healthy environment .
I am convinced that the Austrian presidency will push ahead with integrating environmental objectives into all areas of policy , including animal welfare .
Leonardo da Vinci , Francis of Assisi : it was always the truly great who lent their voice to dumb animals .
The European Union is an immense economic power , and we are proud of that .
Yesterday , the great spirit of Europe blew through this country : liberty , equality and fraternity .
We are proud of that , too .
However , the moral quality of any society can be judged by how it treats its weakest : the old , the sick and the young .
Here we see the soul of Europe , born out of a Christian understanding that every person is unique and inimitable , and I hope that the Austrian presidency will give a hint of the soul of our great continent .
Madam President , Mr President-in-Office , ladies and gentlemen , a subject that was not originally planned for this presidency , institutional reform , has now taken on a new topicality and momentum .
It has been driven forward by the prompt ratification of the Amsterdam Treaty in a number of parliaments and by the clear " yes ' vote of the people of Denmark .
However , it has been given a negative flavour from the outset by the joint letter signed by the French President , Mr Chirac , and by Germany 's Chancellor Kohl , who have used subsidiarity as a pretext to launch a massive attack on Europe 's supposed centralism and on the European institutions ' alleged remoteness from the citizen .
From a German point of view , the background is crystal clear .
The Commission 's refusal to approve the Bertelsmann / Kirch television project hit a particularly close friend and political supporter of Helmut Kohl .
It seems to be a quirk of history that the very same German government that worked to achieve a European competition law in the 1980s is no longer prepared to accept EU decisions in the 1990s .
This reprehensible act is an example of precisely the sort of thing that Kohl and Chirac claim not to have in mind , that is , an attempt to encourage renationalization and populism .
Everyone knows that all the necessary Treaty arrangements have been put in place regarding subsidiarity and that no major action is needed .
Action is needed , however , where the Community is deficient in institutional terms : weighted voting in the Council , extension of the qualified majority and the composition of the Commission .
As we all know , all these points remained unresolved after the last Intergovernmental Conference .
However , at that time , Austria was one of the countries that worked particularly effectively and closely with the European Parliament .
Against this background , and in view of the tradition of federalism in the Member State currently holding the presidency , we have faith in Austria 's creativity and commitment to achieving common European solutions .
Madam President , Mr President-in-Office , ladies and gentlemen , the number one question for this autumn is how to create jobs .
The answer could not be simpler : you just have to produce products and offer services that people want to buy .
How do you achieve that ?
You have to invest in education and training , in life-long learning .
In this case I would suggest - and Mrs Flemming has already touched on this - that the Leonardo programme should receive at last 100 % extra funding .
At present we have given this programme 0.1 % of the Community budget .
If we increased this to 0.2 % , we could make an important contribution to making employment interesting and integrating young people into the world of employment .
What else do we need ?
We need fiscal coordination , and we need harmonization of the legal basis for taxes .
We should not worry so much about tax rates , because what we need here is a market , not a finance ministers ' cartel , but a reasonably priced service for our citizens .
We need as few taxes as possible , but we need a proper basis : we do not need 163 different value added tax regulations , but rather a definition of tax fraud and many other issues .
What else do we need ?
A social dialogue !
In other words , we need to talk with each other .
We have too many problems just to debate them theoretically , we need to sit down and talk with the practitioners .
Madam President , on 30 September negotiations between the European Union and ACP countries will formally open with a view to defining the characteristics of the new partnership agreement that will replace the fourth Lomé Convention .
Already these past few months , during the debate held in the Council on what this agreement should look like , certain governments unfortunately expressed some reservations on essential aspects of future cooperation .
I would like to underline that it is absolutely necessary to strengthen the political content of the Convention , meaning greater emphasis on the promotion of democracy , the rule of law , human rights and the prevention of conflicts , but it is also and especially important to try to develop a common strategy between the European Union and the ACP countries , a strategy aimed at taking on more effectively the challenges of globalization .
Although the contents of the negotiating brief concluded last month are important , the spirit in which the Union 's countries , and especially the Austrian presidency , embark on negotiations with the ACP countries will also be fundamental .
We must be convinced of the fact that in the new Convention a great part of our international protection is at stake .
The Austrian presidency will also have to tackle the particularly urgent problem of adopting adequate legal bases for all the budget lines on international cooperation that risk being blocked because of the new legal situation that arose a few weeks ago .
In the case of Non-Governmental Organizations and human rights actions in particular , we really have to move quickly to produce adequate legislation , otherwise the Council will have to assume the heavy responsibility of the end of a substantial part of our development cooperation .
A last remark : other measures that are at a standstill in the Council have to be adopted , beginning with the regulation on ACP countries which are traditional producers of bananas , and we insist on this so that the amendments adopted by Parliament are also adopted by the Council .
Madam President , I would first like to wish the Austrian presidency all the best for this period .
This period is short but also important and I see that they have started resolutely and quietly .
This augurs well for a successful conclusion .
I wish to highlight two aspects .
The first aspect is the institutional reforms and improvements of the Amsterdam Treaty , with which the Austrian presidency wishes to start via an informal summit .
As ex-rapporteur , I can only emphasize that the democratization of the European Union is not yet complete .
Even though we are called the victors of the Amsterdam Treaty , there are still things to be done and I would ask you to finalize the fulfilment of the democratic content of the European Union .
My second appeal relates to human rights . The chairman of our group has also mentioned this .
The 50th anniversary of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights occurs during this period .
We keep having debates on human rights in this Parliament .
There remain a number of matters which are never concluded successfully , such as the initiatives by the European Union in relation to Nigeria and Burma .
The situation in both countries has escalated during the past two months .
We appealed to the British presidency to pursue a single course of action and to take firmer action .
That failed , so we appeal again to the Austrian presidency to rise to the challenge and to ensure that legal order and democracy are restored in these two countries , because these matters are always much more important than economic interests , for the European Union too .
Madam President , Mr President-in-Office , if you are looking for work , I have two more subjects for you .
One is the Fifth Framework Programme for Research , where we are talking about the derisory sum of ECU 15 or 16 billion .
We must get this work done as quickly as possible or else the Commission will not be able to make the funding available next year .
That means we need to know what is available to us before the decision on the budget .
And that puts both you and us - because we have to work together on this - under pressure for time .
I am assuming that the conciliation procedure will start as soon as possible in September and will then reach an outcome .
The second job I have for you , or perhaps this is on your agenda anyway , is a tough one : the climate summit in Buenos Aires . Although Buenos Aires is a long way from Europe , it still concerns us .
We came very well out of the last climate summit in Kyoto .
The Europeans actually demonstrated their lead in this field .
That was recognized and it also made an important contribution to creating a feeling of cohesion and resurgence in Europe .
The agreements that were signed then , or which were agreed to , have scarcely been observed .
As a physicist I do not just look at such agreements , but I also take measurements or have others take them , and I can see that we are producing more CO2 today than a year ago .
And so it goes on !
That means that we need a strategy , and Buenos Aires is a good opportunity for it . The presidency is also an opportunity for you to demonstrate that you are capable not just of words , but also of deeds .
I wish you luck for your presidency , and I hope that we shall be able to work together .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , a plethora of questions have been asked and I cannot , of course , go into each one in detail now .
I also apologise for the fact that , due to my inexperience , I exceeded my time at the beginning , but I will try now to make up the time lost .
Thank you , first of all , for the kind words regarding Austria - which I accept not for myself , but really on behalf of our country - , for the good wishes , the strength and the energy that you have wished us , because in the long run it should be to the benefit of the entire Union .
I also need this support because the President of the Council - and you as long-serving professionals will know this better than one doing it for the first time - cannot force others to do anything in a dictatorial manner , but has the very difficult task , where possible , of mediating , cooperating , merging and combining often very contradictory individual interests .
That is where I really need your good wishes .
I accept them for what their expression represents : a sign of trust in Austria and in the people , the politicians , the officials and the parliamentarians who will work here .
You have addressed some important subjects .
First and foremost , let me look at the question of the institutions , and the question of this special meeting , which is not , after all , a summit conference in the classic sense .
May I say quite frankly - as was decided in Cardiff - that the institutional reform will be tackled as soon as the Amsterdam Treaty has been ratified .
We may well begin to talk about it before then , but formal proceedings cannot start until after ratification .
Moreover , I believe that the question of institutional reform cannot be reduced to the weighting of votes , to the question of the composition of the Commission , although I detect a certain flexibility in this respect , more so today than I did even in Amsterdam .
Those countries , for example , that have drawn attention to the composition of the Commission are beginning to understand today how important it is that each Member State is represented in the Commission , because it also boosts the credibility of the Commission if all are represented there , although it is clear that they are of course no longer national representatives .
On the other hand , even the smaller and medium-sized countries are beginning to understand that greater flexibility will be required in the question of the weighting of votes .
I do not see that this is any disaster ; I think it is good .
I believe that with a greater number of majority votes a way out can in any case be found which goes in the direction of a more efficient Union .
Now to the question of employment .
Together we want to prove that a strong , credible currency that is a rival to the dollar will not conflict with a responsibility for employment , but quite the opposite : it will be a locational advantage for industry , small businesses or the service industry in Europe .
It essential to prove this and it is possible .
I am convinced - without using any high-brow language which does not suit me - that at the end of the year we will have a considerably higher number of jobs - it may well be more than a million - than a year ago .
Economic growth will of course help us , but it also has something to do with the fact that we have coordinated our economic policy better than before , and that coherence and convergence are already beginning to bear fruit .
On the question of finances and of solidarity , allow me to state quite openly that even the Union of the future will not be able to neglect solidarity within the Union or solidarity with the poorest outside the Union - ACP countries have been mentioned , applicant countries outside the Union .
It is so important that it is actually a basic principle ; this solidarity - regardless of how tough the discussion might be - must be rescued .
There must be absolutely no doubt about that .
We view with interest the report by the Commission on how this fair distribution of burdens within the Union now appears .
Then a discussion will begin within the Union and the Member States .
But I am sure - and I say this quite openly - that these difficult negotiations can ultimately be resolved as everything can that stands between people who have a certain talent for reason , even if they are pursuing different interests .
On the question of enlargement , I have said we want to start the negotiations .
The main point of the discussion is whether we wait until every word has been checked through by the Commission , or whether we start a parallel process as soon as individual chapters have been proof-read .
I prefer the latter approach and I also really need your support , because I believe that the signal of starting honest , open negotiations right now is very important and will support the process of reform in the individual countries .
These countries will have to make great sacrifices , let there be no illusions about that .
Those governments , those politicians who support the European Union and integration will get a taste of a very harsh climate , and will fight against strong headwinds .
We should help them in the process - that is solidarity , after all - and not artificially postpone the start of negotiations by a year for administrative reasons .
That is the fact of the matter which I wanted to put in a nutshell .
Perhaps I should say one more word on the summit , because it , too , is connected with enlargement .
We need a strategy beyond the 11 applicants , for which we have already developed a type of entry philosophy .
What happens with countries such as the Ukraine , Moldova , and the Balkan states ?
That is quite an important question which is , of course , not at all easy to answer one way or another .
Such a strategic discussion was : which network of European relationships are we offering , a European conference or whatever ?
That is a subject that , in my opinion , can also be discussed at the extraordinary summit , at the informal Council in Gymnich in Salzburg , but perhaps also by the Heads of State or Government .
We have addressed the subject of Latin America .
Under the Austrian presidency we began the first Joint Council with Mexico yesterday .
And I will tell you quite plainly why .
Sixty years ago , Mexico was the only country to protest at Austria being annexed by Hitler 's Germany .
The only country !
This fact has been engraved in our collective memory for 60 years .
It was quite exceptional that we should have created this Joint Council before this interim agreement had even been in force for two weeks .
We want to convey our thanks in this way .
You see , little things can often be so important and the responsibility of Europe and the ties with Latin America are decisive .
Together , with the Germans of course , we want to do everything to ensure that this summit next year in Rio de Janeiro functions .
I have a few words to say on the environment : Europe led the way in reaching the Kyoto Agreement .
The 8 % reduction is , in reality , extremely ambitious .
If we convert that into concrete measures , then some painful decisions will have to be made , and national governments will then have to stand by these decisions .
For this reason , we must urge that this question also be supported by concrete measures in reality .
It is no longer the time for fine words .
The major difference from earlier national declarations was that this is an obligation subject to international legal redress .
For this reason , I think that the discussions that we are holding now with the Commission and the Council at last have a new quality .
I also find it very positive that the subject of environmental protection has been addressed by many parliamentarians .
I would like to give you some clear information on human rights .
We have already prepared a troika meeting with Algeria .
We are now in very close contact with Nigeria and I certainly do not want to conceal certain positive aspects in this respect . I sincerely hope that the new ruler , General Abubakar , really adheres to the declarations that he has just made .
You may rest assured that the Austrian presidency will pay close attention to these questions that have also been supported today .
Thank you again for the trust you have put in us .
Thank you even for your sceptical comments .
It goes without saying that Cyprus is on the list of priorities .
We want to begin in exactly this way .
I do not deny that there is a right to self defence .
In the question of stationing missiles , I hope that we can find another solution that does not threaten the security of Cyprus .
Mr Klaus Hänsch quoted Wallenstein .
' You have arrived late , but you have arrived ' .
The full quotation reads : ' You have arrived late , but you have arrived .
The long journey excuses your tardiness . '
We have been journeying for a long time and we intend to reach a good destination .
This fascinating debate is now closed .
Situation in Kosovo
The next item is a statement by the President-in-Office of the Council on the situation in Kosovo .
I have received six motions for resolutions at the conclusion of this debate .
Welcome
It is my great pleasure to welcome a delegation from the National Assembly of the People 's Democratic Republic of Algeria , led by Mr Abdelkader Hadjar , chairman of the Assembly 's Committee on Foreign Affairs , Cooperation and Emigration , who have taken their seats in the official gallery .
The delegation is visiting us on the occasion of the fourth interparliamentary meeting with the relevant European Parliament delegation .
May I add that relations between Algeria and the European Union will soon be based on the principle of a EuroMediterranean partnership and that the contacts we have made at a parliamentary level have demonstrated a common desire to cooperate in a large number of vital sectors .
May I wish the Algerian delegation fruitful meetings and an excellent stay in Strasbourg .
Situation in Kosovo ( continuation )
Madam President , I am particularly pleased that the Algerian delegation is here today and , like you , Madam President , I hope that the meeting bears fruit , that we gradually improve the relationship between Europe and Algeria , and that the Austrian presidency will be able to contribute to this progress .
But first I will turn to the subject of Kosovo : Mr President of the Council , you have spoken of the huge loss of power by Rugova .
This should not surprise us .
That is not your fault personally , but Mrs Pack and many others here have often spoken - and the Commissioner , whom I would particularly like to welcome here , knows this - of the fact that the European Union must do more to support the peace-loving forces .
So far , I must say in all honesty , it has done little to nothing .
We share the blame if the democratic and peace-loving forces are weakened .
We must state this quite clearly in full knowledge of the facts .
I am very glad , on behalf of my group too , that at last - in accordance with the wishes of this Parliament - we are more strongly represented as Europeans and I am also glad that this is happening under the Austrian presidency .
My second point concerns the political objective , because there are already different opinions on this in this house .
Let us , however , make clear to everyone what our political objective is , even in the case of possible intervention .
Because General Norman has stated this quite clearly recently .
He was also prepared to intervene if necessary on the part of NATO and only wanted to know the political objective .
The political objective must be the autonomy of Kosovo - and I fully admit you are right here - in a democratic Yugoslavia .
If , however , we set ourselves another objective or other objectives , some in favour of autonomy and some for independence , then we know that we will face the next problems with independence .
In Macedonia , or , as it is known here in official jargon , in the FYROM and also in Albania itself .
We should not be drawn into this game .
We must stand up for autonomy and indeed also for a corresponding democratic system in Yugoslavia .
I am very glad about all the efforts , especially through the talks with Russia , to bring the United Nations onto our side or to bring them to the stage of approving the appropriate intervention should it prove necessary , which I hope it never does .
But I will say quite openly in my total solidarity or identification with the aims of the United Nations , that the Albanian population must know that Europe must never tolerate the slaughter of this people , the withdrawal of their basis for life .
Every effort must be made to achieve a peaceful settlement ; every effort must be made to persuade the United Nations to issue an approval , if intervention is necessary .
But we must remain perfectly clear that we are not only fighting for the autonomy of the Albanian people , but we are fighting at the moment for the right of the Albanian people to survive .
What happened in Bosnia must not happen to us again , otherwise we will completely lose all credibility .
If we are in favour of a common foreign and security policy , then we must prove now that we are capable of carrying it out to the end .
Madam President , Mr President of the Council , I thought your speech was excellent , Mr Schüssel , only it has come many , many years too late .
Time is literally running away from us !
As Mr Swoboda said , this is not your fault , but the combined fault of all western governments .
Since 1989 I have visited Kosovo almost every year , so I really know what I am talking about .
Just ten days ago I was in Albania and saw the misery of the refugees .
I think that we simply have to include in the equation the fact that we are dreadfully late to act .
Everything you say about Rugova is right .
For eight years Rugova tried to motivate people to non-violent resistance , which is what the Albanians ( Skipetars ) have done .
It is unimaginable that they have managed this !
But the situation now is such that he cannot prove anything .
For eight years he urged the people to show non-violent resistance and the West has not thanked him for it !
Now we have the situation in which Western foreign policy - which has always reacted on an ad hoc basis and had no medium or long-term objectives in this region , as we saw in Bosnia - only reacts when the television shows people in the rest of Europe that the blood is flowing down there .
The political solution in Kosovo can no longer be the autonomy that was crushed by Milosevic in 1989 .
Everyone must know this .
For years I was in favour of having three republics in a new democratic Yugoslavian union : Serbia , Montenegro and Kosovo .
But ask people about it : even this solution no longer appears possible today , especially as Yugoslavia is anything but democratic .
The longer the murdering and pillaging and the ethnic cleansing goes on among the Albanians , the stronger the support of the KLA will become , and the more the support of Rugova will decline .
Indulgence toward Belgrade strengthens the KLA and weakens Rugova .
The sanctions , as you yourself have said , lack any bite .
For this reason , we must discharge our duties more thoroughly and attempt to solve this problem .
My view is that we will only be able to do this in a language that Milosevic understands .
Madam President , the Group of the European Liberal Democrat and Reform Party is critical of the Council of Ministers ' actions on some points , but we are still grateful for the good speech given by Mr Schüssel .
Firstly , we think that the Council of Ministers , as the foremost representatives of European democracy , should act swiftly and sternly .
Milosevic is continuing with his attacks , fighting is taking place , villages are being bombed , many people are being killed , people are fleeing .
Mr Schüssel , the Council of Ministers must do more than it has done so far to put an end to the misery .
By the misery , I mean Mr Milosevic .
He must be forced to end his attacks and withdraw his troops from Kosovo , under threat and with serious reprisals if necessary .
After that , real negotiations about Kosovo 's future can begin .
Or do you think , Mr Schüssel , that you can ask the oppressed to negotiate while the hands of his oppressor are still around his throat ?
Secondly , it is very desirable for the UN 's Security Council to agree to military measures from the side of the democracies if there is no other way Milosevic can be persuaded to do the right thing .
Meanwhile , the Council of Ministers should not let its hands be tied by any veto .
We expect the European Union , led by its Council of Ministers , to put a stop to oppression and tyranny in our part of the world .
Thirdly , we Liberals think that the future status of Kosovo should be decided through negotiations and not before them .
We think that it borders on impudence to ask Kosovo 's elected president , Mr Rugova , to abandon his demand for autonomy before actual negotiations have even started .
This demand has been a cornerstone for Mr Rugova in all the years he has led his oppressed countrymen .
In these years he stressed at the same time that the fight should only be fought with peaceful means .
But did he get the support of the democracies then ?
No , we failed . ' In Kosovo it was calm . '
Within the European Union it should not make any difference whether we are Swedes , Greeks , Austrians or Portuguese , or whether we are Protestants , Catholics , Muslims or Jews .
The Union exists for us as individuals .
My inner hope is that those who are now fighting against oppression and for freedom in Kosovo should be driven by the desire not to set group against group , Orthodox against Muslim , Serb against Albanian , that their goal should be to anchor Kosovo into a European community characterized by democracy and respect for every single person .
Mr President-in-Office , in your speech a moment ago you said that you wanted to collaborate with the European Parliament , and we thank you for this .
Please know , then , that if there is a topic on which the European Parliament has expressed itself many , many times , it is Kosovo , warning about the tragedy that could occur and that has in the end occurred ; and all this with the total indifference of the European Council and the Commission .
We had already imagined that sooner or later Milosevic the dictator would turn on the Albanians in his own back yard , taking advantage of the methods he already used during the war and for ethnic cleansing in Bosnia .
Mr President-in-Office , in my opinion , the essential point is the last one you mentioned : until there is democracy in Yugoslavia , it will be impossible for us to solve even the problem of Kosovo .
I believe that , in the case of Milosevic the dictator , Europe must speak with one strong , far-reaching voice , threatening clear and strong positions before it is too late .
Madam President , the so-called Kosovo Liberation Army has declared that whosoever desires peace in the Balkans must support the independence of Kosovo .
Nevertheless , American diplomacy , expressing its intentions towards Yugoslavia , insists on including the Liberation Army in the process to find a solution .
For its part , the Council appears to be moving towards such a view , arguing that any group that has something to say must take part in the peace process .
Does the Council not think that exerting unilateral pressure on Belgrade without adopting the tactic of Milosevic fundamentally undermines the moderate forces of the Albanians in Kosovo and strengthens the intransigent forces of the Liberation Army ?
The President-in-Office of the Council has told us that they control 40 % of Kosovo and that their stance is one of " independence ' .
How will they impose a peaceful solution in the context of the autonomy sought by the Council ?
I think that the time has come for us to draw our own conclusions and to assume our own responsibilities towards the situation that has been created in the Balkans .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , Parliament has pointed out the tragedy of Kosovo so many times .
We have numerous resolutions .
Rugova returned to Strasbourg many times .
We awarded Demaçi the Sakharov prize , but the Council remained in deadlock all this time , because no concerted policies were agreed on , not even a policy relating to Kosovo .
All that time the Council knew that the Serbian violence would lead automatically to more violence .
The situation has now become hopeless , and may give rise to mass slaughter .
Basically , the cause of the violence must be taken away : is it Serbian state nationalism or the Serbian state terrorism ?
International law must be implemented to the full for Kosovo .
In my opinion , this means a massive diplomatic offensive , in which Kosovo will be directly involved as an equal nation .
I have much confidence in the Austrian presidency , but I would ask it to propose that the Council awards it a realistic diplomatic charter , such as my country has recently done for the Palestinians .
History should be able to also anticipate events , instead of always arriving late .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , when representatives of the communist Serbia of Milosevic were here as a delegation seven years ago , at the time of the heroic liberating rebellion of Slovenia and Croatia , I had made the following three observations .
Firstly , instead of wanting to maintain its domination over these historically constituted ancient nations , admittedly federated within Yugoslavia but with a constitutionally recognized right to secede - which will also be the case , I hope , for our countries within the European Union - , Serbia would do well to free itself from communism .
Secondly , by claiming the territories of the Krajina region of Croatia as Serbian , on the pretext that these border regions were largely populated by Serbs , they similarly exposed themselves to one day seeing their province of Kosovo contested , historic cradle of the Serb nation but with a population consisting of 90 % Albanian Muslims .
Sixty years ago , the Serbs were in the majority in Kosovo .
Now they make up no more than 10 % of the population , for two reasons : the collapse of their birth rate and continuing immigration on the part of Albanians which has strengthened the Muslim minority already present .
Thirdly , the Serbs would have done better to endeavour to reverse the flow of immigrants and to repopulate their land rather than wanting to reduce the Catholic people of Croatia to living within the area visible from Zaghreb cathedral 's bell tower , according to the cynical expression of one of their belligerent leaders .
Remember that at this time the Serbian Bolshevik regime in Belgrade was supported here by Jacques Delors .
Unfortunately , the people continue to pay for the fecklessness of their leaders and the folly of their ideologies .
But despite all this , these considerations do not justify the interference of the new world order in the domestic affairs of Serbia today , and they justify even less the search for a pretext for military intervention . Such intervention would lead to Serbia 's break-up , with all the imaginable consequences this would have for the Balkans and for Greece , a country which is rightly worried , with centuries of dreadful Ottoman domination still fresh in its memory .
We must reaffirm the principles of international law here .
The first is the inviolability of frontiers , which should only be modified in exceptional circumstances and by mutual agreement .
The second is the right of peoples to self-determination , as long as it is expressed in a democratic manner and not through the pressure of terrorist organizations , as was the case in French Algeria and is the case in the Spanish Basque country today .
The third is the non-interference in the internal affairs of a state .
Finally , I have a few comments .
How can we accept that the Palestinians , who have always lived in Palestine , should have far less rights than the Albanians , whose presence in Kosovo is far more recent ?
How can we accept that Israel 's right to a birthplace should be so glorified when it is denied to the Serbs ?
How can we accept that the condemnations of Israel , which maintains a ferocious policy of apartheid and increasing colonization , are not followed by the application of any sanctions , whilst we prepare to strike Serbia ?
Similarly , should we accept , in some areas of France , Belgium or Germany , the proclamation of Muslim republics , on the pretext that this is what new populations would want ?
We say no , no and no !
Madam President , I thank the President-in-Office for his statement .
It is by far the most positive statement we have heard about Kosovo in the last few months and it is a clear indication that many months of very patient diplomacy are beginning to pay off .
It is important that we have managed to do that while maintaining the cohesion of the Contact Group .
And it is important that we keep the whole of the Contact Group on board , including Russia .
If we do not , we will cease to have any control whatsoever over the situation .
I have two concerns following the President-in-Office 's statement .
Firstly , his remarks about the weakening of Mr Rugova 's position must concern us all .
We have to be clear once again - and I am glad the President-in-Office made the point - that we are talking here about autonomy , and now extensive autonomy ; we are not talking about independence .
I repeat what I said last month that those who talk loosely about independence are only going to make the situation worse , not better .
If we make that position clear we will be supporting people like Mr Rugova .
Secondly , however , I was concerned not to hear the President-in-Office say that , as part of resolving this situation , we have to guarantee the rights of Serbs who live in Kosovo .
We must accept that Kosovo is important historically and traditionally to the Serb nation and we must not replace fear of one set of people by fear of another .
That has to be a key element .
For the Serbs as a whole we must make it clear that , as soon as there is a solution to the problem of Kosovo , we will want to lift sanctions .
We will want to try to rebuild the former Yugoslavia .
We are not making the Serbian people scapegoats for the actions of their leaders .
We must strike a positive note if we are to try to break through the situation .
Constantly trying to grind people down is not a solution .
Having said that , ultimately it is clear that Milosevic himself will only understand the threat of force .
While we pursue diplomatic solutions , we must not lower our guard but continue the military preparations that are necessary through NATO as well as our pursuit of a UN resolution that will give a legal basis for military action .
We hope that will not be necessary but , nonetheless , we have to take the two-pronged approach of pursuing proper peace-making diplomacy while maintaining the option of force .
Mr President of the Council , first and foremost I would like to thank you for the specific and clear speech you have given on a subject in which the real point has so often been missed .
I see signs in this that it is not in vain that Austrian history has played a significant role in Kosovo .
Because Austria means a great deal to the Albanians .
I ask you , therefore , to use this Austrian prestige to bring peace , where Austria in its time also brought peace .
But I would also like to say that it is important for us to pursue a much clearer policy for once and I am grateful that you have started this process .
The most important thing , however , is that we support Mr Rugova , as that is the political solution that we must seek .
I am , therefore , very happy that my group has submitted Mr Rugova 's name for the next Sakharov Prize .

We must do everything to strengthen the position of Mr Rugova which , unfortunately , has been betrayed by politics , including those of the European Union , in recent months , even years .
The peace-loving groups have not been supported there .
It is understandable that we have had difficulties .
In this context , I wish you every success in your task .
Madam President , it seems to me that the President-in-Office of the Council , Mr Schüssel , has clearly illustrated and presented with great dignity a European position that in substance is , nonetheless , very weak .
Naturally , I believe that the Council will have the support of all or most of the political forces of this Parliament for the actions that it has announced and that it has undertaken and that are headed in the right direction .
However , allow me to say that we believe , like Mrs Spaak whose speech I fully endorse , that a peaceful solution is no longer conceivable and that the weakening that you , Mr President-in-Office , have noted of the more moderate part of the Albanian world in Kosovo , that is , Rugova , will have serious consequences .
In a way , what a lot of the Members here have been saying , that Europe and the international community can be in favour of autonomy but never independence , actually means that Milosevic knows that his actions to crush Kosovo will be met with a very weak reply from the international community .
In these conditions , it is very difficult , Mr President-in-Office , to force Yugoslavia to make that little extra effort that is still possible so that the situation in Kosovo does not explode .
We therefore hope that you are right , but our preoccupation is that once again Europe 's diplomacies will be inadequate and come too late .
Madam President , the efforts of Mr Rugova to find a political solution by means of dialogue must be supported .
For this reason , I welcome the public declaration of support for Mr Rugova on the part of the President of the Democratic Party of Albania , Mr Sali Berisa .
This is a significant declaration , which comes from the majority party in the Albanian opposition .
I would like to remind you that the Cardiff declaration supports the autonomy of Kosovo and rejects its independence . It frees the Serbs and the Montenegrins who are opposed to the policies of the establishment in Belgrade to continue the fight for more freedom and democracy in Yugoslavia and for more autonomy in Kosovo .
But , above all , I would like to remind colleagues , and the hawks whose voices were heard in this House , of the no , the no not only of the European Union but also of this Parliament to the secessionist movements of the Serbs in Eastern Slavonia and Krajina .
Croatia and Bosnia and Herzegovina preserve their territorial integrity thanks to the consistent and judicious policy of the European Union and of the whole of the West .
Finally , it is essential that hostilities cease so that pressure can be exerted on both sides in the conflict , and that military measures be used only as a last resort .
Such measures must be used if there is no other solution , either from NATO or Europe , in order to put an end to the continuing bloodshed .
Madam President , the President-in-Office has this morning shown himself to be a real European with a clear vision on the Kosovo issue .
I am very impressed , in respect , too , of the accurate analysis of this problem he has offered .
The Members of this Parliament have often spoken of the fact that self-determination is only done justice in a democratic constitutional state .
If the Yugoslav Federation could indeed be transformed into a democratic constitutional state , than autonomy is , of course , also completely acceptable , but nothing more than autonomy .
However , we cannot compel anyone to live in an undemocratic violent dictatorship .
That is impossible !
The point is , therefore , how do we get the Serbs to no longer elect criminals to the highest positions .
That will indeed require a clear policy towards Milosevic .
I agree with all those who say that Milosevic only understands firm talk .
We have seen this in Bosnia when a week of NATO actions was required to finally halt Milosevic and his band .
But we also need a different policy aimed at democracy and the promotion of a constitutional state within the Republic of Serbia and within the whole of the Yugoslav Federation .
I would ask the President-in-Office , as well as the Commission , as they are involved in the democratization policy , if this policy can actually be implemented by the Council and the Commission , so that we can indeed take our responsibilities seriously as we should .
Because fleeing our responsibilities is no longer an option .
Votes
Mr President , it is a fairly small correction , but there is a problem of translation with Amendment No 49 which is supposed to extend the representation of minorities to those covering more than one state - e.g. the Sámi people of Lapland .
The English version talks about minorities that have ' traditionally settled ' .
The version I would like is the same as in Amendment No 46 - i.e. ' minorities traditionally resident ' .
We are not talking about settlers , we are talking about people who are traditionally to be found in a territory .
Amendment No 46 was originally drafted in Italian .
I would just like to ensure we are consistent here .
We will make the necessary amendments , Mr Macartney .
On Amendment No 8 by the Green Group
Mr President , in the vote on Article 2 you said that Amendment No 8 by the Green Group was invalid .
In my opinion , this is not the case , because the preceding amendments that we accepted refer to the setting up of regional constituencies .
The amendment by the Greens , however , aims to add something to Article 2 , namely to obtain compensation for the system of proportional representation if there are regional constituencies .
For this reason I ask for a vote to be taken again on Amendment No 8 .
Mrs Müller , it is for this very reason that we considered your amendment to be inconsistent .
But I will consult the rapporteur so that he can enlighten us with his wisdom .
I agree with you , Mr President .
We therefore judge the amendment to be inconsistent .
Before the final vote
Mr President , I would like to propose that this report be referred back to committee , pursuant to Rule 129 .
In fact , the report seems to me to be incomplete .
Given the current state of affairs , it does not seem to do justice to the legislative power conferred on the European Parliament by the Treaty .
It seems to me that it is an unusual enough matter for Parliament to want to exercise its competence fully .
The report speaks of common principles , of a European electoral system , but it is far from being complete .
A number of aspects are not touched upon , in particular those which the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights had mentioned in its opinion .
For example , you can be elected at the age of 18 , or at 25 , depending on the Member State .
The report is also full of contradictions .
We want to bring representatives closer to the electorate ; this is the principle of proximity .
But , at the same time , a transnational European list is envisaged .
Reference is made to the French example when , as you know , France abandoned the project , the government having withdrawn it from the National Assembly .
I believe it would not be to the advantage of French sovereignty , only a few days after Sunday , 12 July and after the country 's national holiday , if the report 's only practical consequence was to be in contradiction with the wishes of the French authorities .
This is why I propose referral back to committee , and I suggest that you put my proposal to a roll-call vote .
Madam President , I would like to take this opportunity to express my appreciation and admiration for the work of Mr Anastassopoulos who , as you know , is not a member of my group .
I consider this one of the most important , but also one of the most difficult reports which this Parliament must deal with during this Parliamentary term .
It is one of the most important as it is a step in the direction of the implementation of the 1957 Treaty of Rome , which at that time laid down the establishment of a common European electoral system .
Forty years later , it still has not been realized .
The Anastassopoulos report brings us a step nearer this goal , the goal of the founders of the European Union .
But it is also one of the most difficult reports to be debated by us , due to the large differences between our countries and due to the value which we all put on national traditions .
In my opinion , the rapporteur has succeeded superbly in tabling a realistic proposal which is moderate and takes account of the sensitivities in our countries .
We may conclude from the vote that there is widespread support for this proposal and I would therefore like to start the vote .
( Parliament rejected the request for referral back to committee )
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I will be brief .
I agree totally with Mr de Vries .
The European Parliament has accomplished a concrete task , laid down by the Treaty of Rome .
This would not have been possible without the competence and the will to negotiate on the part of Mr Anastassopoulos , but also of a great many others who have contributed to the adoption of this report and this resolution .
Welcome
Votes ( continuation )
It has been proposed that the word energy which appears in the list in paragraph 25 should be replaced by carbon dioxide emissions .
I have discussed this with the proposer and we have agreed that this could be done as an addition , so that the text in the English version would read : energy , for example , emission of carbon dioxide .
I will consult the House to see if it accepts this oral amendment or if there are 12 Members opposed to it .
( The President noted that there was no objection to the oral amendment ) -On paragraph 27
The amendment concerns a phrase in the text in paragraph 27 where it says ' tax on carbon dioxide emissions and energy ' .
I would like to replace these words with " carbon dioxide energy tax ' .
I think that sounds more natural in the English text because the concept of a carbon dioxide energy tax exists .
That would therefore replace the current text , " tax on carbon dioxide emissions and energy ' .
Mr Olsson , I imagine that your proposal applies both to the initial text and to the two amendments which I am going to put to the vote , Amendment No 9 tabled by the Group of the European People 's Party and Amendment No 2 tabled by the Green Group .
Are there any objections to this amendment ?
Mr President , I have no objections , because that is the wording in normal usage , even by the Commission .
I only ask urgently that a vote be taken on Amendment No 9 in any case , as the term ' revenue-neutral ' appears here .
With this amendment , we want to make it very clear that environmental expenditure , regardless of where and how it is spent , must not under any circumstances increase the tax quota ; instead , the money must be returned to the citizens .
We must vote on this !
Please be assured , I will put your amendment to the vote , as well as that of the Green Group , but with the rapporteur 's oral amendment applying each time to the text , since it does not concern the text of the amendment , strictly speaking .
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
In Denmark , we have a long and excellent tradition of voluntary work among all age groups , not just among young people , even though the level of activity is substantially higher in that section of the population .
Denmark is often described as ' the nation of organizations ' , and on average , every Dane is a member of some organization or other , whether it is a political party , a youth organization , a Scout movement or a residents ' association .
All these people are working to improve the situation of the members of the organization in question and others who are sympathetic to their cause .
But only a minority would be prepared to work towards developing the European dimension .
We question whether there is such a thing as a ' European dimension ' .
We distance ourselves from this type of EU propaganda among young people and the rest of the population , for that matter .
Nor do we believe there is any need for a common rule applicable to young volunteers .
On the basis of the considerations outlined above , we are voting against a European voluntary service for young people .
Whilst everyone is now in agreement in recognizing that the training and education of young people in the world today are the fundamental axes of development in our societies , here we are confronted by a joint text which goes right to the heart of these issues , and yet which is extremely disappointing .
It is disappointing because the results of all this are minor advances forced out of conciliation .
For the least that can be said is that , in spite of the efforts of our Parliament , the Council was by no means the most conciliatory during the procedure , particularly with regard to the question of the programme 's financial framework .
Indeed , what are these measly ECU 47.5 million in relation to the enthusiastic generosity of tens of thousands of young Europeans awaiting such exchanges , which we have constantly told them are synonymous with good citizenship , openness to social and cultural diversity and mutual enrichment and which are essential qualifications for their full development ?
How can we make them understand , when they are hoping to invest emotionally in transnational activities of collective use , that they will come up against a multitude of legal and administrative obstacles ?
What can we say about the degree of European integration if we are not even capable , at the dawn of the 21st century , to promote this type of initiative intelligently ?
We already know that the programme has enormous potential and can be a brilliant success .
This was the case with the exchange programmes for students .
The many young workers or young unemployed who are no longer studying , and for whom European voluntary service is specifically targeted , want and deserve much more if they are to be supported in their projects for mobility and apprenticeship throughout Europe .
We must , of course , support this much awaited text , even if it is insufficient , because I think this little something , imperfect as it is , is better than nothing at all .
I still take the view which I have previously declared on this matter when it was discussed in Parliament .
The report 's firm intention was that the financial framework for the programme 's implementation during the 1998-1999 period should be increased from the Council 's proposal of ECU 35 million to ECU 80 million .
After negotiations with the Council , the Council has now proposed an increase of the sum to total ECU 47.5 million .
I cannot possibly vote for this proposal when I can see how at the same time the Member States are making cutbacks which are causing job losses in the public sector in their respective countries .
Dybkjær report ( A4-0275 / 98 )
Sustainable development nowadays enjoys a broad consensus in our countries .
Those who would still dare maintain that the economy and the environment are contradictory are few and far between .
But widely proclaimed good intentions still need to be translated into concrete measures .
The interinstitutional negotiations on the fifth environmental action programme are exemplary in this regard .
We can , of course , regret the time that has been taken over such an important issue .
In fact , the procedure commenced in February 1996 has only now come to a conclusion .
Almost 30 months were thus necessary to fulfil the new provisions provided for in the Treaty on European Union which came into force in November 1993 . Meanwhile , the fifth action programme anticipated a review of its strategy before the end of 1995 .
Having said this , the European Parliament can congratulate itself on the results achieved thanks to the implementation of the codecision procedure which can now be applied in this matter .
The field of environmental issues has broadened and the Council has approved the need for an overall evaluation of the current programme .
It will be accompanied by proposals concerning the priority objectives and the measures to be taken from the year 2000 onwards .
That the Council has already recognized that some will have to be " still more ambitious ' makes this acceptance all the more positive .
Another reason for satisfaction in my eyes is the Council 's agreement on the possibility of legislative initiatives with regard to the use of fiscal instruments in the environmental field in order to encourage employment , competitiveness and growth .
This relates to an long-standing demand which should be made concrete as soon as possible .
Whilst awaiting the White Paper announced by the Commission , I therefore give my unreserved support to the results of conciliation as proposed .
As far as the results of conciliation on the EU 's action plan for the environment are concerned , we must unfortunately note that not much remains of the demands and measures from the Green group and the combined environmental movement which are necessary to achieve the goal of sustained development .
Not even the proposals from the European Parliament 's first reading remain to any great extent .
At the European Parliament 's second reading , 10 important amendments were accepted with an absolute majority .
These included , for example , the fact that the three new Member States of the EU would not be required to reduce their high environmental standards , that the Commission should set up an action plan for what was to be done with nuclear waste and that the Commission should submit a directive on environmental liability .
All these proposals have been negotiated away in the compromise proposal which is now to be adopted .
The content of the compromise proposal looks largely the same as the proposal the Commission had still intended to submit in the area of the environment .
All the proposals which would really have made the Commission - and the Council - act and take environmental issues seriously have been removed from the text .
The Members of the European Parliament on the Conciliation Committee have not succeeded in defending the demands which the majority of the European Parliament adopted at second reading .
As far as the transitional arrangements for Sweden , Finland and Austria are concerned , the proposal does not represent any guarantee for these countries that they shall be able to keep a higher level of environmental protection than the rest of the EU .
Harmonizing standards runs the risk of levelling them down to the same common denominator .
After all , this is what almost happened to three of our Member States - Austria , Sweden and Finland - which fortunately seem to have been able to benefit from separate status .
So much the better for them , but what a shame for the rest of us !
Secondly , why raise environmental standards in Europe if , at the same time , we are not prepared to look critically on what we accept from third countries ?
The Euro-internationalists have to face up to their contradictions in this respect .
Indeed , can Member States engage in a policy of sustainable development within a context of world trade under the dictatorship of the WTO , which strives to prohibit states from having a say in the quality of imported products ?
If we really want an ambitious policy on the environment and health , the argument has to follow its logical path ; control must be retained over our borders , which are precious filters .
Thus , if only products which respect human beings and nature are allowed to enter the Community territory , there is no doubt that third countries will work more rapidly towards improving their standards .
If not , if the law of the jungle prevails , I unfortunately do not rate the chances of our efforts in the area of sustainable development very highly .
Following the rejection by the Council of the lion 's share of Parliament 's amendments at first and second reading , I am encouraged to see that by working effectively , the Conciliation Committee has managed to come up with a compromise text relatively quickly .
I am convinced that the many initiatives contained in the action plan are necessary if we are to secure a good , clean environment for our descendants .
The rapporteur rightly emphasized making as many as possible of the actions in the programme binding on the Community rather than considering them to be priority political objectives .
I am convinced that the environment can only be secured by means of a clear set of laws with teeth .
Cabrol report ( A4-0276 / 98 )
We cannot support the Cabrol report on creating a network for the epidemiological surveillance and control of communicable diseases in the Community .
We believe it is superfluous to create a permanent network at Community level under the wing of the Commission .
It would be far better to coordinate efforts under the auspices of the WHO , because the diseases in question are not only restricted to the territory of the EU .
Nor can we support comprehensive registration , for which the Parliamentary and Council resolution paves the way .
Based on the above considerations , we are voting against this report .
It is an obvious and natural area of cooperation to monitor , advise and spread information about communicable diseases in the EU and other countries .
Developed cooperation between the Member States can reduce the risk of infection .
This kind of Union function is an important instrument for reducing the risk of infection and preventing disease , but it can never take over ultimate responsibility from the democratic institutions and responsible authorities of the Member States .
A corresponding democratic accountability is lacking at Union level because the legislators cannot be changed at general elections .
Cross-boundary coordination is crucial for maintaining effective treatment of communicable diseases in the Community .
Thus , it is also important to set up an effective , successful network for epidemiological surveillance and control .
I am convinced that a permanent network of authorities and central epidemiological institutions in the Communities is the only way we can get anywhere near ensuring that effective medical treatment is given for communicable diseases , whilst also stemming the tide of the regrettable development of multi-resistant disease-causing micro-organisms already extant in some parts of the Community .
I am very pleased that the Conciliation Committee has reached a sensible compromise on the proposed network .
I repeat my opinion which I made clear at the second reading of this report in January 1998 .
The cause which is being served here is , of course , good , that is , the creation of a centre for the control of communicable diseases .
I am , however , very sceptical of the value of always creating new institutions at ' Community level ' .
Sweden has already developed networks for this purpose , including in cooperation with the WHO .
If a network is to be created in Europe , it should be a pan-European structure .
These continuous new EU institutions require resources , and these resources have to be taken from somewhere .
The positive choice of an EU institution may therefore require negative decisions at national or global level , especially when we remember the negative attitudes towards taxes in the Union .
Breyer recommendation ( A4-0242 / 98 )
The Group of Independents for a Europe of Nations supported both the report and the amendments tabled by the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection .
The framework directive on the harmonization of Member States ' legislation with regard to food additives has been in force since 1989 .
The proposal from the Commission on which we are voting today is aimed at adapting European legislation to bring it up to date with the most recent scientific , technical and technological developments .
With regard to the use of nisin ( an antibiotic ) in the production of pasteurized eggs , the Commission proposes withdrawal of its use , whilst permitting it , however , in the manufacture of mascarpone .
Rather than demanding the withdrawal of all antibiotics from livestock feed for reasons of bioresistance , we consider that it is far more important to reduce their use in food for human consumption .
Indeed , bioresistance develops according to the absorption of active antibiotics to be used in food .
This is the reality of the matter .
Yet again , our group does not understand the Commission 's position which we denounce as illogical , unless its proposals are in response to some interest or other wishing to destabilize European animal production .
Be that as it may , it is necessary for European regulations to be regularly adapted to scientific , technical and technological developments , and for this to be done in response to the single objective of consumer health protection .
The purpose of amending Directive 95 / 2 / EC is to adjust its annex to accommodate the major technological development that has taken place over the last few years , and to enable Member States that have joined the EU since the directive was adopted to continue to use traditional additives .
It is very gratifying that the Commission 's monitoring of the trend in the additives market has resulted in a proposal so quickly , thus always keeping EU legislation up to date in this important area .
The Danish government has expressed concern in the Council in the matter of certain substances permitted under the directive .
However , I hope it will be possible to reach a compromise that is acceptable to all Member States .
Anastassopoulos report ( A4-0212 / 98 )
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Anastassopoulos report , as voted for this morning , does Parliament no credit .
Indeed , I insist that it is far from responding to the obligations of the Maastricht Treaty and the future Amsterdam Treaty .
Many significant aspects have not been adopted by , nor are they dealt with in , the report .
Furthermore , the amendments we had tabled , namely Amendments Nos 35 , 29 and 26 have been rejected even though we said that the aspects not touched upon came within the competence of the Member States .
Parliament has thus recognized that it should have discussed them , but it has not come back to the issue .
It has not touched upon either the requisite conditions for inclusion on the electoral roll , the establishment of a system to control and review electoral lists , the conditions for eligibility or ineligibility , or the incompatibilities other than those mentioned in Article 8 . Nor has it discussed electoral propaganda , the financing of electoral campaigns , the preparation , holding and monitoring of voting operations , or electoral disputes .
What is worse , the report that we have adopted inherently contradicts what is being proclaimed .
We want to bring the electorate and its representatives closer together and it is proposed to establish a transnational European list .
Reference is made to the French example when France , given the very strong reserves of the people , has just abandoned the project of regionalisation of its electoral system .
At a time when electors want decisions to be taken as close to them as possible , how can we call for a list which will lead to an abstention rate close to 99 % if it is implemented ?
Now is the time for nations , now is the time to give a voice to the people .
At a recent sporting event , the happiness of the European people at belonging to a nation was clearly expressed .
This is what we should have expressed today and not this report , which is a botched job .
Mr President , one of the problems with this report and with the idea that the European Parliament and Members of Parliament and political parties should draw up an electoral system is that they are going to have the interests of the political parties themselves rather than the interests of citizens to the fore .
Basically they will be looking at what is the best kind of system to enable them to make more gains in the next election .
Also , it ignores the fact that in certain Member States there are very fair electoral systems .
For example , Ireland has one of the fairest electoral systems in the whole of the European Community .
Harmonising electoral systems for the European election could actually be detrimental to the very fair and equitable system that we have in Ireland , and most people in this Parliament are probably totally unaware of that .
Furthermore , the idea of setting aside a certain percentage of seats for the European Parliament to be elected on a Europe-wide basis assumes that there is a sort of Europe-wide political identity .
There is not .
It would be to the detriment of smaller states , to the detriment of smaller parties and peripheral regions .
To imagine you can force this European political identity on people by adopting some sort of system like this is ludicrous .
What you have done here today is damaging to people at grass-roots level and to the political system and to democracy .
We really have to look at this again .
It is a major mistake .
It will not be in the interests of people , despite what you are trying to say here .
That is why I voted against the report : it is a really bad idea .
Mr President , I agree with everything that Ms McKenna just said , so I will not repeat it .
Instead I will concentrate on the question of whether this report has any basis in fact .
The factual evidence on PR suggests that , bearing in mind the spoilt ballot papers that remain in each Member State that has PR , large numbers of voters reject it at every election .
The only country in the European Union which has a smaller percentage of spoilt ballot papers is the United Kingdom , in its tried and tested first-past-the-post system .
As far as I can see , after my experience of 14 years in Parliament , PR is fair to one element , and one element alone : the political parties .
On that I agree with Ms McKenna because it unfortunately produces a load of clones , i.e. , what is acceptable to the leadership shall come here rather than what is acceptable to the electorate .
Therefore I am in favour of the electorate having the last say as to who they actually send to the European Parliament - or any parliament , for that matter .
That is why I voted against this report .
Mr President , every report presents a concept , and a major one at that .
The Gucht report offered the concept of proportional representation and Parliament declared itself in favour of this .
The Anastassopoulos report offered us the concept that large constituencies , in the largest most populated countries , should be divided into a number of constituencies , described as territorial constituencies .
The question which is now being raised is this : by removing the word " territorial ' from Article 2 , have we or have we not changed the rapporteur 's message ?
Well , I would simply like to draw the attention of the House to the fact that we have not actually altered the substance of what the rapporteur had proposed . This is for the simple reason that the last line of Article 2 excludes states with less than 20 million inhabitants from the obligation to create constituencies .
Does this mean that these States are shielded from the obligation to create a national electoral constituency ?
Not at all .
The very fact of having this declaration for small States means that the constituencies to which the first sentence of Article 2 relates are infra-national , territorial constituencies .
Ladies and gentlemen , we have removed the word but we have not removed the idea .
The spirit of the Anastassopoulos report is indeed the obligation for large states to divide the national constituency into a number of smaller ones .
Our view is that the Member States should each decide for themselves what kind of electoral system they should have for elections to the European Parliament .
Our view is that a proportional electoral system is fairer than an electoral system with single member constituencies .
But this is a debate which people can have in each individual Member State .
The same applies to the question of opportunities for the electorate to vote for individuals .
As far as the debate on the idea that a number of seats should be filled through elections in a single constituency for the whole of the EU is concerned , we dissociate ourselves from the idea .
As Europe looks today , with the lack of an EU-wide media debate , differences in language , culture and political traditions , it goes without saying that the EU is not ready to create an EU constituency .
We would strongly warn against attempts to centralize democracy in this way .
It could lead to the creation of an oligarchy because democracy will become so centralized and large-scale that the citizens will not feel involved in politics .
On the basis of the Amsterdam Treaty , the report gives expression to the European Parliament 's vision of an electoral system with common principles for the Members of the European Parliament .
In order to be able to support these principles they have to be based on the fundamental idea of a ' Union of the peoples and of the states . '
We think that the report should not amount to anything more than what is stated in the Amsterdam Treaty , that is , ' common principles ' .
Therefore , we cannot support Article 7 which maintains that a certain percentage of the Members of the European Parliament should be elected through a single constituency .
I supported and voted in favour of the central objective of this report : the definition of common electoral principles for the European elections based on the principle of proportionality , which is the best way of securing a democratic system .
I supported a number of other aspects , particularly the incompatibility between the mandate of a Member of the European Parliament and that of a national member of parliament and the creation of infra-national electoral constituencies as a means of bringing Members closer to their electors , without prejudice to proportionality .
I voted against the proposal for a European electoral constituency for transnational lists , because that extraordinary idea is not intended to correct deviations from the proportionality rule and ensure that minorities are represented , nor is it even really necessary to ensure transnational participation in European elections . Bearing in mind the rules of the Maastricht Treaty on European political citizenship , I voted against the proposal because :
it is against all the principles of a supra-national democratic power on federal lines , based on a national parliament with a number of members per country in proportion to each country 's population ; -with good reason , it avoids the really central issue of the development of the Council into a kind of ' Upper House ' in which all states would be equally represented ; -it raises , but does not resolve , the problem of national weighting in the European list , a political problem similar in all respects to the question of the weighting of votes in the Council ; -it distances electors even further from the elected ; -finally , it would be a means of perpetuating Members ' European mandates , separating them ever further from their electoral bases ; some of them might never be elected again otherwise.I therefore reject this proposal on a matter of pro-European principle and not because of any opportunist calculations which may lie behind some of the proposed compromises on the Anastassopoulos report .
This proposal is an expression of a pro-European elitism which can only alienate further a public already concerned about the esoteric nature of some of the institutions of ' far-off Brussels ' .
Now we do urgently need a pro-European impulse , but it should follow another path , precisely the stony path this report has not been willing to follow . It plumps for the easy option , through fear of impeding the political battle for democracy in Europe .
For me , the hard way involves enhancing the supra-national role of the Commission , which means proportionately increasing its political responsibility to the elected Parliament .
It involves selecting major pro-European political figures as candidates for the European Parliament , with real input and influence in the political systems from which they come .
It involves the selection of someone with real pro-European political influence and authority as President of the European Parliament .
And finally it means accepting the Delors proposal that the European political parties should put up their own candidates for the Presidency of the Commission , so that the President would then have the democratic legitimacy to deal with national governments .
I find no evidence of any such pro-European political courage in this merely ' politically correct ' proposal for transnational European constituencies .
The European Parliament has just adopted the Anastassopoulos report which provides - although in a slightly more obscure manner than the initial document - for an obligation to regionalise the European elections in all the Member States where the population is greater than 20 million .
My group has fought , and will continue to fight , this proposal , which is only at the beginning of its legislative course since it will be necessary , in accordance with Article 138 of the Treaty , for the Council to adopt a recommendation unanimously - admittedly under pressure from the European Parliament - and , above all , then be approved by each Member State according to its own constitutional regulations .
Nevertheless , the process has been set in motion .
It seems to us to contradict the principle of subsidiarity , which should leave to each Member State the choice of number and size of its constituencies .
It is also very dangerous for large states , who would quite quickly risk finding themselves divided into a number of territorial entities , each one with a weight equal to that of a small state .
Some claim that this would not occur if the sub-national constituencies adopted did not coincide with the boundaries of historical regions .
But they are only falsely appeasing their guilty conscience .
In reality , it is clear that a debilitating action would be at work , and you can count on the Commission to nurture this with all possible means .
I find it enlightening to remember that arguments in favour of the regionalisation of the electoral system were developed in France in a report dated June 1996 , prepared under the auspices of the " European Movement - France ' , which , as everyone knows or should know , is heavily subsidized by the Commission , and it obligingly relays the Commission 's not entirely worthy ideas .
This model of indirect influence is frequently used by the Commission through numerous other intermediary associations , sometimes receives 100 % funding and which should one day be studied to understand better the wheels of the spread of federalism .
What is more remarkable in this instance is that the European Movement 's report had been drawn up by a cross-party committee whose members - or so the foreword on page 11 affirms rather ostentatiously - were " from a cross-section of political formations representative of the broad trends of the democratic sensibilities of the country ' .
However , it should be noted that representatives of the Group of Independents for a Europe of Nations were not included .
There was what the report calls an " initial contract ' between these members and the governing authorities of the European Movement which stated , in particular , that " the essential objective of the new electoral law should be to bring the electorate closer to the elected ( an extraordinary slip , incidentally ) by breaking up the framework of the single national constituency ' ( page 13 ) .
Given this " initial contract ' it is not surprising to finally learn on page 16 that " the members of the committee were unanimous in recommending a reform of the existing system and , in this perspective , the continuation of proportional representation and the division of the electorate into a number of territorial constituencies ' .
To what extent certain members of this committee were taken in , we do not know .
What is certain , in any case , is that public opinion is constantly manipulated through the effect of Commission subsidies .
We are , therefore , taking this opportunity to demand once more their complete and permanent removal .
We would also like to remind you that the simplest and most certain way of bringing European representatives closer to the electorate - and not the other way round - is to give national parliaments back a major role in the Community decision-making process , making them more active players on the European scene .
With regard to the European Parliament representatives , who should all be elected , for both theoretical and practical reasons , within the framework of a single national constituency , they might find themselves better controlled by the electorate if they were to apply the proposals contained in the different documents of the Group of Independents for a Europe of Nations .
Amongst others , Members of the European Parliament should be managed at national level and not by Brussels , their work should be better linked to the work of preparatory reflection on national laws when they are common subjects , and citizens must be enabled to draw up a true balance sheet of the positions taken by their representatives in Brussels , by their different speeches being published in a specific section of the French government gazette .
I support the report by Georgios Anastassopoulos .
The proposals put to us largely move in the direction of a people 's Europe and the strengthening of European citizenship , a direction which I support and which takes up all my energy .
Two measures respond to these necessary demands : the creation of territorial constituencies for states with more than 20 million inhabitants and the election of Members of the European Parliament at European level .
I regret the overcautiousness of some , on both the right and the left , with regard to these two points .
Whilst I understand , although I do not share , the arguments for refusing such developments under the pretext of a loss of sovereignty , I cannot accept that others should condemn them out of a strategy of politicking .
These latter are often the very same people who regret the lack of representativeness and the distance between our Parliament and our people .
I would try to understand this , if I did not already understand only too well .
It is , however , regrettable to have to wait until 2009 to be able to elect 10 % of our Members within the single frontier of the Member States ; 60 Members elected by Europeans as a whole would have been a strong symbol of the construction of Europe if it had been applied from 2004 .
Secondly , I approve of the desire to make the offices of national member of parliament and Member of the European Parliament incompatible .
These two mandates demand time and effort .
To permit the holding of a dual mandate is de facto to discredit our role in the eyes of the population : to reject it is thus a wise measure .
I would once more like to congratulate Georgios Anastassopoulos , whilst hoping that his recommendations will be understood by national members of parliament , beyond any strategy of politicking .
I hope so , but unfortunately I cannot say that I am sure this will be the case .
In Article 7 of his " draft act ' , the rapporteur has had the good sense and the courage to introduce a proposal for transnational lists covering 10 % of the total seats available in the European Parliament .
Some will perhaps consider that alongside the other proposals in this text - a list system of proportional representation , minimum thresholds , preferential voting , territorial constituencies in states with more than 20 million inhabitants - , that of transnational lists is of secondary concern .
This is not my opinion .
On the contrary , it is an initiative which is a part of the main theme of the construction of Europe which is less focused around national issues .
It is the logical continuation of the directive giving Europeans living in another country the right to vote at the time of local elections in their host country .
In both cases , it is a question of developing the realization of a true European citizenship .
And it is furthermore based on this precedent , which goes beyond the boundaries of the framework of the State , that the European Parliament 's Legal Service has given an opinion on this proposal which , in its opinion , is not alien to the principles of the Treaty , since elements of transnationality already exist in terms of the European elections .
As a Socialist who is a member of the a Party of European Socialists ( PES ) alongside the parliamentary Group of the Party of European Socialists ( PSE ) , I should add that it would give an extremely specific content to the establishment of true European parties as distinct from traditional political groups .
It may be interesting to add an element of dramatization to the European elections by dissociating them from national elections and removing the risk of confusion between the two levels .
Thanks to the transnational lists , minority groups spread throughout the Member States may find a way of increasing their standing and even of being represented within the European Parliament .
I am thinking , amongst others , of gypsies and Muslims .
These are the principles .
What of the concrete realization ?
We are not yet there , but everyone knows that there are many practical problems to be resolved : the drawing up of lists ; the overall balance of Members between states ; the choice of personalities of a European stature who could acceptably figure on a transnational list rather than a national list , and so on .
This is the problem of a Europe being constructed from amongst nations and federations .
But the fact remains that the principle of transnational lists is likely to develop the spirit of a European conscience .
The regular election of representatives by citizens through free , fair and secret direct universal suffrage is most certainly the characteristic of truly democratic power .
As long as it respects these basic characteristics , the electoral system can , however , vary .
It is , when all is said and done , no more than a method of implementation which can be amended in space and time , without representing any cause for challenge of the democratic nature of a representative regime .
In the current state of the construction of Europe , it appears that the priority is for all of the Union 's citizens to feel fully and truly represented within the European Parliament .
From this perspective , a harmonization of the essential elements of national electoral procedures - in the sense of the generalized use of proportional representation by constituency for the European elections - , combined with the introduction of a minimum threshold of representativeness - aimed at avoiding too much fragmentation of the political groupings - appears to be the best solution since the British government has put a bill to its parliament establishing proportional and regional voting for the 1999 European elections .
It is for this reason that I support the draft act which is before us .
I would , however , like to add that harmonization of the essential elements of the electoral procedures for the European elections is not sufficient to make up for the lack of legitimacy and recognition which the European Parliament suffers from .
It is my deep conviction that this will remain as long as Parliament is not invested with the basic powers devolved to any true parliament . These include being the final authority with regard to voting on taxes and budgets and having the power to appoint and dissolve a European government which is fully accountable to it alone .
This report contains the incompletely drafted proposal of the so-called transnational lists for the European elections , and I cannot accept it in this form .
In the absence of any further precise details on this in the report , it is difficult to determine what this actually means .
To the rapporteur , transnational , that is , European , lists appear to mean that 10 % of the Members of the European Parliament will be elected not nationally , but on a Europe-wide basis .
This contradicts other proposals contained in the report .
For example , an attempt is made , through the regionalisation of constituencies for the large countries , to bring the voters closer to politics .
The transnational lists will , on the other hand , turn Europe into one vast constituency , which will in turn distance the Members of the European Parliament , definitively placing them in higher spheres , far away from the voters .
But perhaps transnational lists mean that in individual regions , such as the Saar-Lor-Lux region , cross-border lists could be made up for the European elections : such an idea per se would not be inappropriate for the promotion of European thinking .
If this is the intention of the report , it should at least indicate so .
In addition , it is not clear how such lists would be created , nor in particular how countries with very few Members , such as Luxembourg , would be served by this .
The more I think about it , the more this transnational list appears to me to be a type of ' political gadget ' , that stands in direct contrast to the objective that I myself am pursuing in European politics , in other words , keeping European politicians in touch with the citizens , participation of the citizens in the political discussion in Europe and the ' visibility ' of the European politics for the citizens .
The creation of a uniform electoral law for elections to the European Parliament is one of the most difficult aspects of the process of European integration .
That is shown by the fact that the task of producing such a law featured back in the Treaty of Rome , but almost 50 years later we have still not been able to approve it .
First of all , it was the very question of direct elections to the European Parliament which was the subject of debate ; more recently , it has been the different traditions in the various Member States which have prevented us reaching an agreement .
So we should congratulate ourselves on having approved the Anastassopoulos report , for which I voted , for that reason .
In fact , this report allows Parliament to take a step which , although not as large as might have been hoped , is still of great political significance and will undoubtedly help to bring the voters and their elected representatives closer together . That is essential for the smooth running of the democratic system and to allow people to participate more directly in the decision making process which affects them , and thereby feel they are taking part in the great adventure of building a Europe of peace and wellbeing .
I am glad to be able to explain my vote in favour of the Anastassopoulos report on the production of a draft electoral procedure based on common principles for the election of Members of the European Parliament .

The report and draft act , drawn up in accordance with Article 138 ( 3 ) of the Treaty establishing the European Community - Article 190 ( 4 ) of the consolidated Amsterdam Treaty - , fill a gap in the fulfilment of the Treaty of Rome , which envisaged a uniform electoral system throughout what is now the European Union .
In the much-needed deepening of the democratic aspects of the EU , which is still today suffering from a democratic deficit in some areas , fulfilling the aforementioned mandate will constitute one more very important step in the representation of the citizens of the EU in the European Parliament , which has been repeatedly pointing out the need for this .
It is worth remembering , in this respect , the excellent earlier draft produced by my former Liberal colleague , the Flemish Member Karel De Gucht .
Unfortunately , the lack of will and agreement between the governments of the EU Member States has prevented Parliament 's successive proposals from being put into practice .
I hope and desire that on this occasion the draft produced by our Vice-President , Georgios Anastassopoulos , will become reality .
It is a good proposal , which contains the essential elements to lay the foundations of the uniform electoral system demanded by the Union 's democracy .
I am glad that one of those elements envisages territorial constituencies in Member States with a population of more than 20 million .
Constituencies corresponding to stateless nations and well-defined regions of the EU make a marked contribution to consolidating the reality of the EU and the integration of the peoples who form it .
Respecting such identities when electing their representatives in the European Parliament will certainly be a big help in improving the degree of representation and the relationship between the people and their Parliamentary representatives .
Once again the European Parliament is acting as the guarantor of progress and democracy in the construction of a united Europe .
Let us hope that this time the governments of the Member States are conscious of their obligations and do not stand in the way of complying with the wishes expressed in the Anastassopoulos report and the plan it contains .
Within the development of the institutional context , marked , in particular , by the establishment of direct universal suffrage for the election of Members of the European Parliament and the granting of the codecision procedure through the Maastricht Treaty and more recently through the Amsterdam Treaty , we must congratulate Georgios Anastassopoulos on the work he has carried out .
I fully share his legitimate ambition to bring European representatives closer to the citizens in general and the electorate in particular .
But I question the choice of method he advocates .
Indeed , the electoral method which truly enables this proximity to be established in practice is the method of voting for a single Member whereby the number of constituencies would correspond with the number of Members to be elected .
During the French government 's recent attempt to regionalise the voting system , I took this same position .
Furthermore , a large majority of the national political class denounced the fact that this proposal for reform was based on a method which did not enable the desired objective to be attained at the grass roots ..
This failure on the part of the Jospin government , which finally withdrew its proposal , demonstrates that a reform of the voting method used for the European elections must , of necessity , take into consideration : the real expectations of our citizens and representatives , the existing geographical and administrative realities and the change in the number of Members of the European Parliament for each Member State , following enlargement .
Furthermore , it is now particularly important to anticipate which general principles are common to all Member States . The states must , in accordance with the principle of subsidiarity , retain authority with regard to practicalities concerning the establishment of electoral lists , the organization and financing of electoral campaigns , the preparation and progress of electoral procedure and electoral disputes , as well as the setting of a minimum threshold for the allocation of seats .
As the amendments which would have contributed to moving the text in this direction have unfortunately not all been adopted , Mr President , I have voted against the final text .
I regret that I must vote against the report by our honourable Vice-President , Mr Anastassopoulos , but it raises questions concerning elements of principle in our politics .
The history of parliamentarianism shows us conclusively that an extremist party has never yet legally gained power in a country in which a system of voting for one member was used .
A study by one of the major German universities has proved that Hitler would never have gained a majority if the system of the proportional list system had not existed in Germany .
Let us not be under any illusions .
Democracy is under threat today and we cannot allow mistakes to be made .
It must be given a human face ; the voters must know whom to trust .
The proportional list system leads us to the kind of ' partitocracy ' in which most Members are no longer representatives of the people , but instruments of the party functionaries .
The growing number of people who do not vote should be a serious warning to us .
We need Members who obtain the trust of the people through their own efforts .
The system that is to be expanded today , however , all too easily turns these Members into employees of the party structures .
This leads to the decline of , and consequently the direct threat to , democracy .
Those of us who have lived through dictatorships and war , can only have the gravest doubts about the path that can be taken by choosing the wrong electoral system .
According to the new Article 190 in the Amsterdam Treaty , a set of common election regulations for the European Parliament is to be drawn up .
The following points were among those voiced by the rapporteur :
voting should be based on a system of proportional representation ; -a threshold not exceeding 5 % should be introduced ; -10 % of the total number of seats should be reserved for lists for a single pan-European constituency beginning with elections to the European Parliament in 2009.The new aspect in Article 190 ( 4 ) of the Amsterdam Treaty is that " ... a uniform procedure in all Member States or in accordance with principles common to all Member States ' is to be used .
Thus , direct harmonization - as solicited by the rapporteur - is not required by the Treaty .
The Danish Social Democrats believe the rapporteur has gone too far , since Article 190 does not require harmonization .
The procedures applicable to European Parliament elections - for example , proportional representation and thresholds - would , in fact , even out the differences between the larger and smaller nations , thus giving small countries proportionately more influence .
The Danish Social Democrats support the other amendment tabled by the Group of the Party of European Socialists , endeavouring as it does to deflect the rapporteur 's report away from the concept of harmonization .
Lindqvist ( ELDR ) , Eriksson , Seppänen and Sjöstedt ( GUE / NGL ) , Holm and Schörling ( V ) , Bonde and Lis Jensen ( IEDN ) , in writing .
( SV ) The undersigned have voted against the report .
We think it is the duty of the national parliaments and constitutions to regulate the electoral system , even with regard to elections to the European Parliament .
It is the national parliaments which have democratic legitimacy and familiarity with the local conditions .
We think that democracy in the countries of the EU is based on the national parliaments and constitutions .
It is therefore important that it is these authorities which have power over such crucial issues as electoral systems .
We are particularly opposed to paragraph 4 of the report .
It proposes that 10 % of the seats should be distributed by proportional representation at EU level .
Such an arrangement requires functioning EU parties , something which is hardly likely to be realized within the foreseeable future .
Today the so-called European parties completely lack any legitimacy or basis among the citizens .
The differences between the national parties with the same leanings are substantial , and the political debate is highly national .
In the spirit of pluralistic democracy and a Europe of all the peoples I wish to state my support for Amendments No 46 ( tabled by Mr Ebner of the Südtiroler Volkspartei ) and No 49 ( which I have tabled ) .
Both express common concerns for the smaller peoples of Europe .
The South Tyroleans , Valdostans , Sards and Friulians in Italy and the Frisians in the Netherlands , for instance , are covered by Amendment No 46 .
But Amendment No 49 goes further , by extending this to recognised historic nationalities in more than one state .
The particular beneficiary of this approach would be the Sámi people , who inhabit the northern part of two Member States ( Sweden and Finland ) , as well as of the former applicant country Norway .
There is a strong moral case for giving the Sámi people a seat in this Parliament .
Under the current system that does not happen .
But a European Parliament without a Sámi seat is an incomplete Parliament and I appeal to colleagues to eliminate this deficit along with all the others this report seeks to address .
Today ( 15 / 7 ) the European Parliament votes on the Anastassopoulos report proposing an EU-wide common electoral system , based on proportional representation , for future European elections .
Much as we respect Mr Anastassopoulos personally , and appreciate the enormous effort he has put into his report , Conservative MEPs will be voting against his conclusions .
Two of his main conclusions are unacceptable to us .
We are opposed in principle to PR being an obligatory system of election , whether at European or national level .
We cannot support the idea of some MEPs being elected in a single panEuropean constituency , something the report proposes from 2009 .
The British experience proves that single-member constituencies keep MEPs closer to the people than continental systems and encourage them to pay more attention to their constituents than to party bosses .
Large regions or , worse still , single national constituencies , are the enemy of effective representation .
We welcome the fact that the Gaullist RPR in France recently proposed that the single national constituency in that country should be replaced by eighty-seven individual constituencies on the British model .
Whilst we dislike PR , it is important that , wherever PR is used , governments and parliaments choose the most open and voterfriendly version on offer .
Closed lists are anti-democratic and bad for the civic culture .
My German EPP Group colleague , Mr von Habsburg , has rightly condemned them as the instruments of a party state .
We will be campaigning for open , rather than closed , lists to be the norm in future Euro-elections .
Mr Anastassopoulos ' personal support for open lists is most welcome .
Today , as part of our campaign , we are publishing a paper by Professor Vernon Bogdanor of Oxford University , one of Britain 's leading constitutional and electoral experts , setting out the case for open lists to promote voter choice in Europe .
Today is also the start of voting within the British Labour Party on candidates for next June 's European election .
In each existing Euro-constituency , Labour Party members will be able to participate in the nomination of two or three candidates to a central pool of over 200 aspirants .
At that point , the Labour leadership , through the NEC , will decide the order of candidates within each region .
Party members will be excluded from the key decisions on who gets elected .
Whereas both other main parties in Britain - Conservatives and Liberal Democrats - have allowed their voluntary membership complete control over the order of each regional list , Labour 's control-freak tendency is determined to impose identikit slates of Blairite clones from the centre .
The Labour leadership 's response to PR confirms all our worst suspicions about how the system can be abused when party apparatchiks refuse to give up control and decide to shut the voters out .
The electoral procedure for the election of Members of the European Parliament is essential , mainly for those Member States where there is a decentralized system of government , such as Spain which has 17 autonomous communities , the administrative organization of which is closer to the people .
For that reason , I think the European elections should use the autonomous constituencies , since this method brings the Member closer to the people he represents , and makes him more accessible , thereby achieving one of our objectives : that the European Parliament be more sensitive to the needs and concerns of all European citizens .
Furthermore , this type of constituency attempts to provide a practical outlet for the situation in the many Member States composed of different historical nationalities , such as Spain , which is shared not just by the Catalans and the Basques , but also by other historical nationalities such as the Valencian Community .
That means it is a good idea to introduce autonomous constituencies for the election of Members .
In that sense , I support the Anastassopoulos report .
I voted against the report , as I cannot accept that , as from the year 2009 , 10 % of European Parliamentary seats should be filled by representatives from a pan-EU constituency .
Such a practice would unfairly favour large Member States to the detriment of the small ones .
It would mean an increase in populism in the nomination process as well as the emergence of internationally well-known candidates , not necessarily politicians . This would not have any added value for the work of Parliament .
In addition , the question of dividing countries up into one or several electoral districts must remain for the Member States themselves to decide .
The Vice-President of Parliament and rapporteur of this report will forgive me if I call to mind a famous compatriot of his by the name of Plato , and state that I am a great friend of Mr Anastassopoulos but an even greater friend of Truth .
And in my humble opinion , the truth is that each Member State should be sovereign to decide how to select or elect the Members who represent it in this Parliament .
As I see it , there is no sense in 10 Member States with a population of less than 10 million forcing the other five Member States to create constituencies which in practice will surely violate the principle that each and every Member represents all the country 's voters .
Furthermore , this system could produce unexpected results , to which we may perhaps not have given enough thought .
I shall give an example : with the current Spanish method , which treats the whole national territory as a single constituency , there are six Spanish Members from the Spanish Basque Country in this legislature .
If the proportional system were applied to the territory and population of that region , it would only have two Members in a future Parliament elected by such a system .
That would no doubt go against the interests of the Basque Country and against the wish to bring this Parliament closer to a region of Spain which deserves , and gets , special attention from this House , thanks partly to the work of its six current Members .
What I have just said does not mean I do not admire the report by our colleague Georgios Anastassopoulos , which is good and worthy of admiration .
So I have voted in favour of the text .
The Anastassopoulos report is the perfect illustration of the anti-national method and ideology which drive the current federalist majority in this Parliament .
It is an own-initiative report founded on a legal basis which figures in a Treaty which has not been ratified by Member States and which is therefore not in force .
But this matters little , for the tactic is always the same : it is a question of creating a fait accompli , regardless of the law , in such a way as to be able to then use the European Parliament 's proposals as a lever to put pressure on the Council and to put this latter on the defensive .
The intended objective of the content is to break up national constituencies .
To achieve this , federalist ideology jointly uses its two favourite channels : the infra-national level and the supra-national level .
Under pretext of bringing Members of the European Parliament closer to their electorate , the Anastassopoulos report proposes a maximum fragmentation of the electorate by doing away with both the notion of a single national constituency and the Members ' status of national representatives elected in the different Member States .
At the same time , the report recommends the establishment of transnational lists , which would have exactly the opposite effect to the previously stated objective .
But it matters little that these proposals are often entirely contradictory : the objective is negative - it is a question of destroying the national framework - and not positive : bringing a Member closer to his electorate is no more than a false pretext .
After today 's vote it is clear that a proportional electoral system will apply to the whole of the Union in future .
At the same time the electoral proposal respects the principle of subsidiarity and avoids regulating electoral procedures in too much detail , for example , election expenses , voting age etcetera .
It was also important and in keeping with the principle of subsidiarity to establish that the setting of voting thresholds is voluntary .
As a part of creating more uniform conditions for the Members , it was important to establish that having any other parliamentary seat at the same time is incompatible with being a Member of the European Parliament .
However , on three points I regret the resolution the majority of Members decided on .
Firstly , it was unfortunate that the majority of the House considered that constituencies should be compulsory in Member States with more than 20 million inhabitants .
If a country has fewer inhabitants , it does not have to be divided into constituencies , including Finland .
Secondly , it was also unfortunate that the majority in Parliament - 349 against 173 - voted in favour of discussing a proposal that a certain proportion of the seats should be distributed within a single constituency which is common to all Member States .
Such a system could only serve to further confuse the electoral procedure .
Thirdly , it was unfortunate that a majority could not be raised to clearly state that it should be possible to have protection mechanisms for minorities : 190 votes for and 287 against .
In spite of the above flaws , I considered it important that the work on common provisions could now continue in the Council of Ministers and therefore voted for the report in the final vote .
I would like to thank our colleague Georgios Anastassopoulos for the work he has carried out .
Nevertheless , although I fully share in the ambition , a completely legitimate one , to bring European Members of Parliament closer to their citizens , I am not in agreement with the method advocated .
Resorting to a regionalised system of proportional representation is not the best solution .
Indeed , only the method of voting for one Member , with a number of constituencies corresponding to the number of Members to be elected , enables this objective to be attained .
In France , the failure of the Jospin government as regards its recent proposal for reform aimed at regionalising the method of voting in the European elections is largely linked to the discrepancy between the means and the objective .
It would have been desirable for this House to draw lessons from this national experience .
Mr President , I voted in favour of a large number of amendments which would considerably improve the proposal , taking particular account of the principle of subsidiarity .
As they were not all adopted , I have voted against this text .
Olsson report ( A4-0200 / 98 )
Mr President , in order to achieve sustainable and lasting development , our society must take up a double challenge : to encourage individuals and businesses to pollute less and to correct the distortions in competition which penalize manufacturers who have invested in the fight against pollution , whilst generally applying the principle of " the polluter pays ' .
Admittedly , it is essential that the environmental dimension , as well as the social dimension , be integrated into fiscal instruments , but the Olsson report is based on the concept of an ecotax , that is , a supplementary tax to be added to an already excessive tax burden .
That can only have a harmful influence on the economy .
However , what is actually needed is a tax system adapted to the demands of sustainable development .
But this means a real tax revolution , not greater taxation but different taxation , not so heavy but better calculated , encouraging employment rather than more unemployment , in favour of the environment and not the polluter , in favour of health and no longer the sickness of living .
The Olsson report does not allow us to achieve these objectives .
Mr President , the 20th century dawned with red taxes : taxes on income , inheritance and capital , both in Europe and the West .
The 20th century must now come to a close with green taxes and we are presented with a new version of fiscal interventionism : taxes on CO2 and against pollution .
It is ineffective in principle and dangerous to the system .
With regard to the principle , we have 40 French , European and Western tax doctrines .
Fiscal intervention has never been seen to work .
Africa tried it , in the field of economics , with dozens of investment schools . It did not work !
To achieve justice , it did not work ! To achieve demographic revival , it did not work !
And nor will it work in respect of the environment , because of the system , because it will first of all be necessary to fix the price of , and take into account , different hypotheses , different pollution , different sources of pollution emissions .
This will bring about a new legislative complexity and a prescriptive pollution .
It is economically dangerous because it will cause distortions between countries which will apply them and countries which will not .
It is the same as the story of the drift gillnets .
Tunisia and Japan do not apply them in the Mediterranean .
Finally , it is morally condemnable because it is not the principle of the polluter pays which is applied , it is the principle of the consumer pays , the principle of the innocent pays , just like the surcharges on meat to tackle pollution , to tackle mad-cow disease .
And if the aim is to encourage employment , then let us have widespread tax reform , with a European ceiling for tax and social security deductions , and let us finally reflect on the stupidity of maintaining a tax on the creation of wealth , that is , a tax on income .
We think that environmental taxes and charges are good and help reduce pollution and the wrongful use of natural resources .
But this should be dealt with at the level of the Member States , not at EU level .
I am happy with this initiative on the part of the European Commission which , for the first time , examines Member States ' use of environmental charges and draws up an inventory of the possibilities and obligations linked to this .
It is nevertheless disappointing that the Commission has not taken this inventory further .
Indeed , a critical and comparative study of the effectiveness and profitability , both environmental and economic , of these taxes would have been particularly interesting and useful .
On many points , I do not share the opinion of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection , which recommends the promotion of environmental charges without even demanding a prior cost / benefit analysis .
Personally , I am not in favour of bringing in new taxes .
On the contrary , I advocate firstly the use of tax incentives , whose effect is always more positive , and secondly , the need to make polluting companies responsible for their actions .
Taxes are never the ideal solution , on the contrary !
The principle of " the polluter pays ' is a good one if it does not systematically end up by buying the right to pollute .
For this fundamental reason , I voted against the proposed resolution .
Karl Erik Olsson 's report highlights a number of significant environmental problems to which the EU single market and other forms of economic globalization have contributed .
At the same time , the Olsson report also refers to a number of environmental obligations that the respective participating countries entered into at the meetings in Rio and Kyoto .
We fully support the view that various environmental taxes and charges may constitute one of many effective means of reducing pollution .
However , what makes the Olsson report unacceptable to us is , for example , that it recommends EU environmental taxes and charges and the harmonization of national economic policies at EU level .
Empowering the EU in terms of taxes and charges is at odds with the promises we have made to our electorate .
We have promised to fight any action that would grant more powers at EU level to the detriment of national democracies .
At the same time , we wholeheartedly support all positive local , national , regional and international actions that may help reduce any kind of pollution .
However , we oppose the far-reaching proposal in the Olsson report that would spell sweeping EU harmonization of vital aspects of economic policy .
For these reasons , we are voting against the Olsson report .
The Danish Social Democrats support initiatives on environmental taxes and charges at EU level .
However , the revenues should go to the individual countries themselves , and the taxes and charges must not be funnelled into other areas .
We support the report in challenging the Commission to come up with common proposals that would at least promote the use of environmental taxes and charges .
Environmental taxes and charges in individual Member States could conflict with the rules of the single market and , therefore , environmental taxes and charges should be based on the need to solve environmental problems .
We are pleased to see the topic on the agenda of the presidency for this autumn , and it is our hope that this discussion will soon blossom into something tangible .
I will vote in favour of Mr Olsson 's report , for a tax system favouring the environment and based on the principle of " the polluter pays ' enables the encouragement of industrial and consumption practices more in favour of supporting sustainable development .
Nevertheless , indirect taxes on consumption have the enormous inconvenience of not taking income into account and of not being based on the principle of progressive taxation , which is the fairest form of taxation .
Thus , the multiplication of these taxes , as is the case with VAT , increases social inequalities by penalizing the rich more heavily .
They can thus only be used when we are sure that the tax created truly brings about a change in behaviour and effectively reduces pollution .
It will be noted , for example , that in spite of significant and increasing taxation on petrol consumption in France , there has been no notable reduction in use .
In summary , my aim is to call on the European Parliament and the Commission to be mindful of the social consequences of environmental taxes or charges .
The unreserved or scarcely suppressed enthusiasm during the debate on environmental taxes cannot but cause us serious concern .
Although we acknowledge their merits , it has yet to be proved that they will have the intended effect of making it possible to replace labour taxes - even if they are effective from the environmental point of view , they will not produce much in the way of revenue - or that they will not have the effect of penalizing investment , particularly in a competitive world with open borders .
In addition , we are shocked at the complete absence of any reference to their retrogressive effects , in that they penalize the poor more than the rich ; and the absence of any reference to the fact that the Union 's greatest polluters are the richest countries : Germany , the United Kingdom , France and Italy alone are responsible for 71 % of CO2 emissions , whereas Portugal produces 1.4 % . This is thus an argument for different requirements and timings , or indeed the fact that an energy tax will be a particular burden on transport , and will thus affect the poorest , peripheral countries much more than the others .
Finally , it is also shocking that the report never says that the only clearly effective optimization policy which involves no retrogressive effects or economic distortions would be a policy of direct support for restructuring equipment .
Could this still be the case because the burden of such a policy would fall principally on the richest countries , which are trying to soothe their consciences and evade their responsibilities by insisting on environmental taxes ?
We must be careful to distinguish between two issues in the Olsson report : that of the harmonization of ecotaxes and that of a possible European tax system .
For the Group of Independents for a Europe of Nations , protection of the environment is unquestionably a priority area of common interest , where a high degree of harmonization can and must be sought between the maximum number of Member States .
On the other hand , it is unacceptable that questions of pollution should be used as a pretext to enable the Community to have own resources at its disposal , circumventing any control on the part of Member States , which is what the Commission ceaselessly and untiringly strives for .
We have seen , with the mad cow affair and the drift gillnets , to what point the Commission is an expert at manipulating health and environmental issues , to which we are particularly sensitive .
So , we will not accept that , under the guise of ecotaxes , an attempt is in actual fact made to create a European tax .
We must seek to preserve the environment , the single market and the fiscal sovereignty of Member States .
With regard to VAT and excise duties , for example , administrative procedures have been put in place which respect the fiscal independence of Member States , whilst preserving the principle of the single market .
For ecotaxes , a certain number of Member States have established such taxes for packaging .
In Germany , for example , the dual system enables operators as a whole to participate in the ecotax , whatever the origin , be it a third country or another Member State .
The system of green points in France , with the establishment of Eco-packaging and Adelphe also enables easy intra-Community trade .
However , in Belgium , the ecotax system in place which obliges operators from another Member State to include the accreditation reference of each of their distributors , is a heavy system , which causes a certain level of protectionism .
The amendments tabled by our group aim to give the Commission the responsibility for harmonization of administrative procedures with regard to ecotaxes .
In fact , contrary to what has been done in Belgium , the administrative system for the collection of taxes must be simple , fair , effective and must not hinder intra-Community trade .
If the Commission remains set on its current position , hindrances will be such that some will wish for the creation of a European tax , which is absolutely unacceptable .
Indeed , the European Union budget must remain a budget exclusively financed by Member States and by customs duties on products imported from third countries .
The creation of a European tax would be one more step towards the creation of a European super-state , which is something our people do not want .
The issue of the imposition of so-called environmental levies and charges , otherwise known as ecotaxes , is not new and has been in abeyance in the Community organs for years .
Now , however , the issue raises its head again with greater intensity , with a series of proposals such as , notably , the proposal for a directive to levy a CO2 energy tax and increased VAT on energy , the proposal for the taxation of energy products , and the Green Paper on pricing in transport , in the context of a more general attempt to broaden the European Union 's powers of taxation .
We believe that the environmental element must constitute a fundamental parameter of all policies and activities , that sustainable and far-reaching development must go hand in hand with the protection of the environment , that environmental policy must be based on prevention , on the imputation of responsibilities to those who are involved in its destruction , and on the taking of measures to repair the damage caused .
Moreover , a fundamental role is to be played by the completion and enforcement of the existing legal framework at both a national and an international level , and by the taking of coordinated action for the implementation of declarations that are made from time to time , such as the measures announced at Rio and Kyoto , which are being flagrantly ignored for the sake of increased super profits for big business .
The proposal for environmental levies does not even guarantee that revenues will be used to finance environmental protection actions , to promote activities relating to sustainable production models , and to boost the use and production of environmentally friendly technologies .
The environmental sector could bring about the creation of new jobs and thereby contribute to increased employment .
However , a guarantee must be given that , whatever measures are taken to protect the environment , they will not lead to new indirect subsidies for employers , as there is a serious risk that resources will be misused or held back and not paid out . ( This was demonstrated by the respective problems relating to the payment of VAT or , as in Greece and other countries , the nonpayment of social security contributions . )
Moreover , any financing of actions to protect the environment may lead to unfair subsidies for big business , without there being any guarantee that they will have a positive impact on the creation of steady full-time jobs , as demonstrated by the current unreliability of environmental studies which must accompany large-scale works .
We disagree with any attempt to link environmental levies with the logic of the White Paper on increasing competitiveness by reducing labour costs and , consequently , employers ' social security contributions .
This would lead to the further shrinking of the State social security system and to the support of private insurance .
The reason for this is that the institution of such levies , if linked with the reduction in employers ' contributions , will lead to reduced revenues for social security organizations .
Moreover , the current reality shows that a reduction in employers ' contributions does not lead to an appreciable increase in employment , but rather to an increase in profits .
We are especially concerned by the fact that the range of products susceptible to taxation is expanding dangerously , covering a variety of essential goods and goods of wide consumption such as water , transport , construction , chemical pesticides and fertilizers .
We fear that the ulterior purpose is to create an additional generalized tax burden aimed at increasing tax revenues .
For these reasons we cannot vote for the report .
This brings the explanations of vote , and the agenda for the morning , to a close .
( The sitting was suspended at 1.20 p.m. and resumed at 3.00 p.m. )

EMI annual report
The next item is the report ( A4-0263 / 98 ) by Mr Fourçans , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , on the European Monetary Institute 's annual report ( 1997 )
Mr President , it gives me great pleasure to be able to present the 1997 annual report of the European Monetary Institute to the European Parliament .
It is an irony of history that the last time I appeared before this Parliament it was to present the annual report of an institution in liquidation , namely the annual report of the Committee of Governors of the European Central Bank .
This time I am here to present the report of an institution which is now about to be liquidated - the European Monetary Institute .
Preparatory work for Stage Three proceeded as planned in 1997 .
Since the start of 1994 the EMI , in close collaboration with the national central banks of the European Union , has undertaken the necessary technical preparations to establish the European System of Central Banks , conduct the single monetary policy and create the single currency .
These tasks will be completed by its successor , the ECB .
The EMI published a report on monetary policy strategy in February 1997 identifying two potential strategies for Stage Three : intermediate monetary targeting and direct inflation targeting .
However , the report also stressed that , irrespective of the final decision , the objective of price stability needed to be clearly defined and specific targets used to measure the performance of the ESCB .
It also maintained that the risk to price stability had to be assessed according to a broad range of indicator variables , with particular reference to monetary aggregates .
The theoretical preparations relating to monetary policy instruments and procedures were concluded at the end of 1996 . The ' framework report ' published in January 1997 set out the single monetary policy in Stage Three and the operational framework .
In the area of foreign exchange policy , the European Council meeting in Amsterdam in June last year approved a resolution relating to the new exchange rate mechanism to be introduced in Stage 3 , ERM2 .
The EMI finalised a draft agreement between the ECB and future non-euro area NCBs setting out the operating procedure to be submitted to the ECB for endorsement .
It continued work on the technical infrastructure to enable the system to operate from 1 January 1999 .
Implementation work was conducted to enable the ECB to carry out foreign exchange intervention focusing on the operational framework and information system support .
Work has also been undertaken with a view to transferring foreign reserve assets to the ECB at the start of Stage Three .
As regards statistical preparations , work has focused on implementing and clarifying the wide-ranging statistical requirements for Stage Three .
For example , in 1997 the EMI published a provisional list - later revised - of constituent bodies of monetary and financial institutions .
It also published documents on money and banking and balance of payments statistics .
Work has likewise begun with Eurostat on quarterly financial accounts .
In the field of payment systems , in September 1997 the EMI issued a second progress report on TARGET , which is currently being tested and implemented to enable it to be fully operational by late December .
Both static and dynamic testing and multilateral tests have been completed .
Simulation tests are now being conducted under conditions as close to the future live environment as possible .
Preparations for euro banknotes have continued .
In 1997 final designs were developed based on the draft designs chosen by the EMI Council in December 1996 .
Illustrations of the revised designs were published in July 1997 and made into printing plates in the first half of 1998 .
To enable euro banknote production to proceed smoothly prototypes were manufactured by eight different paper mills and ten different printing works in 1997 .
This project revealed that all the participating printing works should be able to produce all the euro banknote denominations , achieving uniform standard of quality and appearance .
Mass production of euro banknotes will start early in 1999 .
Finally , in 1997 the EMI was actively involved with other aspects of the changeover to the euro .
To cite just a few examples , the EMI met with representatives of European Union-wide banking and financial associations to discuss issues such as the replacement of contract prices that may become meaningless after the start of Stage Three and inter-bank rates .
After the EMI had urged banking associations and money and foreign exchange markets to agree on collective definitions of euro-area indicators , the banking federation of the European Union and the financial markets association , i.e. the professional association of foreign exchange market dealers announced their intention of calculating and publishing a euro area-wide indicator of inter-bank rates to be called EURIBOR .
The initial composition of the euro area from 1 January 1999 onwards was decided , as you know , in early May .
The annual report briefly described the main characteristics of the euro area , based on the available information .
I began today by recalling that the establishment of the ECB and the European System of Central Banks took place barely six weeks ' ago , on 1 June 1998 .
Since then , we have been busy carrying forward the preparations for Stage Three .
Both the General Council and the Governing Council have met - the Governing Council has already met twice .
In its meeting so far the European Central Bank has been concerned with many organisational issues , such as the allocation by the Executive Board of responsibilities amongst its members and the establishment of a new structure which suits the tasks of the ECB .
It has also already agreed on the Rules of Procedure of the ECB , which will be published shortly in the Official Journal of the European Communities , and it has approved the establishment of 11 ESCB committees to assist in the work of the ECB .
In terms of the preparatory work , at its first meeting the Governing Council agreed on the method to be applied for determining the NCBs ' percentage shares in the key for the ECB 's capital and the measures necessary for paying-up the ECB capital .
As a result , the European Central Bank was endowed with an initial capital of slightly under 4 billion euros at the start of July .
The Governing Council also agreed on the framework for the organisation of the overall testing of ESCB-wide systems and procedures , which will be conducted in the remaining six months before 1 January .
It also dealt with two specific issues relating to preparation for Stage Three : TARGET and euro banknotes .
On TARGET , a pricing policy was agreed .
The main element of that pricing policy is that a degressive tariff will be applied to payment transactions flowing through this system .
On banknotes , it has been agreed that the initial supply of banknotes for the euro area should be produced largely following a decentralised approach , that is each of the 11 participating national central banks will be able to organise the production of the euro banknotes needed to replace their national banknotes , either by producing the relevant banknotes themselves or by entering into bilateral pooling arrangements .
The second meeting of the Governing Council took place on Tuesday last week .
It decided on the introduction of a minimum reserve system .
Among the functions that such a system can usefully perform , the contribution that it can make to stabilising money market interest rates and increasing the demand for Central Bank money by creating or enlarging a structural liquidity shortage in the market was considered by the Council to be particularly important .
However , the Council also considered very carefully the implications of such a system for the banking sector .
With this in mind , it decided that the minimum reserve holdings would be remunerated at a level corresponding to the rate of its main refinancing operations .
The exact specification of the minimum reserve system , including the reserve ratio , which is currently defined within a range of 1.5 to 2.5 % , will be decided by November 1998 at the latest .
A decision was also taken on the size and the form of the initial transfer of foreign reserve assets to the ECB from participating national central banks .
Without going into the details , the transfer amounts to around 39.5 billion euros .
The conditions for the participation of non-euro area European Union central banks and credit institutions in the TARGET system were also decided , taking into account the risk to the conduct of monetary policy that giving unlimited access to intraday credit to credit institutions outside the euro area could bring .
Therefore , non-euro area European Union central banks will be able to provide collateralised intra-day credit in euros to their credit institutions but subject to a ceiling both at the level of the non-euro area European Union central banks and at that of non-euro area credit institutions .
Finally , the Governing Council has adopted a number of ECB recommendations for European Union Council regulations concerning the collection of statistical information by the ECB , the application of minimum reserves and the powers of the ECB to impose sanctions .
I would like to draw your attention , Mr President , to the recommendation on statistics .
This is of particular importance to the ECB because it will need to base its decisions on euro-area-wide statistics , particularly , in this context , monetary and balanceof-payments statistics , which will be provided under this framework legislation .
An ECB regulation specifying in detail the actual reporting population and the statistical information which reporting institutions will be required to provide , cannot be issued until the Council regulation is enacted .
These requirements have already been discussed over a considerable period of time , but a legal instrument will provide the necessary certainty for those who must meet them .
There will be an opportunity for the Ecofin Council to adopt the relevant text at its meeting in October , and this means that we would much appreciate it if the European Parliament could deliver an opinion as required in the course of September .
To conclude , in my view , the thorough technical preparation carried out by the EMI during 1997 and in earlier years enables us to look forward with confidence to the introduction of the single currency at the beginning of next year .
This preparatory work is now being brought to completion by the ECB and the ESCB .
However , the solid foundations which have been laid by the EMI should help the ECB and the European System of Central Banks to develop into a credible and powerful institution which will pursue its primary objective of maintaining price stability in the euro area in a determined manner .
This , in turn , will provide the conditions necessary for sustained economic growth .
The improvement in the economic situation in the European Union , seen last year and expected to continue in 1998 , may be considered to provide a very satisfactory starting-point for monetary union .
However , Member States ' fiscal policies now need to be geared towards achieving the medium-term requirements of the Stability and Growth Pact as soon as possible .
The bench-mark for fiscal policies is clearly to achieve a budget which is in balance or in surplus and a surplus , I might add , is needed especially for those countries that continue to have high debt to GDP ratios .
Mr President , Mr President of the European Central Bank , before the start of the second stage , this European Parliament had already assumed responsibility for organizing a monetary dialogue with the European Monetary Institute , and at the same time it stressed that this must be developed further in the third stage of monetary union with the beginning of the age of the euro .
We in the European Parliament have been able to see the commitment of this European institution , the European Monetary Institute , at a time in which there was great doubt as to whether monetary union could actually begin on time . Therefore , the European Monetary Institute , its President and its employees should be thanked for their work which has always been characterized by hope and by the European Community spirit , because we all know that if a matter is not tackled jointly , it cannot be completed .
In this respect , Mr President , I wish you all the best for your work in the European Central Bank , which will be so important to our daily lives .
In this respect , I would also like to thank the rapporteur , whose position is supported by the PSE group , for his comments on the report by the European Monetary Institute .
Even if this no longer survives , many recommendations by this institute are still of particular importance for the European Central Bank .
I would like to emphasize one point at the beginning of this debate : when the common monetary policy is introduced on 1 January 1999 , not only the markets , but also the people , must be convinced of the value of this institution 's work , of the credibility of its decisions , in the interests of price stability and also in the interests of the independence of this European monetary authority .
At the same time , however , it must be possible to develop an information and communications strategy that meets the need of the people who are entering this age of the euro with uncertainty , fear and scepticism .
For that reason , this European Parliament 's question concerns what is being done or what should be done beyond the monetary dialogue with this Parliament on the basis of the quarterly report and on the basis of the annual report from the European Central Bank , in order to give concrete shape to democratic accountability and the establishment of European openness for its decisions .
This raises the very specific question of what a rejection of the publication of records really means .
Is it really not possible for the European Central Bank to publish its monetary decisions , as this European Parliament has repeatedly requested , and at the same time to publish the reasons for a monetary decision on the day of that decision ?
We in the European Parliament are not concerned in the least about who puts forward what point of view or who votes which way in the European Central Bank .
We are simply concerned that the public , that we all understand what the background is to these monetary policy decisions , that not only affects price stability but actually helps to determine investments , growth and employment .
To this is added the fact that this monetary dialogue is not only in the interests of the democratic system , but at the same time is in the interests of the European Central Bank , which can only gain credibility .
For this reason , I also think that it is very important to discuss strategies of monetary policy .
Money supply and inflation targets are in competition , as the rapporteur indicated .
We in the European Parliament considered a double and mixed strategy at a very early stage and are of the opinion that money supply and inflation targets must be linked because we want to avoid any risk , especially in the age of electronic money .
I must repeat that the more indicators that have to be assessed by the European Central Bank , the simpler it will be to control the development of money supply and thus also inflation , one of the major tasks of the European Central Bank .
Mr President , I hope that the next time you come before this Parliament , unlike the two previous occasions , it will not be to give a report of an organization about to be liquidated .
I would like to share with you three concerns , and put to you two questions .
My first concern relates to the external representation of monetary union .
The situation of close interdependence of the financial markets nowadays makes cooperation on the part of the major monetary authorities - of which you are one - more necessary than ever ; we recently noted during the Asian crisis , that you were not to be seen , at least , you were not in the front row of those discussing these problems .
I would like you to explain to us what the problem is with regard to your external representation .
My second concern relates to the coordination of economic policies : the process provided for in the Treaty does not seem to give particularly spectacular results . I am , above all , concerned about continuing efforts with regard to the consolidation of budgetary stabilization .
We have a number of concerns with regard to this matter , as does the Commission , I believe .
It seems that many countries , having achieved the required performance in terms of respecting the convergence criteria have now let themselves go a little and there is a natural tendency to relax efforts which must , however , be continued .
The third worry concerns the impact of the Asian crisis in conjunction with the Russian crisis , not so much on an economic level - we have been given more or less reassuring statistics in this respect - , but concerning the direct commitment of the European and international banking system in the affected countries .
It appears that the chances of repayment on the part of Russia , in particular , are slim and we know it they must this year repay more than 30 billion dollars , of which it has not one cent .
I have exhausted my speaking time , but with regard to the establishment of the Central Bank , I would nevertheless like to ask what level of autonomy of action you leave to the Governing Council , for this is an important point .
You have a good team ; we know it is united . This was made clear at the time of the hearings .
How will the Bank establish it and what truth can we give to the rumours which are circulating regarding difficulties relating to the printing of bank notes ?
Mr President , this is a moment of transition .
Formally , we are dealing with the EMI report for last year . The president of that institution has become the first president of the European Central Bank .
Obviously , as stated by the previous speakers , starting with the rapporteur , Mr Fourçans , whose report we support , this has been useful for a first exchange of views on the first steps of the European Central Bank , which has been undergoing a process of consolidation since 1 June this year .
I would like to repeat a few points which have been mentioned which I think would benefit from clarification .
Yesterday , in this same Hemicycle , we approved Mrs Berès ' report which deals with the composition of the Economic and Financial Committee . We expressed our dissatisfaction at the way the composition of that committee has been hijacked by representatives of the Member States ' central banks and high ranking officials answering to the finance ministers .
They have excluded a wide range of experts in fiscal and budgetary matters , and analysts specializing in the international situation . In fact , it prevents there being a genuine Community dimension .
That lack of a Community dimension can also be seen in , for example , the presence of the European Central Bank itself and the representation of monetary union in the international fora and international bodies relating to monetary matters , from the International Monetary Fund to the groups composed of representatives of the large industrialized economies .
I am also referring , as Mr Herman said , to the question of relations with Ecofin , the Euro 11 and the role these institutions play in their relations with the European Central Bank .
We are deeply concerned about these issues , and we think that between now and the beginning of 1999 they should be resolved as best they can .
Mr President , Commissioner and President of the European Central Bank , at the outset I should like to take this opportunity to congratulate the President of the Central Bank on his appointment and wish him well during his term of office .
This annual report does not provide an adequate point of reference or explanation as to the type of policy to be managed .
In the future the European Central Bank must include important elements , such as more detailed analysis of developments on world financial markets and possible areas where discussions can take place on coordinating fiscal policies .
The summary with regard to the countries of central and eastern Europe is far too brief from the point of view of future enlargement .
If we look at the European situation as a whole , the fight against unemployment must remain a top priority and of course one way of tackling the problem is through increased product investment .
It is also useful to recall that the monetary policy of the euro zone is inseparable from the introduction of a Union economic policy based on coordination of the economic policies of the Member States .
The European Central Bank will play a key role in creating an economic atmosphere conducive to investment and will therefore play an important role in job creation .
While the emphasis since 1994 has been on preparing the management framework for the European Central Bank , decisions still have to be made .
The most important concerns the instruments for monetary policy .
Above all an intermediate monetary policy objective must be defined .
It follows that the Central Bank , given a precise objective , must examine a whole range of criteria in order to take decisions .
The European Central Bank Council must disclose its strategy on this matter in September .
Could I ask the President of the Central Bank what steps are to be taken to ensure that the visually impaired will not be disadvantaged when the new notes come into circulation ?
In conclusion I would like to say to the President of the Central Bank how much we appreciate his offer to appear regularly before Parliament 's subcommittee .
I can assure him that we will be acting as the euro watch-dog .
We will be looking to him to safeguard the interests of the smaller Member States .
Mr President , these reports by the European Monetary Institute and Mr Fourçans point in the same direction : they are to be identified with those who proclaim the obsessive principle of price stability , and aim for a uniform fiscal and budgetary policy and a centralized economic policy .
These are just two more reports that ignore technical difficulties , disregard uncertainties over democratic control of policy , give priority to theory and convince and want to convince us that everything is fine with the real economy .
This is Mr Duisenberg 's last report before he moves from the European Monetary Institute to the European Central Bank .
And he has taken up and emphasized the preoccupations he had while he was there in his new and continuing duties : the same strategy requires us to go faster and faster along the same road to price stability to the point of deflation , the reduction of budget deficits to the point of surplus .
With his advice and warnings he comes close to threatening Member States , not even allowing them to celebrate their pleasure at being among the Eleven .
If , in common with this Parliament , Mr Duisenberg is worried , like the breathless White Rabbit in ' Alice in Euro-Wonderland ' , we are worried because he is worried .
And we want to say so .
Mr President , Mr President of the European Central Bank , the demise of the old , the EMI , is the birth of the new , the European Central Bank .
For this reason , we here are discussing the policy of the European Central Bank .
I assume that Mr Duisenberg will deny press reports that his salary is being treated as a State secret .
I further assume that we will have a great many more discussions about which monetary policy is really suited to guaranteeing the necessary future investments in Europe and the development of employment that we urgently need .
We must also discuss the acceptable margins of inflation , the problem of deflation , the lack of investment and the problem of the asynchronous course of economic activity that exists not just regionally , but now also socially .
Will we in a couple of years have to republish " A Tale of Two Cities ' , in which the Third World expands throughout Europe ?
Monetary policy must play its part here too .
Secondly , the complex matter that we will discuss is the question of the democratic integration of the European Central Bank and the ESCB .
I just want to help the ECB on its way with this advice : the institutional nirvana is not a safe place .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , we must recognize that the European Monetary Institute 's final annual report represents an efficient and substantial piece of work .
However , I have to note , as the speakers before me have noted , that on certain points that I consider to be fundamental , this report restricts itself to generalities .
Why express these reserves ?
Because whilst its mission was to herald the third stage of Economic and Monetary Union , the Institute also had the mission of reflecting , not only on the establishment of the forthcoming common monetary policy but also of shedding light on three basic considerations for the good performance of this monetary policy .
Firstly , what are the conditions for good coordination between the monetary policy which will from now on be conducted by the European Central Bank , under Parliament 's supervision , and the economic policies of the different Member States ?
Secondly , what are the conditions for the best possible coordination , both budgetary and fiscal ?
Similarly , what analysis has the Institute been able to make with regard to the interdependence of the financial crises shaking Asia and Russia ?
What analysis has it made of the necessary or desirable speed of globalization ?
Thirdly , what is the impact of the principles of longterm growth , prosperity and employment on the monetary projections which have been put forward ?
The Institute 's report remains far too general and imprecise on these three points .
The Group of the European Radical Alliance thus shares the critical opinion of Mr Fourçans and will vote in favour of his report .
It is to be hoped that the European Central Bank will support you over the coming months , President Duisenberg , and will be able to learn the lessons of these imperfections which we regret today .
Mr President , this fourth annual report completes the EMI set .
However , it does not offer a comprehensive review of the past four years .
The main news appeared in the March convergence report of this year .
Nevertheless , I would like to draw your attention to a number of points .
Take paragraph 13 of the motion for a resolution .
It would seem an open door but the problem with EMU is precisely that a joint monetary policy might very well run counter to the country-specific context of a national economy .
This is the case , in particular , for Ireland , Finland and the United Kingdom .
The Netherlands was also out of step last year , economically speaking .
When problems such as this affect small countries , then it is hardly noticed at EU level .
But this changes when large countries are involved .
How does the ECB handle such a dilemma ?
Secondly , I refer to EMS II and the position of the transition countries .
Are they ready for participation in EMS II and for linking their currency to the euro ?
Chechnya has tried to link its currency to the Deutsche Mark and the US Dollar but had to abandon it .
This development evokes in me the question as to whether the establishment of EMU might not create an additional obstacle for speedy accession on the part of the central and eastern European countries to the European Union .
Finally , I would like to comment on the position of government finances in the Member States .
The deficits and debts are rather high compared with the present economic trend .
This applies , in particular , if we look at the future demographic trend of an ageing population .
I consider it desirable that the ECB or the European Commission and Eurostat investigate and report on this problem .
Mr President , I welcome Mr Duisenberg on his first visit to the European Parliament .
I hope that we are going to have a very good relationship over the coming eight years of his presidency .
I should like to also say to him that this is his first chance to speak to the citizens of the European Union , in particular the 290 million citizens who will be covered by his Central Bank .
Therefore I would like to remind him that he needs to make sure that this bank builds public confidence .
The European Central Bank is not the Bundesbank .
The Bundesbank has a track record and enjoys public confidence in Germany .
The European Central Bank is the newest of the European institutions and has to earn the confidence of the citizens of the European Union .
You cannot earn that confidence by sitting in secret in your office in Frankfurt ; you cannot earn it without disclosing information and without ensuring that citizens and our communities are informed about the way in which you do your work and the decisions that you take .
So what I would like to ask the President of the ECB today is that he set out for us very clearly , in simple terms , the way in which the European Central Bank is going to disclose information to the public .
We do not expect you to publish the names and the voting records of people within the monetary authorities .
We do not expect you to do that because we need anonymity in that area .
But we need decisions to be communicated to the public ; we need decisions to be communicated to the business community and we need decisions to be communicated to the financial markets .
The financial markets need predictability .
The business community needs confidence in the work that you do and the citizens of the European Union need to have confidence that you are acting on their behalf .
When you came before us for your hearing you said that you would only publish the minutes some 16 years after a meeting has taken place .
I hope , in retrospect , you now realise that is completely unacceptable .
There has to be an interactive relationship between you and the other members of the board in Frankfurt , the European Parliament and the citizens of the European Union .
We even had the ludicrous situation last week , Mr Duisenberg , where someone enquired what your salary was as President of the Central Bank , and was unable to find out that information .
You are a public servant and this information must be made public ; it must be in the public domain .
I want to ensure that we have a good relationship with you .
I think that is possible because you want to show the sort of goodwill that you have shown as President of the EMI , but as well as attending hearings in this Parliament , as well as attending meetings of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy in the European Parliament , we need you to provide information so that people have confidence in the European Central Bank , but much more importantly , they have confidence in the euro .
Mr President , on 30 June we celebrated the baptism , or shall I say the official creation of the European Central Bank in Frankfurt , the common house for the single currency .
Indeed , the euro 's arrival modifies the existence of the European Monetary Institute whose annual report we are examining today .
This document reviews the state of preparation of the European monetary institutions on the eve of the euro 's introduction and in so doing outlines the monetary policy of the European Central Bank .
The new bank will be a success early on if , in addition to fulfilling the new functions for which it has been created , it correctly carries out the tasks the EMI were entrusted with .
That is why we commend the official President in his dual function , Mr Duisenberg .
The Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy has already expressed its satisfaction with the very informative document .
We therefore thank the rapporteur for taking the time to recall the rights and duties of the newborn monetary institution - which is why we used the word baptism - commenting and analysing the rights and duties of the dying monetary institution , which does not , however , require a funeral .
In the same vein , there is no need to talk about funerals for the national central banks either ; their role is still too important for the monetary construction of the euro , and this is demonstrated by the 60 000 people they employ in the Member States in comparison with the 281 people working in the EMI .
However , in the future and in the medium term , the ECB will have to fully assume all the functions provided for in the Treaties .
The final objectives expressed in figures , such as the inflation rate and money supply , will constitute factors of stability and growth and will also show European citizens that if today we are working so intensely on the single currency , it is in order to better achieve the other Community objectives sooner , beginning with employment .
A final word : let there be no mistake that the European Parliament is the only Community institution directly elected by the citizens to which the EMI had to be accountable ; this obligation will also apply to the ECB .
The European Parliament will do all it can to collaborate , but it will be unremitting in its control of the activity and functions that yesterday were the EMI 's and that today are those of the European Central Bank .
Mr President , André Fourçans ' excellent report enables us to give a final opinion on the European Monetary Institute and to acknowledge the excellent work carried out by this body and by its two successive presidents , Mr Alexandre Lamfalussy and Mr Wim Duisenberg .
It also enables us , through the pen of the rapporteur , to recall a number of principles which have governed the introduction of the single currency and which must direct the actions of Europeans over the coming years .
The first of these principles is that the European System of Central Banks must enable the single currency to move in the direction of complementarity between a single monetary policy and economic policies . They will of course be coordinated but the strategy remains to be defined at national level .
Although the key words are price stability and control of inflation , and although the objectives are long-term growth and prosperity , it is clear that the fact that the EMI 's report has refused to tackle the general problem of the coordination of budgetary and fiscal policies within the Union must be deplored , in line with the rapporteur 's comments .
With the euro and the European Central Bank , we must have the means for rigorous supervision of these policies , which are essential for the much-needed stabilization of public finances .
Indeed , we cannot want to reform the gigantic redistribution tool of the common agricultural policy , set ambitious objectives with regard to enlargement and commit ourselves to holding two mandates through Agenda 2000 if we are not at the same time preparing to put in place technical instruments which protect against both what has been called possible asymmetric shocks and also a slow drift towards laxity . These would gnaw away at the refound fruits of growth to the sole benefit of category-specific and selfish interests , disregarding the common good .
The French government 's capitulation a few weeks ago at the height of the Air France pilots ' strike is a perfect example of what should not be done .
The ECU 200 million lost by the airline during the conflict is a great deal of money which will burden the French taxpayer 's purse and , consequently , will prevent a reduction in the national budget deficit .
It is time that national leaders became aware that this is no longer the time for unruly children to be given everything they want and that a serious reform of the labour market is needed , as the rapporteur states , in order to achieve a significant reduction in unemployment .
Naturally , our group will support Mr Fourçans ' report .
Mr President , each time we debate in Parliament economic policy and the economic situation in the European Union , words of self-satisfaction of those who have shaped economic policy are saved for the achievements of the economic policy that the European Union is following .
Much the same is happening now .
But how satisfied can we feel with the level of unemployment in the European Union and the level of investment , which is inadequate to fundamentally combat unemployment ?
I would like to ask the President of the European Central Bank the following questions .
Firstly , does he think that , with the rigorous implementation of the Stability Pact , which he requested in his speech , it is possible to combat unemployment with the tremendous financial restrictions it imposes ?
Secondly , is it possible for us to go ahead with a policy to support the single currency in the context of a fiscal policy like the one that is currently in force ?
I would like Mr Duisenberg to answer these questions to see whether the people of Europe can feel satisfied with this situation .
Mr President , in welcoming Mr Duisenberg here today , I also congratulate Mr Fourçans for his commentary on the EMI 's final and historic report .
His assertion that the parliamentary dialogue with the ECB must not be confined to monetary policy is persuasively argued .
To quote Mr Fourçans : ' The success of the euro must be economic as well as monetary .
It is by that yardstick that European citizens will judge the new currency ' .
Less congenial are the rapporteur 's comments on the supposed necessity of wage moderation and the slashing of public expenditure to meet the stability pact targets .
I thought we were all in agreement that wage rises justified by productivity gains should be deemed normal and acceptable .
Mr President , let me now turn directly to Mr Duisenberg and ask him to clarify his position on the choice of monetary policy strategy and instruments to maintain price stability .
The 1997 EMI report fails to reflect the interesting and enlightening exchanges Parliament had with the other ECB candidates on 7 and 8 May about the choice of direct inflation targets , with margin or monetary supply objectives - or a combination of both - as a preferred measure of price stability .
Indeed , the President 's then indicative bracket of 0 % to 2 % as a reasonable inflation target seems to have been replaced by a yearning and a yen for monetary supply targets , if recent reports and pronouncements from Mr Duisenberg are to be believed .
Could he make plain his predilections in this area , especially as yesterday 's FT report on the uncertainty of monetary aggregate statistics cast doubt on whether we need to worry about their sharp growth ?
Finally , does Mr Duisenberg believe that it was a wise decision to have the euro banknotes printed by the eleven separate Member States ?
Is this not an expensive method which also has security implications ?
Mr President , this report in some way constitutes an account of the activity of the EMI in relation to the completion of its mission .
It necessarily remains , therefore , at the level of general frameworks , since many of the relevant issues have been the subject of separate , more specialized reports .
Nevertheless , it is very useful and , in the simple yet methodical way which always distinguishes the EMI , not only does it give a great deal of useful information but it also highlights certain points and contains advice on how to address the economic problems faced by the European Union and on the effective operation of EMU .
It must be said that it is a laudable report , despite the fact that many would have expected it to go into greater detail and analysis and , possibly , would have wished for a more concrete approach .
But the nature of the EMI prescribes this form of report and , as our colleague , Mr Fourçans , quite rightly mentioned in his excellent report , this is the way in which it must be approached .
As a result , our congratulations must go to Mr Duisenberg on the work he has done so far and on the work he will do in the future .
Congratulations must also go to Mr Lamfalussy on establishing the EMI and on its subsequent operation .
I recall the first annual report , for which I was the rapporteur , and which stated that we should in some way look carefully at structural issues .
I fear that now we are going through a crisis of excessive confidence because the euro was established much more easily than we expected .
We may , therefore , have forgotten that many of the structural problems still exist .
The financial problems have been ironed out to a great extent because of increased economic activity in the European Union .
Inflation has been brought under control to a very large extent thanks to a proper monetary policy , and also due to the fact that there have been a lot of boosting factors from outside the European Union .
Let us not get carried away by the fact that the euro has become established . From now on , we must have a policy that is not a continuation of the policy that has been followed so far , in other words , a policy to combat the structural causes of unemployment and the other problems apparent in the European Union .
I hope that efforts will now be made to solve the problem of ERM II for those states that are outside the system of Economic and Monetary Union , so that , finally , EMU can be a unifying factor , as had been planned , and so that it can fulfil its objective and contribute to the progress of all the Member States of the European Union .
Mr President , the main principle of the European Central bank is neo-liberalist ideology .
In its name , Europe has seen it lead to both deflation and inflation at the same time : deflation in the labour market , and inflation in the capital market .
The labour market has deflated to an average mass unemployment rate of over 20 % , while the capital market has inflated to a 40 to 50 % rise on the stock market .
Stock market prices have risen mainly in Italy , France and Finland .
These countries have both Europe 's worst unemployment rates and left-wing led governments in power .
It is spectacular proof of a lack of political alternative and satisfying the multifarious needs of profiteers .
Mr Duisenberg , you simultaneously manufacture deflation , or mass unemployment , and inflation , or a bubble economy for the capital market .
The cost of labour and that of capital differ in just the right way to set off a recession in Europe of the type we have seen in Asia .
The European Central Bank will not have any money then to bale out the speculators .
Mr Duisenberg , I have said as much , though in greater detail , in my capacity as member of the administrative council of the central bank in my own country , to Sirkka Hämäläinen , one of the directors , so please ask her for more details on what I mean .
Mr President , I too would like to thank Mr Duisenberg for the quality of his work at the head of the European Monetary Institute .
The excellent mission he has accomplished leaves us with great hopes for the work he will accomplish at the head of the ECB , which we wish him much success in , and it is certainly a good guarantee of his concept of democratic responsibility .
In any case , from this point of view he can count on Parliament to be very demanding of him .
I would also like to thank Mr Fourçans for the quality of his work .
I too would like to ask you , Mr Duisenberg , about your concept of the role of the increase in public and private investment in relation to economic growth .
It emerges from the experience of many Member States that an increase in public and private spending can now contribute to economic growth - the only real way of creating jobs - far more than a strategy of strict reform of a labour market ; nobody knows yet exactly to what extent that could be successful .
In this respect , Mr President , I also have a number of questions to put to you which move in the same direction as those of some of my colleagues .
What will be the orientation of the Central Bank 's monetary policy ?
You will most certainly remember the questions we put to you during your hearing in this Parliament .
As I do not believe these questions have yet been answered , it is appropriate to commence a dialogue , for example , on the definition of a true rate of inflation .
What is a stable rate ?
Between 2 % and 0 % , there is a margin of vagueness , a margin of interpretation for which we are awaiting clarification .
Furthermore , we consider , as does the rapporteur , that in order to be in line with the objectives of the Treaty , especially Article 2 of the Treaty , a monetary policy cannot be in the service of only one of the Member States of the Union , but must take into account the overall objectives of the Union 's economic policy for the whole of the area .
Mr President , I cannot resist the pleasure of making of use of your presence to put to you another question on a somewhat similar subject .
What do you think of the presence of 11 representatives from national central banks of the euro area on the Economic and Financial Committee ?
Do you not think that this is unnecessary given the two members that the European Central Bank will appoint to this committee ?
Mr President , I would like to ask Mr Duisenberg three questions , one of which links up with the last question from Mrs Berès .
Firstly , the budget figures of the various Member States show that the cyclically adjusted deficits are no longer falling , despite a favourable economic trend , and are even rising somewhat in certain Member States with high growth .
I would like to hear the President of the European Central Bank 's comments on this .
It seems to me that future developments might be threatened if the Member States are not capable of reducing deficits when the economic situation is favourable .
My second question concerns the external representation of the Community .
Informal discussions such as G7 Finance are of real importance .
Although representatives of three of the 11 euro Member States have always been included up to now , that is , by political representatives or representatives of their banks , no-one representing the European Commission , no-one representing the European Council , nor anyone representing the European Central Bank is included .
How can economic and monetary discussions at global level be effective when actual representatives of the Euro 11 are not included ?
My last point , which links in with Mrs Berès ' , is that my own foreign secretary , now standing down , warned Europe against a Europe dominated by finance ministers .
You and I know that these finance ministers operate on the basis of the Monetary Committee .
The Monetary Committee will be succeeded by the Economic and Financial Committee , which comprises 15 national bankers , in addition to two European Central Bank representatives .
That makes 17 representatives of the European System of Central Banks .
Is that not a bit overdone ?
And could this not threaten policy coherence ?
Mr President , I first want to say that I agree with Mr Fourçans ' report , and also that I am pleased to see Mr Duisenberg in the European Parliament .

This is the moment to congratulate ourselves on the European Monetary Institute 's contribution to achieving the objective of Economic and Monetary Union .
In fact , we can feel satisfied with the current scene in which Economic and Monetary Union is beginning .
The Europe of the 11 is in a phase of upward growth , with a level of price stability which we can consider practically absolute .
However , doubts arise due to some negative points in this scenario .
We refer to the Asian crisis , especially the deflationary crisis in Japan and the risk of bankruptcy in Russia .
But , above all , apart from these uncertainties , the European economy , having corrected its macroeconomic imbalances , continues to suffer from a fundamental imbalance : the difference between people who are looking for work and people who are working , the imbalance of unemployment .
In this situation , monetary union offers opportunities to consolidate growth , to increase the level of investment and to make progress in reducing unemployment , but on the condition that the Union is not limited to monetary aspects , but is also a Union which harbours a fiscal policy on a European scale which can face up to all these problems .
Therefore , Mr Duisenberg , permit me to say that I was interested to note that your first message to the outside world , to society , stated last week and again here today , constitutes a message of alarm about the rate of deficit reduction , adding that some countries have to be shown the yellow card .
From our point of view , it is certainly important to take advantage of the current growth phase to reduce budgetary deficits , in contrast to what was done in the second half of the 1980s , which was the last upward phase , although the similarity to that phase is not exact , since today there is much more price stability and much more homogeneity than at that time , when the average growth rate of prices was twice what it is now , and there were enormous differences between countries .
But above all , and more urgent than that , we think there should be a different message : the message about the Union 's muchneeded economic dimension , about the progress which should be achieved along this path , in order to arrive at what Mr Fourçans ' report says , which I conclude by quoting : " that the monetary policy of the euro area is indissociable from the introduction of a Union economic policy based on the coordination of the Member States ' economic policies ' .
Mr President , I would like to thank honourable Members for the attention they have paid to the annual report and to many other issues still surrounding the fledgling ECB .
Some questions have been repeated or have overlapped and I will try to bunch them together as much as I can .
Firstly , as Mr Fourçans and others have indicated , there is a need to continue with strict budgetary policies .
I cannot say more than that .
I underline , in reply to questions posed by Mr Metten and finally by Mr Pérez Royo , that the current economic upswing would seem to provide every opportunity to proceed further with the process of convergence and , in particular , to steer government deficits in the direction of the targets set by the Stability and Growth Pact .
Yet , on current indications , at least in some countries , the tendency seems to be that the process may be stalling , to say the least .
That is why , as Mr Pérez Royo said , I last week held up a yellow card and warned some governments to heed the aims of the Stability and Growth Pact .
In that respect I want to emphasize to Mr Herman that we are in full accord with what the Commission is saying in public on this issue .
Many questioners have urged me to explain the monetary strategy , the instruments to be used , the question of stability of prices , its definition and the aggregates to be monitored .
Many , if not all , decisions taken by the European Monetary Institute over the past three years could , of necessity , be only recommendations to the ECB .
Ultimately the ECB had to take the decisions .
We are in the midst of that process now .
We are aware that many decisions are urgently required by the public , Parliament , market participants and the counterparts of the future European System of Central Banks .
That is also the reason why even in the first weeks of the existence of the ECB we came to certain decisions .
I refer to the decisions on TARGET and access to TARGET by the ' Outs ' ; decisions on the minimum reserve requirement which were made public last week and which , I must emphasize , were the final decisions on the monetary instruments that would be used .
So , on monetary instruments the whole package is now complete .
There will be two standing facilities plus the minimum reserve requirements which will be used as the main three instruments for monetary policy .
There is no longer any uncertainty about that .
The monetary strategy analysis is available .
Basically , it says that the monetary strategy to be pursued boils down to the choice between direct inflation targeting or money supply targeting as an intermediate target .
In reply to another question , I hope the relevant decisions will be taken in September - and I am sure by October .
The final decisions on those strategies will be published at the latest in October .
It is possible that we could reach the decisions in September .
A question was asked about how to link the policies of the ECB to the policies of the NCBs .
That monetary policy has to be a euro area-wide policy is certainly true .
The linkage between policies of the ECB and the NCBs provides no problem .
Monetary policy will be decided by the Governing Council of the European System of Central Banks .
So , at a centralised level , the execution of the decisions to be taken will - not entirely , but to a very large extent - be left to the national central banks but under the close and watchful eye and guidance of the ECB .
There coordination seems to me to pose no problem at all .
It is certainly true that the monetary policy has to be a euro-area wide monetary policy .
I always say that regional monetary policy does not exist and that when there are regionally differentiated economic developments this places a heavier burden on other policy instruments like fiscal policy , wage policy and economic financial policies other than monetary policy .
Various questions were asked about democratic accountability and credibility .
My answer is ' Yes ' , we need credibility ; we need confidence .
And I say to Mr Donnelly and Mrs Randzio-Plath that we will not get that for nothing .
We will have to earn them and it may take some time .
But it will require as open and as transparently functioning s system of European Central Banks as is responsible and possible .
It means that , as far as we are concerned , there will be an intensive and open dialogue with the European Parliament .
There will be extensive publication of policies and of the considerations underlying policies and decisions .
In reply to a question by Mr Donnelly , I am sure he understands why we do not want to disclose the precise voting relations inside the Governing Council , for by now very well understood reasons .
But , on the other hand , whenever decisions - either strategic decisions or specific monetary policy decisions - are taken , they will be published and will have to be published as soon as possible after the decision has been taken ; they will be accompanied by as extensive an explanation as possible .
Considerations underlying those decisions will be published .
We may even go so far as to give some insight into the pros and cons of the various considerations and an explanation of the ultimate decision taken .
At any rate it will be as extensive as possible .
In short , we are all set to publish and to be open .
Mr Metten , Mr Herman and others asked about the outside presentation of monetary union .
That is still very much a matter which is under consideration and negotiation .
It is a difficult matter .
We feel that the ECB has to be present at the IMF and the OECD .
The relationship with the European Commission , the G10 and the G7 - that is all in preparation and so far , so good .
In fact I have already been invited and have attended , for the first time , the monthly meetings of the governors of the G10 central banks and in future I will be there every month .
On the G7 , I understand it is the intention to invite me there as well .
With the IMF , we are currently talking to find a form for an adequate representation of the European System of Central Banks at the IMF , which is complicated by the fact that membership of the IMF is restricted to countries , to sovereign governments .
No central bank is a member of the IMF , so we will have to find a way , and we will find a way , to ensure that this important monetary institution is nevertheless heard inside the IMF .
Work on that is making progress .
On representation in the Economic and Finance Committee : the Economic and Finance Committee is the successor to the present Monetary Committee - a monetary committee which consists of the representatives at the highest level of the 15 ministries of finance and representatives of 15 central banks .
In future the Economic and Finance Committee will , in addition to those representatives , also have two representatives from the ECB .
So , in that respect , we gain and do not lose by being present there .
At the moment we are present in the Monetary Committee as an observer with observer status .
In future we will be a full member of the Economic and Finance Committee and it has been agreed informally that when monetary matters are on the agenda and are being discussed in the Economic and Finance Committee , representatives of the national central banks will , to put it quite bluntly , keep their mouths shut and the representatives of the ECB will be the spokesmen for the common monetary policy as it will develop in the future .
On analysis of the impact on monetary union of the financial crisis in Asia and Russia , I beg forgiveness but we are not yet operational as a European Central Bank and , therefore , although we have watched and monitored closely the developments there and the impact it has on economic developments in Europe , we do not yet have the authority to do anything about it .
Let me add that so far it has been , to my mind at least , different from all other liquidity crises which have occurred in the past .
I am thinking of the first Mexican debt crisis , the second Latin American debt crisis and other liquidity crises in the past decades .
They always had the impact of creating tension and havoc inside the European exchange rate mechanism .
This time , the crisis has had no impact whatsoever : there has been no tension and no need for interventions inside Europe , which I feel is significant .
I note with satisfaction that the pre-announcement of the bilateral rates to be used for conversion by the end of this year has indeed been credible , as it was intended to be .
The markets believe it , as can be seen from the fact that the liquidity crises elsewhere in the world have had no impact whatsoever on the internal exchange rate relationships in Europe .
To date , Russia and Asia have had some , but - I am inclined to say - remarkably little impact on economic developments inside Europe .
I had a few questions on banknotes .
One obvious question is what is being done to cater for the visually impaired .
After we have completed extensive consultations with the European Association of Organisations of the Blind and People with Impaired Vision , a number of decisions will have to be taken specifically for their benefit .
First of all , the seven euro banknotes will be of different sizes .
That is the first way in which the blind can tell what they have in their hands .
Secondly , the numerals on the banknotes will be ' feelable ' : they will be embossed . The blind will be able to ' feel ' what they have in their hands .
In addition , to help those who are not entirely blind , but visually impaired , it has been decided that the colours of the seven banknotes will be very different indeed and easily recognisable even for those who have only very partial sight .
Is my salary a State secret ?
Some questions have been asked about that .
No , it is not a State secret .
I must confess that I do even exactly know what my salary is .
In general , although the figures are not references , the system is such that the salary of a member of the Executive Board of the ECB is about 10 % higher than the highest Director-General 's salary at the European Commission .
The salary of the Vice-President is 20 % higher .
My salary as President is 40 % higher than the salary of an Executive Director .
That is the approximate salary structure .
In addition , contrary to what some in Europe seem to believe , we pay European tax on it , which makes my marginal tax rate - if you want to know the details - 45 % .
My average tax rate is about 33 % .
I cannot say anything more .
I am taxed like all other European officials .
As far as I can see , I have given exhaustive answers to all those questions .
Is it a wise decision to have the banknotes printed by ten printing works ?
I think it was a wise decision to have it done that way .
It took account of factors like employment in the various countries , with all the existing printing facilities that they have .
If you were to ask me if it was the most efficient decision that could have been taken , then the answer would be ' no ' .
To centralise printing would have been more efficient but it would not have been such a wise decision .
So it has been decided to print banknotes in accordance with the subsidiarity principle .
Every national central bank may decide when , where and how much will be produced .
As I indicated in my introductory statement , some central banks might voluntarily enter into pooling arrangements whereby each bank would take a share of the work .
The debate is closed .
The vote will be taken tomorrow at 12 noon .
Marketing of fertilizers containing cadmium
The next item is the report ( A4-0254 / 98 ) by Mrs Hautala , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy , on the proposal for a European Parliament and Council Directive amending Directive 76 / 116 / EEC on the approximation of the laws of the Member States relating to fertilizers , as regards the marketing in Austria , Finland and Sweden of fertilizers containing cadmium ( COM ( 98 ) 0044 - C4-0109 / 98-98 / 0026 ( COD ) ) .
Mr President , the time has come to recall the promises the European Union made to its newest Member States , Austria , Finland and Sweden , when they joined the Union almost four years ago .
These countries were promised they could keep to their strict environmental standards for the duration of a transitional period that would be four years in length .
It expires at the end of this year .
During this time , the EU intended to do all it could to raise its own environmental standards to the same level the newest Member States enjoyed .
The idea was that the whole European Union area would acquire a high level of environmental protection .
This report on cadmium might sound pretty trivial but it has very far-reaching political significance .
Actually , I am convinced that the citizens of Austria , Finland and Sweden will be watching very carefully to see whether the EU is actually capable of keeping to its promise of high standards for the protection of the environment and public health .
By the way , it was finally agreed today in the part-session that the right of Finland , Sweden and Austria to keep to its strict standards would be supported .
So , just what is the position today , when the termination of the transition period is just a few months away ?
One of the most important derogations was the cadmium content limit in fertilizers .
Cadmium is a notoriously poisonous heavy metal that disturbs microorganisms in the earth , making it difficult for plants to grow .
It builds up in animals , but it also accumulates in humans .
There is often a lot of cadmium in the raw material that is used to make phosphate fertilizers , especially if it comes from certain countries in Africa .
The European Commission has given economic support to phosphateproducing countries in Africa to develop a technology for industry to be able to remove cadmium from the raw material in phosphate fertilizers .
Now it is important that this research and development work be speeded up on both sides .
On the other hand , in some regions , the cadmium content of the raw material for phosphate fertilizers is not so great .
Such regions include , for example , Finland and the Kola Peninsula in Russia .
My conclusion is that the Commission and the Member States have wasted these four years of transition time in dilly-dallying over the production of a risk assessment study which is needed to come to any conclusion on whether regulations should be introduced at Union level on the cadmium content of fertilizers .
In fact , there is reliable data coming from these newest Member States that limits for cadmium are very strongly justified from the point of view of health and the environment , though not enough information has been had from older Member States .
As rapporteur of the Commission 's proposal , I think that the Commission has definitely taken the right step .
It in fact proposes that a new transition period of three years be granted to Finland , Sweden and Austria , so the time for the EU level risk assessment study can be extended accordingly .
However , I am of the opinion that the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy has accepted the view that the Commission and the Member States should be rather more determined in their purpose .
A derogation being allowed to exist indefinitely in this way is out of the question , and environmental and health factors , on the one hand , and an unhampered single market , on the other , demand that there should be an agreement now that any possible or necessary amendments to legislation be approved during this new three-year term .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , what the rapporteur has said is true , that the cadmium contained in phosphate fertilizers , a poison that destroys microorganisms , has been found in Finland , Sweden and Austria , to be harmful to humans and the environment .
The EU directive on fertilizers does not , however , stipulate limits for cadmium content , and that is the problem .
We know , in a general sense , that the cadmium content of phosphate fertilizers is harmful .
Cadmium must in future be classified as a harmful substance , and its limit values must be specified precisely in a new directive .
Producer countries , especially Morocco , must renounce their apathy and commit themselves to developing methods of ridding phosphate fertilizers of cadmium .
That is in the interest of producer countries .
Community aid must continue to go particularly to producer countries in the African continent which are vitally important producers of the raw material for the EU internal market , and for whom the EU is the largest market in the world .
Here in the EU we must press ahead and produce a risk assessment study on cadmium in fertilizers .
Our objectives are foodstuffs as free of impurities as possible in this allergy-troubled Union , and our principle should obviously be that our earth , our timber and our people should all remain toxin-free .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , when Austria , Sweden and Finland joined in 1995 , the European Union committed itself to a more careful consideration of ecological aspects than before .
This is of enormous importance for the economic framework conditions , because only an even playing field permits equal competitive capability .
Thus , we agreed in general then that the more stringent Austrian environmental standards would provisionally continue to apply generally for four more years .
At the same time , a monitoring process was established at Union level .
The objective was to adapt environmental standards , if necessary , to the higher national standards .
These agreements were and still are considered a great environmental policy success both for the new Member States and for the environmental situation in the European Union .
Since then , we have achieved the first success with the benzene content of petrol .
The limit value has been drastically reduced .
In the case of the sulphur content of heating oil , the Austrian limit values have likewise been retained and also the development in the cadmium limits in fertilizers is thoroughly positive , because the limit values not only of Austria , but also of Sweden and Finland , have been extended to the year 2002 on the basis that an objective study is to determine whether cadmium from the soil really can be transferred into the human bloodstream .
If this should be proven , the limit value situation in the European Union is clear .
Currently we still do not have sufficient information about the risks posed by cadmium .
We want an objective analysis of the effects in this area .
Mr President , congratulations to my colleague , Mrs Hautala , for her excellent report .
The Commission 's proposal is to extend the right of Finland , Sweden and Austria , to be exempt from the requirements of the directive on cadmium in accordance with their Acts of Accession .
The Commission has promised to decide on a risk assessment study for the whole of the EU area .
In addition , the Commission must endeavour to develop methods to rid raw materials for fertilizers imported into the EU of cadmium .
According to information I have received from laboratories , it is already possible to remove cadmium from phosphate fertilizers .
A process has been discovered .
Now it just needs to be put into practice .
Cadmium accumulates in the soil and is dangerous to humans .
According to certain studies in EU Member States , the soil 's cadmium content is already very high .
That is why ridding fertilizers of cadmium is especially important .
In Finland , selenium has been added to fertilizers in greater quantities since 1984 : formerly , six grammes per kilo of fertilizer , and , since last April , 10 grammes per kilo .
We have been monitoring the use of selenium for years .
According to these studies , the supply of selenium to domestic animals and the general population has declined .
For this reason , 10 grammes of selenium , rather than just six , are now being added to selenium fertilizers .
Studies show that the increase in selenium has had an excellent effect on the state of the health of domestic animals and the population .
The EU as a whole would do well to follow this example .
I urge the Commission , while undertaking its research , to invest also in an appraisal of the effects of selenium added to mixed fertilizers , so that we can improve the health of the whole of the EU population and its livestock .
Finally , I would like to state that tighter standards to promote human and animal health cannot be allowed to seen as hindrances to business ; the EU has to find a place for them .
Mr President , at the time of the accession negotiations , Austria , Finland and Sweden obtained permission to retain environmental standards which were more demanding than Community legislation , particularly for the cadmium content of phosphorus fertilizers .
In fact , through the Commission we finally committed ourselves to an upward harmonization of standards .
Yet to this day , nothing has been done , whilst the harmful nature of the substances in question appears scientifically proven .
The Commission contents itself with granting a derogation to those states which are most advanced in the area .
However , public health and environmental protection are not subsidiary questions ; I think that current affairs ensure we are reminded of this every day .
For once , it is for Community legislation to align itself with the most demanding in order to remain credible .
This issue , which appears to be largely technical , in fact assumes a major political dimension , above all , in the context of enlargement to include the CEECs .
We must not give false political signals to candidate states and whilst derogations admittedly serve as a way of catching up with the most demanding policies , they must not prevent the most ambitious from continuing to progress .
The derogation , the principle of derogation , must not be perpetuated for ever .
We must fulfil our commitments and it is in this spirit that we support the report and the amendment by Mrs Hautala , whom we congratulate most sincerely for her extremely clear work .
Mr President , those who participated in the discussion have already described the starting position adequately .
We are facing a particular situation , as the three new Member States had special standards which we have continued to maintain with the obligation to check whether there can be a Community regulation that adopts either these or other standards .
It was clear from the start that the Community regulation was to originate from scientifically founded data .
It is incorrect to say , as the last speaker did , that the Commission has done nothing .
We have carried out a study of this problem , and it produced insufficient data for a Europe-wide raising of standards .
This means that at the moment we are in a position in which the concerns that we share with Parliament - Mr Rübig is absolutely right in this respect - cannot result in a legislative measure because we do not have sufficient scientific data .
That is the whole problem , as far as the Commission 's actions are concerned .
In many other cases it may be perfectly correct to criticize the Commission , but in this case it is completely unjustified .
What can be done ?
In conjunction with the Member States , we have commissioned a new study in order to obtain better data which will then permit us to take the appropriate legislative measures .
This data , however , if it is to be reasonable and reliable , cannot be available before the year 2000 because some of the possible consequences necessitate a certain period of observation .
Because of this , we must wait until 2000 , and that obliges us now to propose an extension of these derogations because otherwise the three new Member States would be in an area without rights , which cannot be the intention of the entire process .
At the same time , however , we cannot accept what Mrs Hautala proposes , because if we now - before the expert opinion , so to speak - wanted to introduce common standards , then we would completely undermine this scientific process .
There is no point in commissioning a scientific study in order to obtain grounds for standards , and at the same time saying that we are going to adopt this standard anyway .
That is not a form of legislation that I can justify , Mrs Hautala , and therefore I ask Parliament to accept our proposal , which even the rapporteur does not reject .
If you do not want to extend the derogation , if we cannot resolve this now , then we will , as far as the three new countries are concerned , exist in a very uncertain legal framework which cannot be in the interests of those involved .
I only mean this part .
We cannot accept the other part - as I have already said - as we cannot commission a scientific study while stating in advance that we will do what we think is right now , regardless of the findings .
That is our situation and that is why I ask Parliament to play its part so that we can extend these derogations , so that we at least have today 's legal status .
Mr President , I would only like to make it clear that this report fully approves the extra new three-year period .
I wish Mr Bangemann would listen ; you obviously have a headphone .
The basic line is approved , but this derogation cannot be allowed to continue to be open-ended in this way ; should it not end some time ?
As you yourself say , you will have a decision on this risk assessment study by the year 2000 , which is absolutely right .
I have to make it clear that the Commission has done its bit , but old Member States have dragged their heels , so this proposal by Parliament is totally realistic and feasible for all parties concerned .
Thank you , Mrs Hautala .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12.00 noon .
Motor vehicles for the transport of certain animals
The next item is the report ( A4-0253 / 98 ) by Mrs Hautala , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy , on the proposal for a European Parliament and Council Directive relating to motor vehicles and their trailers - transporting certain animals and amending directive 70 / 156 / EEC in respect of the type-approval of motor vehicles and their trailers ( COM ( 97 ) 0336 - C4-0339 / 97-97 / 0190 ( COD ) ) .
Mr President , the proposal for a directive that we are now debating , is a certification system for vehicles to be used for the transportation of certain animals .
These standards apply to animal transportation loads of under eight tonnes .
Under this directive it will become possible for the manufacturers of vehicles to choose a certified system in the internal market for the whole of the Union , one that will fulfil certain technical requirements .
It is a matter of a joint decision , as the aim here is a better internal market for these vehicles .
In fact , many decisions on animal welfare taken in this Parliament are , properly speaking , outside the jurisdiction of Parliament , as the issue is mainly the application of the common agricultural policy .
On that , Parliament mainly gives an opinion and then the Council does whatever it does and often then does a bit of horse trading , because one demands unanimity .
But this time , and I think it may even be the first time , Parliament will have the opportunity to affect the issue of animal welfare to the extent that it will be the legislating party .
Because of that , it is very important for Parliament now to use this opportunity to the best advantage .
Very many Members continually receive communications from constituents who are appalled and enraged at how animals are treated during transportation .
Now we have a chance to improve things .
It is obviously not a matter of being able to solve problems of animal welfare with technology , but this can have a very important part to play .
Why should we not take advantage of modern techniques and facilities when new vehicles start to be manufactured ?
This will mean causing as little suffering to animals as possible while they are being transported .
Actually , it is likely that demands for animal welfare will become more stringent in the future , certainly not slacker .
That is precisely why it is very important that technical factors that improve the protection of animals are taken into full consideration when manufacturing these vehicles in the future .
Apart from anything else , this is also the most economically sound option .
All the proposals contained in the report are fully capable of being achieved with modern materials and technology , and that goes for gentler sloping ramps too .
There has been some discussion on them in Parliament , but the manufacturers have said that such things are possible and that the strain factor is reasonable .
I wish , moreover , to say that animal welfare is also a matter of economics , because if animals fare badly while being transported , the result is poor quality meat , whereas the quality of meat can be improved by means of technical features on vehicles , with the consequent economic benefits .
The issue of the ramps is a vital one .
The Commission suggests that their angle of inclination should be 25 degrees , but animal welfare studies show that it ought not to be more than 20 degrees .
It is obviously a matter of loading / unloading and sawdust at the start and end of transportation .
We should mention as a separate matter that pigs , which in many ways are like people and are very sensitive and intelligent animals , are extremely sensitive to loading arrangements and sawdust .
For that reason , the report contains the proposal by Mrs Anttila , the draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , that there should be lift apparatus on vehicles used for the transportation of pigs .
It is very important that Parliament does not now waste this opportunity to improve future vehicle models for the transportation of animals , to take account of animal welfare .
Better planning as well as the surveillance of transportation are very important and , for this reason , we propose that these vehicles should be checked at three-yearly intervals .
Naturally , the behaviour of drivers also affects the welfare of animals , but the technical factors can by no means be underestimated .
Mr President , congratulations to my colleague , Mrs Hautala , on a very well-informed report .
I am extremely satisfied with the report 's amendments , the implementation of which would mean less stress for animals while being loaded onto vehicles and during transportation .
Stress during transportation has a direct effect on the quality of meat , as Mrs Hautala stated .
Conditions for transportation differ widely in the EU area , owing , for example , to differences in climate .
In the north it is freezing cold , and in the south it is too hot .
Both conditions must be taken into consideration when fitting out vehicles .
I am very glad that the report includes mention of an obligatory loading lift for sheep and pigs , which I had already proposed to the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development .
When we produce directives in the 21st century , our aims must be progressive .
There is a clear gap in the directive between the technical and material requirements of equipment for transporting animals , on the one hand , and requirements for use and proper use of equipment , on the other .
Requirements for equipment and its use go hand in hand .
A mere requirement for correct use does not guarantee the welfare of the animals .
Nor does high-tech equipment with all mod-cons guarantee the animals ' welfare during transportation , if the use of the vehicle and the actions of the driver are inappropriate .
That is why I think it is important that the authorities in Member States are given sufficient powers to monitor transportation .
The next goal must be to extend these requirements now under discussion to cover equipment already being used over a given period of transition .
When that transitional period has lapsed , the equipment should fulfil the requirements of the directive , at least as far as the important , central issue of animal welfare is concerned .
The Commission 's proposal mentions that the date of the next check due should be displayed on the vehicle 's registration plate .
There is no mention , though , of the time that has elapsed between checks .
That has to be put right ; ideally , checks should be carried out every three years .
Animal transportation in the EU has attracted a lot of negative publicity , which does not benefit anyone .
As the regulations for transportation have now been reviewed and when vehicle equipment gets put right , we will have the requirements we need for a much improved system for the transportation of animals .
Mr President , road transport of cattle has long been a thorn in the side of many people and the main cause of this is the offence caused by the shocking pictures which all of us have seen of the transport of animals over what are certainly large distances .
Today we debate the type-approval of vehicles designed for animal transport whilst recalling these pictures .
It speaks for itself , therefore , that the European Parliament places great demands on the type-approval , because we no longer wish to see such abuse , where animals being transported not only suffer from temperatures which are much too high , but also from lack of water and food .
We are convinced that civilised society is harmed when animals are not treated civilly , even when this concerns animals for slaughter .
The Committee on Transport and Tourism agrees with the European Commission that different equipment must be present on board for different types of cattle ; but this is not sufficiently detailed in the proposal .
My committee has therefore submitted detailed proposals to ensure that animals cannot fall from trucks or loading bridges and that they are prevented from injuring themselves when they are moved from one level to another .
But the greatest problem is that the Commission omits a number of matters , because it is of the opinion that these must be included in a directive relating to the use of the vehicles , rather than in the type-approval .
But let me tell you that it makes no difference to cattle in which directive it is included .
The distinction between equipment and use is a curious one , because the equipment determines to a large extent how a vehicle can be used .
The Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy has adopted a great deal of the Committee on Transport and Tourism 's proposals and I would therefore like to thank Mrs Hautala for her efforts .
I hope , therefore , that they will stand up not only at first reading but also at second reading , and that we will be able to convince the Commission and the Council , if need be , in the very last round .
Mr President , I would like to thank the rapporteur for an excellent report .
Over recent years Europe has been outraged by this barbarous treatment of animals for slaughter .
Transportation takes place today in Union Member States , and especially outside the Union , in conditions we can at times imagine to be frightful and totally inhumane .
And to a large extent it will continue .
I have myself slaughtered animals and been employed in the transportation of animals , so I do know a bit about the subject .
Transporting animals to be slaughtered over long distances to countries outside the Union - if this seems a risible topic , you would do well to listen carefully - is absolutely intolerable both from a humane and economic point of view .
We must give due consideration to inhumane conditions for animals for slaughter , as it goes on with the support of the Union .
We have in this way issued a permanent licence to torture animals .
This directive on vehicles which is being prepared is an interim measure but it goes in the right direction .
We have to give consideration to loading and unloading as has been stated .
Loading is the greatest cause of stress and who would not get furious at the fact that animals are dying while being loaded ?
Loading stress can be avoided with simple lifting equipment , as has been mentioned .
While drafting the directive , we have to take into consideration the need , too , to take account of internal differences within the Union , like those that exist between the North and the South .
In Finland , we have done a great deal in this area . But within the Union , we have to have a more active system of monitoring .
Ladies and gentlemen in the front row , it would be important to put an end to the transportation of live animals for slaughter across the continent .
Meat is not affected by travel .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , my group welcomes positively the objectives and provisions in this draft directive which is a considerable improvement on the existing measures .
But an improvement also means an increase in costs , for you never get something for nothing .
This is why , although we accept the strengthening of certain constraints which the rapporteur proposes , we are far from agreeing with her on all issues , especially when it comes to an important legislative principle , the principle of proportionality .
The images which have given rise to compassion and anger or indignation on the part of many of our citizens correspond to realities which must be abolished , but which have nothing to do with some of the measures proposed , in particular with regard to the problem of loading ramps .
If Mr Ilaskivi is an expert in the field then I , too , can argue that I am an expert in the area of loading and unloading animals .
When I was younger , I loaded and unloaded hundreds and hundreds of pigs and heads of cattle .
So I know what a ramp is .
The ramps used to date had between a 30- and 40º incline .
I would like to be able to demonstrate for you the difference between a ramp at 25- and a ramp at 20º .
You would be extremely surprised and should not underestimate the animals ' skill in surmounting an obstacle of this nature .
I have experience of this and I can tell you that , in this instance , the cost is excessive .
Mrs Hautala affirms that it is technically feasible .
Admittedly , you could transport all animals in air-conditioned buses with couchettes ; it is technically feasible .
It is a question of assessing the relationship between welfare and cost , and in this respect , the rapporteur goes too far .
A ramp at 20º raises considerable problems and should , in particular , be flexible so that it can fold , which is obviously extremely expensive .
This is why our group cannot support the rapporteur 's excessive proposals , but we are the first in line to support , enthusiastically , those which are reasonable .
Mr President , my first reaction to Mrs Hautala 's report is to ask why the Committee on Economic Affairs and Industrial Policy was given the task of dealing with a subject that belongs more appropriately , in my opinion , to the Committee on Agriculture and to the Committee on Transport and Tourism .
How the subject of the welfare of animals during transport can be seen as more relevant to economic and monetary policy than to agricultural policy or transport policy is beyond me .
I suppose the fact that the opinions of these committees are sought is some consolation , but in a general way this decision needs some sort of explanation .
However , ' inexplicable ' is becoming more and more the norm in this House .
Regarding the subject of the report - the safe and humane transport of animals - we all accept without hesitation that this is a fundamental requirement .
But once again we are going way overboard on this matter which has been adequately dealt with in the Commission 's own proposals .
In the Member States there already exist the most stringent systems of checking on animals for transport , particularly those on long-haul journeys , and rightly so .
The modes of transportation are likewise , in my opinion , of the highest quality and standards .
They simply have to be if animals are to arrive at their final destination in good condition - acceptable to the final recipient .
In the agricultural industry , as in any other , farmers and livestock dealers have very large vested interests in presenting their product in prime condition in order to command the best possible price .
If we are intent on imposing further layers of procedure , if we insist on a whole range of modifications to animal transport , we will stretch the system to breaking point in terms of increased costs and reduced efficiency .
The cost of such procedures will of course be borne only by two groups : farmers and consumers .
We are back on a typical Green agenda , Mr President , the same old story : no matter what you give them they want more and more .
But the high-rise flat occupants of the Greens know very little about the reality of farming today and have learned very little .
Mr President , the recent incidents of poor treatment of animals during transport , particularly by East European countries , have evoked a strong emotional reaction from the public .
Therefore , the proposal that we are debating must be an answer to this public and not to the Greens .
Generally speaking , already on 2 October 1997 , the European Parliament defined the conditions in which live animals should be transported , emphasizing , in particular , that they should not travel more than eight hours and stating in more general terms that the transport should be limited to the closest place possible for slaughtering .
It is clearly in this perspective that the general debate on transport should be held .
With this proposal for a directive , we only deal with the characteristics of the vehicles .
But from this point of view as well we must say that the proposal has its limits , particularly its optional nature and the fact that only new vehicles are covered , that is , those registered after 1 May 1999 .
Furthermore , there are various aspects already highlighted in previous speeches where improvement is needed , ranging from the slope of the ramps to the need for hydraulic lifting platforms to transport pigs , from the amount of room above the heads of the animals to the problem of temperature and the animals ' reaction to it .
It is therefore clear that we are talking about a proposal for which we are asking that not only the text of the report but also all the amendments be approved .
However , we emphasize the fact that in this type of proposal no reference is made whatsoever to poultry , and hens , in particular .
Mr President , unlike Mr Herman I am not an expert on loading animals on to vehicles but I am expert on watching it happening , because I live in the kind of area where millions of animals are constantly having to travel very long distances .
My area has 90 islands , and one can imagine some of the stress involved in getting the animals from the islands to the mainland , and thence on further long journeys .
Both Parliament and the Commission have shown concern .
There is the eight-hour rule and the recommendation mentioned by the last speaker that animals be slaughtered as close as possible to their place of origin .
I would really like to seize this opportunity to ask the Commissioner whether he feels that there is too much laxity about monitoring .
A lot of the criticisms from the public relate to cattle coming from outside the European Union into the European Union .
I wish to know what on earth we can say to satisfy our public critics , because - sadly , perhaps -the fattest file a constituency MP gets is about the welfare of animals .
I wish to support all the amendments on the ramp and the pigs , because I have watched the horror of trying to get pigs into a lorry .
The poor driver knows he has only eight hours but an hour is taken up with loading the pigs , so we really should look at the matter of the loading lift .
Mr President , to consider the welfare of live animals during their transportation is a commendable objective , and there is nothing worthy in this .
Moreover , you get out of it what you put in .
The field of animal production as a whole has every interest in respecting animals during their transportation , for everyone knows that the market value of an animal is greatly reduced if its transportation conditions are poor .
We therefore agree with this respect for transport conditions , provided , however , that they are applied everywhere , and include trade with third countries , both imports - from the point of departure - and exports , and that they can be implemented and are useful .
By way of example , what is the use of having strict guidelines for the manufacture of new vehicles if the way they are used is not in line with the principles of respect for animal welfare ?
We also know that the climate varies substantially between the Mediterranean and the Nordic regions .
Why , then , have the same manufacturing standards ?
Finally , farmers themselves also use specific vehicles for transporting their animals , either to take them to market within a very limited radius or simply to take them to grass elsewhere .
In this respect , too , we must be careful not to create useless additional costs for farmers .
Consequently , we are opposed to all amendments aimed at increasing the costs for farmers and for companies in this line of business . On the other hand , we ask that , within the WTO agreements , international trade as a whole should take account of international transport standards .
Mrs Hautala 's report is extremely technical , but as with all type-approvals , consideration has to be given to the purpose , which in this case is the transportation of animals .
I think the report does justice to that .
Since 1994 , parliamentary chairmen have been receiving petitions bearing millions of signatures regarding animal welfare in general , and transportation in particular .
Regulations and directives have not done much to improve the welfare of animals in transit .
The 1995 directive and the 1998 regulation both indicate that there is a need to establish requirements for the methods of transport used for animals .
That is what we are addressing today .
Joint decision-making therefore amounts to the most important technical step as regards securing genuine progress .
That is difficult .
Major differences exist between Member States .
But we will get there .
Many decisions and statements have come and gone , but what we have here is something concrete .
This directive gives us the basis for improving animal welfare during transportation , but farmers and abattoirs in Member States will have to ensure and check that future transportation - including the means of transport - will be monitored .
Other committees and Commissioners , and , of course , the Council , will be seeing to that .
What is the good of creating optimum conditions in the abattoirs when the animals are traumatized on the way ?
The transportation of live animals , whether for slaughtering purposes or for further breeding , is not desirable , but it is nevertheless a fact .
That prompts me to mention that even though we are improving animal welfare , the spread of infection is still increasing .
That has nothing to do with today 's topic ; rather , it has to do with the way vehicles should be cleaned .
There is good reason to contemplate what ought to be done from here on .
There is good reason to put a damper on trans-European animal transportation , but other than that , I support Mrs Hautala 's report , and I hope the Commission and the Council will be able to come up with something sensible .
Mr President , Commissioner , the Hautala report addresses the technical fittings of vehicles for animal transportation .
We have heard repeatedly what a sensitive subject this business of transporting animals for slaughter is , whether we are dealing with horses , pigs , cattle or sheep , because naturally enough , the films record only those aspects that are not alright .
Things that are alright , however , are not shown .
We must not tar everyone with the same brush .
There are decent hauliers as well .
There must be no repeat of these events .
That would be out of the question .
We have just recently adopted the van Dijk report , and straight away we are astonished to find animal welfare popping up in a different committee every time .
This is not very impressive .
We should leave animal welfare where it belongs , in the areas of agriculture and transport .
Taking the kind of trouble we do with this , we should really know where it will appear next .
The rapporteur has gone to a lot of trouble , and the committees have done some excellent work .
However , I would like to make it clear - and as a farmer , I know what I am talking about - that the use of hydraulic loading ramps in the transportation of pigs is not the last word in wisdom .
Mrs van Dijk demanded in her recent report that piglets of up to 30kg should be loaded using a hydraulic loading ramp .
That is fine .
Now Mrs Hautala is saying all pigs should be loaded using hydraulic loading ramps .
Let me tell you this : my farm has a loading ramp the height of the lorry .
That is critical , because then the animals just go into the lorry at ground level .
When we buy animals , they leave the lorry at ground level as well .
Forget your hydraulic loading ramps !
This is the best way because it is what the animals are used to .
It is about people , not vehicles .
People need to handle the animals in such a way that the animals sense they are being treated properly .
For large numbers of animals , we must demand loading ramps that exactly match the height of the lorries .
There is a standard for them , and it works .
We cannot expect small-scale farmers to fit a hydraulic loading ramp onto their vehicles for driving their animals to the market ; they would have to quit altogether rather than go out and buy one of those .
So there is really no point .
Let me emphasize the following once again : we must improve the implementation and monitoring of animal welfare provisions in Member States .
I am not pointing the finger at the Commission , because it cannot handle this .
It simply does not have the staff .
We have many a time and oft set aside funds in the budget , but the monies have never been paid out because the Council has refused to employ the staff to carry out this monitoring .
This is crucial !
The people handling the animals are crucial to animal welfare , and if they treat them properly , it will work fine .
Mr President , animal welfare is a matter of great importance to me .
In Austria , there is a high level of awareness of the importance of how animals are treated , whether we are talking about utility animals , breeding stock or animals for slaughter .
The Austrian presidency will be taking a greater interest in this topic with a view to improving conditions of transportation of animals throughout Europe .
On the subject of animal transportation , I would like to emphasize the necessity of pan-European regulation .
The European Parliament should stake out the political way ahead and set basic conditions .
However , the European Parliament should not approve any regulations that go into too much technical detail .
As politicians , we are elected to set policy and not to displace experts in other professional fields , for example , veterinarians , technicians , etcetera .
Proper transportation of breeding and utility animals is very important for the wellbeing of animals .
However , the transportation of live animals for slaughter must also be carried out under good conditions , because the quality of the meat depends on this .
As producers , we desire good treatment .
However , after the sale has been concluded , the animal no longer belongs to the farmer ; the buyer becomes responsible .
It is all very well using modern technology , but please also consider that different types of utility animals have different patterns of behaviour .
In my opinion , it would be virtually impossible to load pigs with a hydraulic loading ramp because they never keep still .
As regards the angle of the ramp , I would like to say that in Austria , we have properly aligned fixed ramps .
To me , it is also crucial for the driver and loading personnel to handle the animal calmly .

Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I too have been here almost 10 years and I cannot help thinking about how much we have discussed animal welfare and the amount of paperwork we have created . Sometimes I really feel there is an awful lot of theory here , but precious little practice .
I would say " yes ' to protecting animal welfare , but " no ' to Mrs Hautala 's proposal on hydraulic loading ramps . We are creating the impression that there is just the one kind of mass production .
Plenty of practical questions have already been posed .
What about the small-scale farmer who simply wants to transport his animals from A to B ?
What about the village butcher ; are we not always saying " yes ' to local produce ?
I would like to put that one to the Greens sometime . These are animals from detached houses ; they have been sleeping in straw , and now we are asking for them to be transported through the place on silver platters .
That does not quite fit in with what Mrs Hautala is proposing here .
Commissioner Bangemann , I also have a problem with how this monitoring is supposed to work .
Is there anything we have not made a decision on here ?
Eight-hour transportation , loading and unloading , watering : a lot of this is rather far from actual practice , and for that reason , I would like to suggest here that we should advocate practicable solutions , and you really ought to heed the practical experience of our farming colleagues .
Mr President , getting straight down to your comments , Mrs KeppelhoffWiechert , the whole discussion , or at least two-thirds of it , is neither about the report nor about the problem .
This is not a matter of monitoring the transportation of animals , nor is it about how animals are actually transported ; it is quite plainly about type-approval of vehicles that are subsequently used to transport animals .
That is quite different from what many speakers have been debating here .
It is all very well if Mrs Ewing and others have seen these cruel images and then say this has to be stopped , but that is not the subject of this report .
This report is about our desire to approve vehicles that are suitable in a particular way for a particular type of animal transportation .
That is as far as it goes .
You can put all your comments about monitoring back in your briefcases , because these vehicles will of course be checked to ensure that they are of the appropriate type ; otherwise , they would never be approved .
We do not need any new officials to do that , because we already have technical monitoring bodies and suchlike .
So please do not take this the wrong way , but we would have been finished half an hour ago if we had debated what was , in fact , presented here rather than the completely different problem of how to monitor and implement the transportation of animals .
That is not up for debate here .
Please allow me a further comment .
I always find it somewhat amusing that people who are so interested in animals focus their energies on transport , but the minute an animal is slaughtered , their interest dwindles .
I find this rather odd . An animal has to be treated beautifully , but then it is slaughtered .
I can imagine a stressed-out pig would be able to handle the stress far better if it were not about to be slaughtered at all .
Now for the report itself .
The rapporteur has tabled 24 amendments .
We are able to accept nine of these : Amendments Nos 3 , 4 , 6 , 14 , 17 , 18 , 19 , 20 and 21 .
All these amendments are concerned with very desirable editorial improvements .
To some extent , they also give producers more flexibility , and that constitutes our grounds for accepting these amendments .
We cannot accept the others .
I cannot go into much detail here as to why we cannot , but I will select a few examples .
Firstly , there is type-approval .
I repeat : type-approval has nothing to do with the use of the vehicles or animal welfare as such .
Thus , all the amendments targeted at improved usage or animal welfare as such are out of place in this context .
Naturally , it would be possible - and this would be an example of such an amendment - to change the loading height for one type to something other than what we are proposing here .
However , we have kept to the decisions already made by the Council of Agriculture Ministers , and Directives 91 / 628 and 95 / 29 and one regulation stipulated the heights which we have adopted .
There is no sense in the existing directives using different heights from those found in the directive on type-approval .
People would think we were not quite right in the head if we stipulated two different heights .
We must , therefore , abide by what has already been decided .
Then there is the gradient .
Unlike Fernand Herman , I am not an expert , and I am constantly amazed at all the things he has done in his life so far .
He relates aspects of his own life and experience in every report .
He must have an incredible amount of experience .
We calculated that if the gradient were reduced to 20º , that would mean the loading ramp would have to be too large to allow us to keep the total height of 4 metres .
Mrs Hautala , it is all very well to disagree on a lot of things , but it is very difficult to disagree about mathematics because all it takes is a simple calculation .
Then there can be no differences of opinion .
So , unless we wish to exceed the prescribed limit of 4 metres , we cannot accept this amendment .
As I said , I cannot go into all these amendments one after another .
I hope - and I have to be a little cautious after what the members of the PPE Group have said - that we will be able to agree on a common position which will now mean that we can adopt one of the last regulations on type-approval .
This is not the end of the story , but it is the beginning of the end , and this should ultimately enable us to have the whole matter nicely sewn up .
Mr President , I wish only to tell Mr Bangemann that I have a pretty good knowledge of geometry , and , besides , I studied agriculture at university . But , in any case , have you never heard of the hinge ?
The hinge is quite interesting in itself actually , but after all it is a very simple invention , which can solve this problem of the length of the ramp .
This is actually a very simple technique .
As Mrs Anttila said , we are speaking of new vehicles for the 21st century .
If we are not forward-looking enough now , in two years ' time animal protection groups will be telling us these vehicles are no good for anyone .
Do you think that will be of any benefit to the manufacturers ?
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place at 12.00 noon tomorrow .
( The session was adjourned for five minutes while awaiting the beginning of ' Question Time ' )
Question Time ( Council )
The next item is questions to the Council ( B4-0481 / 98 ) .
First of all , please allow me to welcome Mrs Ferrero-Waldner , President-in-Office of the Council , who is going to be with us for the next six months .
We predict that , as always , there will be an atmosphere of understanding in this Hemicycle , and that our questions are sure to be answered with the accuracy and efficiency of which we know Mrs Ferrero-Waldner is capable .
So let us begin this Question Time in the normal way , peacefully and with the good manners which characterize this Hemicycle .
Question No 1 by Freddy Blak ( H-0607 / 98 )
Subject : The Staff Regulations and discrimination against homosexuals
As they stand , the Communities ' Staff Regulations discriminate against homosexuals and their registered partners .
Homosexual staff have exactly the same duties and obligations as their heterosexual colleagues but do not have the same entitlements .
The Council has an opportunity to end this blatant discrimination when the Staff Regulations are revised .
It ought to listen to the European Parliament , which voted by a big majority to amend the Staff Regulations so as to give homosexual staff and staff cohabiting with , though not married to , partners the same rights as their colleagues .
I am therefore very disappointed to learn that the presidency is asking the Council to revise the Staff Regulations without complying with Parliament 's wish to see an end to the discrimination against homosexual staff and their partners .
Is it really true that the presidency wishes to perpetuate such discrimination ?
Mrs Ferrero-Waldner , I invite you to reply to Mr Blak 's question .
Mr President , Mr Blak , I would like to answer your question concerning the personal status of , and discrimination against homosexuals .
The matter of equal treatment of homosexuals pursuant to the Staff Regulations of European officials was recently discussed in the relevant Council bodies .
In its examination of the proposal for an amendment of regulations governing officials in respect of equal treatment , as tabled by the Commission , the Council has made the following statement on these two aspects .
Firstly , by adopting Regulation No 781 / 98 of 7 April 1998 , amending the Staff Regulations of Officials and Conditions of Employment of Other Servants of the European Communities in respect of equal treatment , the Council has confirmed that the principle of non-discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation applies .
From this point on , Article 1a of the regulation states that , and I quote : " Officials shall be entitled to equal treatment under these Staff Regulations without reference , direct or indirect , to race , political , philosophical or religious beliefs , sex or sexual orientation , without prejudice to the relevant provisions requiring a specific marital status ' .
Secondly , with particular reference to legislative developments in some Member States , in adopting this regulation , the Council has asked the Commission to carry out the necessary studies into the recognition of registered non-marital life partnerships and to table proposals to the Council on this matter on the basis of its findings .
The presidency will ensure that any new proposal is examined as soon as it is submitted to the Council by the Commission .
I would like to begin by welcoming the Council representative .
I must say it has been several years since we have had quite such a charming representative here .
Nevertheless , I am not completely happy with the answer I was given .
We are in the process of amending the regulation , but consideration has still not been given to the fact that there are people of the same sex who wish to live together , and that this should be respected .
Such consideration has not been given .
I would like to put the following question to you : the Swedish government has given official support to a Swedish public servant working for the Council who has taken a case of discrimination against him and his registered partner to the Court of Justice .
What is the stance of the presidency on the arguments put forward by this Swedish official ?
Mr President , Mr Blak , thank you very much for your kind welcome .
I would like to comment further on your supplementary question . With regard to the Swedish proposals and ideas , we are awaiting proposals to be tabled by the Commission , for , without this , the Council cannot have any involvement in the matter .
Perhaps I could just mention briefly once again that the Commission had already tabled a proposal for a regulation to the Council in March 1993 , to amend the Staff Regulations of Officials and Conditions of Employment of Other Servants of the European Communities in respect of equal treatment of men and women .
One objective of this amendment was to have the general principle of equality of men and women written into the texts in question , while a second objective was to include provisions which would enable the bodies in question to eliminate the very real inequalities which adversely affect the opportunities available to women in the areas covered by the regulation .
The Commission gave partial approval to the first amendment of many tabled by the European Parliament in November 1993 allowing for the principle of non-discrimination to be extended to cover sexual orientation .
After extensive consultation , the Commission presented an amended proposal on 3 March 1996 , which was again brought before Parliament for a reading .
The new position of the House reflects the concept that the European Community should take account of the fact that - as you have said - increasing numbers of predominantly young people are now living together without marrying , and that consequently , following the example of the European Monetary Institute , a corresponding change should be made to public service legislation in the Communities .
When the Commission 's proposal was being examined by the relevant Council bodies , the Commission did indicate that it would not be presenting any additional amended proposals to take account of Parliament 's amendments .
In this case , unanimity in the Council was required for the Commission 's proposal to be amended ; the Council is , therefore , waiting for the Commission to table new amendments , which it will then deal with .
I thank the Council for its reply , but I am not satisfied with it .
If I understood the reply correctly , you have now made an exception and said that a new proposal will be made later on with regard to the new cohabitation relationships or registered partnerships which exist in some Member States .
The question then is when this new proposal will come and how this issue is going to be discussed later on .
The Staff Regulations are not changed particularly often . In fact , they are changed very seldom .
Even if , in reality , we know that registered partnerships exist in several of the EU 's Member States , it means that the Council intends to continue to discriminate against employees who come from these countries .
That is quite simply continued discrimination against homosexuals , despite the fact that this type of cohabitation is permitted in the countries where they originally come from .
I would like to have a reply to this .
Mr President , please allow me to refer to this yet again ; perhaps it was not quite clear , so I will emphasize it again . The Council has asked the Commission to carry out a study of this matter , and as soon as the Commission tables its proposals on this , the Council will become involved once again .
Mr President , Madam President-in-Office of the Council , first I should like to congratulate you , as a representative of Austria , on being the first of the new Member States to hold the presidency .
I wish you all success for the presidential term .
Regarding the matter of homosexual and lesbian discrimination , Article 13 in the Amsterdam Treaty prohibits discrimination in respect of sexual orientation , and in this connection it is important also , in accordance with Article 13 , to review the Staff Regulations .
Obviously it would be awfully important for there not to be any discrimination in the Member States either , and in this respect we are looking particularly at Austria 's own laws , now that you hold the presidency .
Your laws as they relate to homosexuals are clearly unsatisfactory .
I would like to ask , in particular , how you intend to go about concretely reviewing staffing legislation using Article 13 as a basis .
Mrs Ojala , allow me to emphasize once again what I have already stated perfectly clearly in response to the main question . By adopting Regulation No 781 / 98 of 7 April 1998 amending the Staff Regulations of Officials and Conditions of Employment of Other Servants of the European Communities in respect of equal treatment , the Council confirmed the applicability of the principle of non-discrimination to equal treatment on the basis of sexual orientation .
I will quote this once again because this is precisely what is at issue here .
Article 1a of the regulation provides that : " Officials shall be entitled to equal treatment under these Staff Regulations without reference , direct or indirect , to race , political , philosophical or religious beliefs , sex or sexual orientation , without prejudice to the relevant provisions requiring a specific marital status ' .
That corresponds exactly to the wording of the Amsterdam Treaty , and consequently , as I have already said , the Commission was asked to carry out studies into the recognition of registered non-marital life partnerships and to table its proposals to the Council .
Question No 2 by Felipe Camisón Asensio ( H-0608 / 98 )
Subject : Overbooking in passenger air transport
Does the Council intend to undertake any new initiative to deal with the problem of the growing number of passengers who are becoming victims of the practice of overbooking at EU airports ?
Mrs Ferrero-Waldner , I invite you to reply to Mr Camisón Asensio 's question .

Mr President , Mr Camisón Asensio , on 30 January 1998 , the Commission tabled a proposal to the Council for a Council Regulation ( EC ) amending Regulation ( EEC ) 295 / 91 establishing common rules for a denied-boarding compensation system in scheduled air transport .
This regulation came into effect in April 1991 , and since that time the Commission has been gathering information on its application .
Considering the most recent developments in the air traffic sector , the amendments proposed by the Commission are aimed , in particular , at increasing the number of instances where passengers are entitled to compensation , as well as adjusting the minimum level of compensation upwards to help keep the practice of over-booking within more reasonable limits .
At that time , the amendments were examined by the relevant Council bodies .
In the meantime , on 18 June this year , the Council concluded that it was necessary to review the present regulation with the objective of raising the minimum payment levels ; the Council asked the Commission to examine how air passengers could become better informed of their rights .
The Council bodies will continue to examine the Commission 's proposals with a view to reaching agreement in the near future .
I too should like to start by welcoming the President-in-Office of the Council with full Parliamentary courtesy .
It comes as no surprise to me at all that the European institutions are very concerned about the growing problem of overbooking , leading to the relevant regulation having been updated during a recent Council meeting , as the President-in-Office of the Council has just said .
However , the great paradox of this issue is that , in most cases , passengers who cannot board their plane are not aware of their rights .
In view of this situation , we have a twofold supplementary question .
When will airlines be forced to display a notice on the desk setting out people 's rights to compensation in cases of overbooking ?
Will the forthcoming regulation ensure that damage sustained through missing connections with other flights receives fair compensation ?
Because , as things stand , that question is up in the air , which is a very appropriate expression when dealing with air transport .

Mr President , Mr Camisón Asensio , please allow me just to state the following and then to give my response to this question .
Firstly , the amendments to Regulation 295 / 91 cover an extension of the area of applicability to all flights . Secondly , they cover the airlines ' " OK ' endorsement on airline tickets , known as the document of passage as well as , thirdly , the level of compensation and , fourthly , compensation in all instances of overbooking .
Regarding information to passengers , allow me to comment that yesterday , I was reading an in-flight magazine myself and came across a really brilliant article explaining this issue to passengers . Generally speaking , however , we cannot of course set a deadline for this , because the Commission would first have to be called upon to examine the options , and that would probably take some time .
The Council actually reached its conclusions , based on the proposal I have just outlined , on 18 June 1998 .
In its conclusions , the Council firstly recognizes that the practical experience of implementation demonstrates the need for a review of the regulation , and secondly , it welcomes the Commission 's proposal to amend the regulation , calls on the Permanent Representatives Committee to continue discussing the Commission 's proposals - this would indicate that matters could be resolved within a relatively short space of time - and challenges the Commission to pursue this specific matter of information .
This process will , therefore , probably not take very long . Competition , too , will make for a better service and will help regulate passenger numbers , because this question is becoming an increasingly important one for all those who travel by air .
The practice of overbooking is openly admitted - they say to passengers like me that all air transport companies do it - and , as has been said , people do not know their rights .
Could I ask the President-in-Office , whom I very much welcome - she has added a lot of colour to this fairly sombre Chamber - whether she believes that these proposals will come into force during the Austrian presidency ?
Mr President , let me first thank my colleague Mrs Ewing for her kind words of welcome .
It is difficult to say at this juncture what will happen .
As you know , the Commission has been called upon to act , but we have not as yet seen any proposals .
It would , therefore , be difficult for me to say to you at this point in time that it will be possible in the course of our presidency , but it is most certainly a matter which shall receive our attention .
Question No 3 by Alexandros Alavanos ( H-0609 / 98 )
Subject : Strict compliance with the Amsterdam Treaty
The President-in-Office of the Council , the UK Foreign Secretary , Mr Robin Cook , committed multiple infringements of the Amsterdam Treaty during his visit to Ankara in attempting to formulate a common position of the " 14 ' - i.e. with the exception of Greece - on political relations between the Union and Turkey in a bid to alter the decisions taken by the Luxembourg European Council concerning Turkey , which only a Summit Meeting can do .




As such action is in breach of Articles J.3 ( 3 ) , J.8 ( 2 ) , J.13 ( 1 ) and J.13 ( 2 ) of the Treaty of Amsterdam , will the Council say what measures it will take to ensure that every presidency of the Council of the European Union complies strictly with the Treaty on European Union ?
Madam President-in-Office of the Council , you have the floor to reply to Mr Alavanos , who is situated behind you .
Mr President , allow me please to elaborate briefly on the question posed by Mr Alavanos , and I would like to ask the Member to note that the Amsterdam Treaty has not yet come into effect and that , therefore , no contraventions of its provisions can possibly apply .
However , the Council is of the opinion that the stance taken by Mr Robin Cook in Ankara was in accordance with the provisions of the Treaty .
The Council therefore sees no reason to act on the Member 's proposal .
Mr President , I wish to thank the President-in-Office .
My question was addressed to Mr Cook , who wanted the time to answer it .
But he did not have the time because of the change in the presidency .
I do not expect the President-in-Office to criticize her colleague ; that would be very difficult .
I would simply like to put a supplementary question to the President-in-Office .
Will the Austrian presidency , in matters of foreign policy , seek the agreement of all 15 Member States , in accordance not only with the Amsterdam Treaty , which will soon be in force , but also with the articles of the previous Treaty , and not the agreement of 13 or 14 Member States ?
Will Austria , as a democratic and sensitive country , seek the agreement of all 15 Member States on matters of foreign policy , and especially on the sensitive issue of Turkey ?
Mr President , allow me to respond to the Member 's question by saying that Austria and the Austrian presidency will go to great lengths to obtain a consensus of 15 .
I can also state that in the difficult matter of Greece and Turkey , as well as the question of Cyprus / Greece / Turkey , we have initially been sounding things out with both Greece and Turkey , and that this is indeed the direction in which things appear to be moving .
Obviously , we are well aware that these are difficult political questions and that we will probably only be able to take a few small steps at a time .
However , this matter is of genuine concern to us .
Perhaps a small-scale presidency from a small-scale state will be able to make more happen - because in reality all interests are focused on working for the European Union .
At any rate , we certainly hope to make a little progress with Greece , Turkey and Cyprus on these very difficult political issues .
Mr President , Mr Marset Campos , I would like to mention the following in connection with your question .
I would refer you to the answers to questions Nos H-0135 / 98 and E-1115 on the situation on the Island of Bioko .
The Council has been following with deep concern the trial of some of the members of the Bubi tribe native to the Island of Bioko . These individuals were accused of belonging to , or supporting , the independence movement , namely the Movimiento de Autodeterminación de la Isla de Bioko , or the MAIB .
On 24 February 1998 , the Council expressed its deep concern to the Ambassador of Equatorial Guinea regarding infringements of human rights following the alleged attack on the town of Luba by the MAIB on 21 January .
Several hundred people were reported to have been arrested and after interrogation at least three people are understood to have died in custody .
The Commission has called on the authorities to investigate and punish those responsible for such infringements of human rights .
The Ambassador stated that the Ministry of the Interior had set up a special commission to receive and investigate complaints regarding infringements of human rights , and that the President had even intervened personally to ensure that no further such acts of violence would go unpunished .
The Ambassador gave further assurances to the effect that those responsible for the attack on 21 January had been identified and would be tried ; all other persons arrested had been released .
At a meeting between the heads of the EU-accredited mission to Equatorial Guinea and President Obiang , which took place in Cameroon in May 1998 , the mission heads expressed the concerns of the European Union with regard to the human rights situation in Equatorial Guinea .
Despite this , on 1 June , a military court passed the death sentence on 15 of the 100 or so accused .
The presidency has recently appealed to the President of Equatorial Guinea on behalf of the Union not to uphold the death sentences .
As far as we are aware , the death sentences have not yet been carried out .
The Council will continue to observe developments in Equatorial Guinea very closely and will take every opportunity to underline the importance it attaches to upholding human rights and democratic principles in that country .
As regards EU development aid , in August 1996 President Obiang requested consultations with the Commission under Article 366a of the Fourth Lomé Convention with the objective of reaching agreement on the resumption of development cooperation .
On his visit to the Commission on 31 October 1997 , President Obiang was received by Commission President Santer and during this meeting he proceeded to explain and defend his programme of democratization .
The Commission made it clear that a gradual resumption of aid would be dependent upon progress in human rights , democratic principles and the rule of law .
I want to thank the Austrian presidency for its kindness and courtesy in answering this question , but I should imagine we have heard the sad news , reported in today 's press , of the death in hospital of one of the people who had been sentenced . They were not actually condemned to death , but this event reveals the inhuman conditions suffered by such people and the systematic violation of human rights which Obiang is imposing on the whole country .
I believe this provokes fears of even more dramatic consequences in the near future , and makes it more difficult for the democratic opposition in Equatorial Guinea to bring about the necessary transition .
So the European Union must act firmly with all the available means so that human rights are respected once again in this part of the world and , moreover , so that forces from outside Africa are not allowed to intervene .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I too have just received the news that the leader of the Movimiento de Autodeterminación de la Isla de Bioko has died in prison , probably as the result of torture inflicted on him .
Let me now say again that the Council will be observing developments in Equatorial Guinea all the more closely and will take every opportunity to point out the high value that must be attached to human rights and democratic principles in that country .
The Council will do everything in its power to avoid any repetition of this in future .
Madam President-in-Office of the Council , I too thank you for your kindness , but unfortunately I have to say that you have not by any means satisfied the expectations of this House or the democratic opposition in Equatorial Guinea as regards the situation we are dealing with .
I understand , of course , that your country , Austria , no doubt views the terrible human rights situation in Equatorial Guinea as remote , but I would suggest for example that you request information from the Spanish government , because they were also the ones who , last autumn , urged President Santer to receive the dictator Teodoro Obiang , who subsequently set up a council of war , which was certainly followed by death sentences and the death , probably from torture , of the Equatorial Guinean leader , Martín Puye .
So , as well as monitoring the situation closely , I would like you to tell me clearly whether you do not think the Council needs to adopt a common position to apply Article 5 of the Lomé Convention to Equatorial Guinea and stop that country participating in that agreement until , of course , it respects minimum democratic principles and human rights .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , let me assure you that we are of course following this difficult situation closely .
Up until now , this information has not been available to us in any detail .
I assume , however , that the Council will be dealing with these developments soon , although we will need more detailed information , and I can assure you that we are keeping a very close watch on affairs , and we will of course be doing everything in our power to improve the situation .
At the present time , I cannot say any more than that , because I cannot , of course , pre-empt the Council and its decisions .
Question no 5 by Allan Macartney ( H-0616 / 98 )
Subject : Commission document on compensatory measures on the abolition of duty-free sales
Will the Council ensure that the Commission 's document outlining possibilities for compensatory measures to the regions most affected by the abolition of Intra-EU duty and tax-free sales after 1999 , as agreed at the May Ecofin Council , is presented to and debated at an Ecofin Council this autumn ?
Mrs Ferrero-Waldner , I invite you to reply to Mr Macartney 's question .
Mr President , Mr Macartney , as a result of consultations at the European Ecofin Council on 19 May 1998 , it became apparent that there was no consensus on the question of calling for a Community-wide study into the effects of the abolition of intra-EU duty-free sales on 30 June 1999 .
In light of the various studies conducted in individual states and comments from the sitting , however , the Commission will - and I would particularly like to draw attention to this - clarify in a working paper exactly what instruments Member States have at their disposal to help absorb the impact of these measures .
I also welcome the Austrian President-in-Office of the Council .
The Austrian presidency has got off to a very good start .
We appreciate your directness in dealing with our questions .
The mystery here is that , at the Council meeting in May , Commissioner Monti promised that there would be measures to alleviate the negative impact of the loss of intra-EU duty-free and tax-free sales .
Since then there seems to have been a rearguard action by certain Commissioners who seem opposed to what he undertook .
What I was looking for was an undertaking from the Council that they will do their best to make sure these measures are forthcoming .
I take it from what the President-in-Office says now that the Council already has this in hand and , in a sense , has taken over the responsibility , in which case I am delighted .
We need to know the impact on areas which are going to suffer , including my own .
Mr President , Mr Macartney , perhaps I failed to express myself clearly .
I did not say that the Council already has a document in hand .
We are awaiting such a document from the Commission , but what we have asked the Commission to clarify is exactly what instruments Member States have at their disposal to help absorb the impact of these measures .
This document is not yet available .
It will also address the question of the content of these measures , but I cannot give an answer to this at the present stage .
Mrs Ferrero-Waldner , this question of compensatory measures on the abolition of duty-free sales is of great interest to this House , which means I have received requests for four supplementary questions .
The Rules of Procedure only allow me to grant two .
So I shall give the floor to Mr Morris and Mr Lindqvist in turn , who made their requests in that order , and I am very sorry but I shall not be able to let either Miss McIntosh or Mr Cushnahan speak , since their requests came later .
Mr Morris has the floor first , for a supplementary question .
I welcome the prospect of compensation , if it is available .
However , in a Community where there are approximately 20 million people unemployed - and since we are faced with the prospect of a further 42 000 people who are employed in the tax-free industry facing unemployment - I should prefer it if the Commission , via the Council , could undertake very serious research to give us the facts as they stand at the present time .
My concern now is that we must know the facts ahead of any action that the Commission and the Council might take in abandoning the tax-free policy .
Mr President , Mr Morris , perhaps I should just say once again that the Member must be well aware that the abolition of duty-free at ports and airports , as well as on ferries and aircraft travelling within the Community , is necessary in order to complete the single market .
In this respect , it has to be emphasized that the abolition of duty-free sales is by no means a new measure .
Those involved in this particular market sector were also granted a five-year transition , which expires in 1999 . This was specifically to enable them to make the necessary adjustments to smooth out the social consequences of the abolition of dutyfree .
The Council is , of course , aware of the fact that the abolition of duty-free in intra-EU ferry and air traffic will lead to employment problems .
The Council therefore eagerly anticipates the results of this study which , as I already mentioned , the Commission will be preparing in the form of a working document on the instruments available to Member States to assist them in dealing with this situation .
Let me stress this again : the Commission is involved and will be presenting this document to us . The latter will of course contain certain facts and figures .
I would like to congratulate Austria on having taken over the Presidency of the Council .
I hope that the question of duty-free is going to have a positive solution .
I come from Sweden where we are very concerned that something should be done ; more than has so far been the case on the part of the Commission and perhaps also on the part of the Council .
In connection with taking the decision on duty-free sales , a promise was made to carry out a proper study of the consequences for the countries which have duty-free and which will suffer a change for the worse , including with regard to employment .
This has not been done .
Now I hear that there is going to be such a working document , which sounds very good .
However , it would be even better if the Council could promise that compensation will be given to the affected countries .
We do not need a study if we can have a good answer on this point .
It would satisfy me .
I am therefore putting this question once again , in order to be able to give a reply to my questioning representatives in Scandinavia .
Mr President , Mr Lindqvist , thank you for your kind words .
On this subject let me repeat that as far as compensatory measures are concerned , I am sure you are aware , Mr Lindqvist , that the Council made this decision unanimously - as I have already explained - and therefore cannot become involved in this matter again .
However , I have also indicated that the Commission has now been asked by the Council to prepare a study on this , that is to say , a working document , and I can only point out that this will make instruments available to Member States , or will advise them as to what instruments are available to them , to help absorb and compensate for the impact of this measure .
Miss McIntosh , supplementary questions are put at the precise moment the main question is announced .
You can ask to speak by raising your hand or by pressing the button .
The President gives the floor in the order the questions are asked , whether by a show of hands or by pressing the button .
It makes no difference .
It is true that the President has a certain amount of discretion in granting the floor if there are a lot of questions from one side of the Hemicycle or the other .
So far , however , I have not had to use my discretion .
Should that need arise , you can rest assured that I would do so with the most absolute - I would even say paranoid - institutional neutrality .
You all know you can ask me for the floor .
The Bureau advises me ; in other words , it is not just one pair of eyes doing all the work , but three , and I try to keep strictly to the chronological order .
I may make a mistake on the odd occasion , but in that case I assure you it is absolutely unintentional .
Mr Watts , do you wish to make a point of order ?
I was just trying to catch your eye for the next question .
Ladies and gentlemen , we are not going to turn this into a competition .
I know the actual starting point is when the next question is announced , and I understand that people get a bit edgy , but please do not be too quick off the mark .
I am going to announce the next question now .
In any case , ladies and gentlemen , allow me to make a little use of the powers invested in me by the Rules of Procedure . In this case , since this question is closely related to the previous one , I am going to take it that Mr Cushnahan and Miss McIntosh have priority .
So I am going to use the authority granted me by the Rules of Procedure in that way , and I hope you will understand .
So without further ado we move on to Question No 6 by Brian Crowley ( H-0714 / 98 )
Subject : Council 's discussions on duty-free
Can the Austrian presidency indicate what plans , if any , it has to hold discussions in the Council of Ministers on the proposal to abolish duty-free in 1999 and all its impact on employment ?
Mrs Ferrero-Waldner , this question is on the same subject .
I do not understand why these two questions were not grouped together .
I was very surprised myself , and asked Parliament 's services why the two questions had not been grouped but I have not had any reply .
Therefore , Mrs Ferrero-Waldner , if you feel it has already been answered , I shall give the floor to Mr Crowley for a supplementary question on the basis of the debate which has already taken place , and I shall then let Mr Cushnahan and Miss McIntosh speak .
Are you happy with that or would you prefer to speak first ?

You have the floor , Mr Crowley .
I want to have an answer from the President-in-Office before I ask my supplementary .
I am dealing specifically with the employment aspects of the matter as opposed to compensatory aid .
Mrs Ferrero-Waldner , you have the floor .
We will take account of that slightly different angle , which must have been why the questions were not grouped together .
I invite you to comply with Mr Crowley 's request and give him an answer .
Mr President , allow me to repeat to the Member what I have already stated .
I was assuming that the questions would be grouped together and that I could then answer both of them at once .
May I state once again that we will endeavour to put instruments into the hands of Member States to help them absorb the impact arising from the loss of certain jobs .
However , I have already said , as Mr Crowley well knows , that provision was made for a five-year transition period expiring in 1999 . This was intended to allow for certain adjustments to be made that would be necessary for smoothing out the social consequences of the abolition of duty-free .
I have nothing further to add to this .
I would like to congratulate the President-in-Office on her first session here in Parliament and thank her for her honesty .
She is the first President-in-Office I have heard say there will inevitably be job losses because of this decision .
I would refer her to the comments of her colleague , the Austrian Foreign Minister , earlier on today in Parliament , when he said that job creation would be the top priority of the presidency and that under the Amsterdam Treaty the EU now had the necessary instruments available via national employment plans in specific and binding areas .
Surely now is the time , under this presidency , to reverse the decision .
The President-in-Office has admitted there will be job losses and also that we can put off this decision until such time as there is harmonisation of taxation - particularly excise duty .
I would like a response on that point .
Mr President , Mr Crowley , thank you for your kind welcome .
In a word , yes .
Our Foreign Minister did address the subject of the job creation programme , which will no doubt figure among the top priorities of the Austrian presidency .
To my mind , it is extremely important for us to enter into the revision process under the auspices of the Vienna European Council and use this to learn from one another .
You are well aware of the great importance attached to best practices .
Just as Austria , for example , can learn about mobility , flexibility and many other specific programmes from other Member States , by the same token , other Member States can learn from us , and here I am thinking of our excellent apprenticeship training scheme , which allows young people of 14 or 15 to start training with a firm or workshop while at the same time continuing to receive school education .
These are just some of the measures available .
I do not want to go on about this , of course , but I would like to put it to you that such measures are important .
Retraining under the umbrella of education would be an important measure , too .
Returning to the original question : the five-year transition period has basically provided the opportunity of operating such a scheme with people who are currently employed in the duty-free sector .
Regarding the general question of the harmonization of taxes - which if I have understood correctly you were also asking about - I must say that our Finance Minister is very concerned about driving this issue forward as soon as the proposals of the Commission have been received .
I would hasten to add , however , that as things are at present the Council will not be facing an easy task here , but at least this is what the Austrian presidency will be trying to achieve .
Naturally , the completion of the single market also means gearing up in terms of employment and competition , and that greatly improves prospects of expanding trade , which is essential if we are to face up to the challenge of globalization .
President-in-Office , let me also join with my colleagues in wishing you and your colleagues a very successful presidency , bearing in mind that this is an historic moment : your country 's first presidency since joining the European Union .
I intend to continue to fight for the retention of duty-free but I am intrigued by part of the response you gave my colleagues and I should like clarification .
Firstly , you talk about a working document .
Will we have this working document before this Parliament before 1 July 1999 ?
Secondly , when you talk about instruments and compensation measures , can I have the assurance of the Austrian presidency that compensation measures will be forthcoming if , unfortunately , this decision does go ahead ; that these compensation measures will be additional to money in existing or future Community support frameworks ; and that countries will not be forced to poach money from other parts of their Community support framework .
Mr President , Mr Cushnahan , allow me to express my thanks to you , too , for your words of encouragement and your warm welcome .
In this context , all I can do is reiterate that the Commission has been asked to prepare the working document , but I cannot say when it will be ready .
I think that question should be addressed to the Commission directly .
Nor can I give you an answer as to its content , that is to say , whether additional funding will be available or not .
I think you should ask the Commission about this .
Mr President , I am doubly grateful to you this evening , for exercising your discretion in this way .
Can I extend a very warm welcome to the Austrian President-in-Office , I am delighted to see her here this evening .
Could I seek clarification on two issues .
It was generally understood that any ferry travelling through international waters outside the 12-mile limit and any airline travelling in international airspace would continue to benefit from and be able to continue with duty-free sales after 1 July 1999 .
I understand that , under the British presidency , a meeting of national customs officials overruled that and that will effectively nullify the effect of a change of route for a ferry operating from my constituency .
This will have very serious commercial and employment ramifications .
That is my first point .
The second point is that the President-in-Office has mentioned compensatory measures in reply to a number of questions this evening .
I would like to be quite specific : from which part of the European Union budget will these funds be taken ?
Mr President , Miss McIntosh , first of all , thank you for your warm welcome .
Secondly , I have to say that your question is rather technical .
I would ask you to allow me to respond to your question in writing , and as regards budget funds , I cannot provide any further information , as I have already explained in answer to the previous question .
Mr President , on a point of order .
Very briefly , if the presidency , quite understandably , wants to reply in writing to the honourable Member , would it be possible to ensure that other interested Members get to see that reply ?
Obviously , we would all have heard an oral reply , and it is only right and proper for the reply to be made available to the whole House .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Member is no doubt aware that the UNESCO recommendation of 1982 initially states that the Elgin marbles should be returned ; it went on to specify that they should be returned to Greece so that they could once again be put on display at the Parthenon .
The matter of the Parthenon Marbles is not something which can be dealt with by the Council , since this goes beyond the jurisdiction of the European Community .
This issue must be resolved solely between the governments of the United Kingdom and Greece .
Mr President , I too would naturally like to welcome the President-in-Office on her first appearance in the European Parliament .
However , I also wish to express my disappointment at the Council 's response .
The Parthenon Marbles are a priceless cultural commodity which concerns not only Greece and Britain but the whole of humanity .
I think that the Council , too , should be just as concerned about their fate as all the other interested parties , who are greatly alarmed in the wake of scientifically well-founded facts , according to which the marbles suffered irreparable damage as a result of how they were treated by the British Museum .
I think that , for precisely this reason , the Council should have the sensitivity that is shown by non-governmental organizations and mass movements for the fate of the Parthenon Marbles , and give a more substantial response to this issue .
Mr President , Mr Theonas , unfortunately , all I can do is to repeat what I have already stated .
The Council has no jurisdiction in this matter .
The issue is a purely bilateral one .
It should therefore be resolved bilaterally between the governments of the United Kingdom and Greece .
Mr President , I thank the President-in-Office , who is here today to give us a response .
My question is not a supplementary question .
It is an entirely different one since , after the latest findings and the announcement by the great scientist Ced Claire concerning the damage done to the Parthenon Marbles , I wonder whether a committee of experts might not get together to participate more generally in the scientific investigation into the matter and in the communication of the findings .
The President-in-Office has the opportunity to show her feminine sensitivity .
In addition , she is from a small , democratic and very sensitive country , and it is well-known that small countries have a lot to contribute on many issues .
More specifically , Madam President-in-Office , will you show this sensitivity and will you convene this committee ?
Mr President , Mrs Kokkola , thank you , first of all , for your kind words .
I would like to refer again to something which I mentioned at the beginning of my first answer , but perhaps it did not come across clearly . The most appropriate body for dealing with such matters is not the Council of the European Union , but UNESCO .
I would , therefore , like to suggest that perhaps the committee of experts you have just proposed should operate under the auspices of UNESCO in tackling this issue .
Let me just underline once more that the Council is not the appropriate body because it has no jurisdiction in this matter .
Question No 9 by John McCartin ( H-0619 / 98 )
Subject : Crisis in Sudan
Following the meeting of the Development Council , has the Council addressed the issue of the war and famine in the Sudan and can the Minister make a statement on the current situation there ?
Mrs Ferrero-Waldner , I invite you to reply to Mr McCartin 's question .
Mr President , I would like to make the following comment on the crisis in Sudan . The Council is watching developments in Sudan with great concern .
Following the debate which took place at the meeting of the Development Council on 18 May , which the Member referred to , the Foreign Ministers of the European Union discussed the situation in Sudan on 25 May and 29 June .
The Council refers to the statement by the presidency on 1 May and confirms that only a lasting political solution will allow the Sudanese people to return to a state of normality .
The Council affirms its support for the intergovernmental development authority , IGAD , in its efforts to find a way to negotiate a lasting peace .
In this context , the Council welcomes the proposal whereby the IGAD Partner Forum ( IPF ) would despatch a ministerial-level mission to Khartoum and Nairobi to investigate the possibilities of bringing about a cease-fire in the areas hardest hit by famine in order to allow humanitarian aid to get through .
The European Union will continue to use all the means at its disposal to urge the parties to resume negotiations and to observe human rights in Sudan .
I thank the President-in-Office for her reply .
I have seen the newspaper reports that the Irish Minister has requested this ministerial mission and am glad that it has been organised .
There is immense frustration - I am sure not only in Ireland but throughout the European Union - at the scale of distress .
I think that there is a political will throughout the European Union to devote whatever resources are necessary at least to alleviate the present hunger and suffering .
Does the President-in-Office believe that the European Union could channel aid to alleviate starvation more effectively than is now the case ?
Can the position be improved on as a matter of urgency ?
Mr President , Mr McCartin , I can at least share with you one communication which I have just received hot off the press .
I am sure you will be pleased to hear this . The Deputy Foreign Secretary of the United Kingdom , Derek Thatchet , went to Nairobi and met with representatives of the SPLA on Tuesday specifically to discuss the matter of the security corridor for aid organizations .
Mr Thatchet then flew on to Khartoum to negotiate there with representatives of the Sudanese government .
The Sudanese rebel organization , the SPLA , has called a unilateral cease-fire in certain areas of the country in order to allow more than a million starving people to receive aid .
The cease-fire in the Federal State of Baralgasal and in parts of the Upper Nile came into effect late on Tuesday evening , according to the SPLA spokesman in Nairobi on Wednesday .
He has since added that the Khartoum government is expected to follow suit .
According to information from the UN World Food Programme ( WFP ) , 1.2 million people in the south of this African state are actually facing starvation .
The people here are suffering primarily as a result of the drought , but also , of course , from the consequences of 15 years of brutal civil war .
I can also add that , since I am responsible , too , for development cooperation , I have discussed this subject myself with the Irish Secretary of State for Development Cooperation . I know she has gone to great lengths in proposing the sort of solutions for Sudan which helped broker the peace deal in her own country .
Mr President , Madam President-in-Office of the Council , I would like to ask whether the Council is also concerned with religious freedom in Sudan , as well as taking an interest in Southern Sudan and the humanitarian issues .
You are aware , for example , that pressure was brought to bear on the Bishop of Khartoum and that he was threatened that if he resisted this pressure , church development aid projects would be blocked .
My information comes from Missio , which is a Munich-based episcopal welfare relief organization , and I would like to ask you whether the Council is aware of these matters and whether it is involved with religious freedom throughout Sudan and with this attempt to highjack development aid .
Mr President , Mr Posselt , I can tell you in general terms that all aspects of the question of the crisis in Sudan are under our constant scrutiny .
In the Council of Development Cooperation Ministers and in the various working committees , we have naturally also been very concerned with addressing questions of religious freedom and the matter of fundamentalism .
We will continue to discuss the question you have raised and you can rest assured that it will be a matter of concern for the Council .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , please allow me to give a joint reply to these questions on the promotion of minority languages and the protection of minorities and their cultures .
What must be stressed , above all , in connection with these issues is that the protection of basic personal freedom and the affirmation of democratic principles constitute two of the fundamental pillars of the European Community .
Allow me to assure the Members that the Council is highly conscious of the importance attached to the preservation of ethnic , regional and local characteristics . This is what makes our Community a kaleidoscopic entity of many facets , whose diversity is intrinsic to its overall richness .
Moreover , it goes without saying that all citizens of the European Union must be able to enjoy the same rights and freedoms .
In other words , there must be no discrimination of any kind against citizens of the European Union , and certainly not on the basis of their belonging to a national minority .
It is the opinion of the Council that the governments of the individual Member States are responsible for ensuring that within national communities , xenophobic tendencies do not lead to forms of discrimination which would be at odds with freedom and democracy , which are the very foundation of the European Union .
The Members must doubtless know that the Council has not examined any specific proposals relating to the protection of minorities , minority languages or similar measures .
Nevertheless , the Council can assure the Members that it will give its full attention to any such proposals that may be presented to it and that such proposals would be more effective at Community level than corresponding measures at national level .
Mr President , President-in-Office of the Council , before I get to the point , allow me to express my delight at appearing here as a representative of an Austrian minority .
I believe that today is the first time in 80 years that an elected representative of part of the former crown land , principality and earldom of Tyrol has been able to stand before a representative of the government of the Republic of Austria , to take part in parliamentary exchanges and to participate in the parliamentary system .
I think that this is the practical manifestation of those major advances which Europe offers us .
Now to the matter at hand .
I believe that it is not enough just to have no discrimination .
What we need is positive discrimination for minorities , that is to say , active protection , and I hope the Council will not only apply itself to this in some detail , but will also seek to obtain appropriate proposals from the Commission .
Mr President , Mr Ebner , I too am delighted to see a representative of an Austrian minority standing before me in my capacity as representative of the presidency .
Let me repeat that the Council can only act on the initiative of the Commission .
Here I must cite Article 128 .
Allow me to point out that Article 128 of the Treaty also makes the following provision : the Community shall contribute to the flowering of the cultures of the Member States , while respecting their national and regional diversity and at the same time bringing the common cultural heritage to the fore .
Through its activities , the Community encourages collaboration between Member States , where necessary supporting and complementing their activities in the following areas : disseminating , and enhancing awareness of , the culture and history of the peoples of Europe ; and maintaining and protecting cultural heritage of European significance , non-commercial cultural exchanges and artistic and literary endeavours , including work in the audio-visual field .
However , should the Member feel that the Commission should approach the Council with a proposal for an action programme to promote minority languages , then I would like to point out to you that provided your draft fulfils the requirement of having the support of a majority of your colleagues , then you yourself have a far more impressive array of arguments to present to the Commission than the Council could possibly assert .
Perhaps I should also mention the special programmes that exist , notably in the field of languages .
I am thinking in particular of the LINGUA programme which has been set up by the EU .
Mr President , I am a Catalan , but as you well know , I cannot submit my supplementary question in the Catalan tongue .
In this case , I will therefore submit it in German .
Madam President , you are only too well aware of how important it is for the EU to remain in touch with its citizens .
At this juncture , I would like to ask whether over the next few months , during the Austrian presidency , the Council will be asking the Commission to come up with any new EU programmes for minorities as well as for unofficial languages .
You mentioned the LINGUA programme .
As you know , we have gained something from the Socrates programme .
However , we must ensure that these official languages , which for the purposes of the European Union are considered to be unofficial , can derive even greater benefit from our efforts in the future .
I wish the Austrian presidency every success .
Mr President , Mr Vallvé , first of all , thank you for using German , my mother tongue .
I greatly appreciate that .
I do actually understand Valencian Catalan , not every word , but a little , although I speak it very badly .
As to your question , I can only repeat that the Commission has to take the initiative .
The Council can hardly assign the Commission the task of taking the initiative .
Over the past decade , however - and this is something I wish to elaborate on - considerable changes have been made in a number of areas affecting minority language communities within the European Union .
At national level , decentralization measures , particularly in the fields of teaching and culture , have also led to an increase in activities favourable to a number of minority communities .
In any case , at European level , there is of course a renewed desire to share the benefits of the single market with the less wealthy regions of the Union .
This takes the form of regional aid , such as the financing of infrastructural projects via the Structural Funds , and this aid in turn benefits certain marginal areas and , consequently , communities in prioritized regions . In many cases , these are also minority regions .
Madam President-in-Office of the Council , I would like to thank you for your advice to the Commission .
However , I have to say quite openly that the Commission sent us to you .
That is one of the reasons why these questions are being put to you .
We have spoken to Mr Santer and from our point of view we would also be happy to seek a resumption of dialogue with the Commission .
I would like to say quite specifically that in the run-up to the enlargement towards the East , the criteria we are setting for applicant countries as regards minorities are criteria that we often fail to live up to ourselves .
We are therefore of the opinion that something also needs to be done within the EU itself , and it saddens me somewhat to see something of a setback here in that the budget lines for the promotion of minority languages have come under the infamous judgement of the Court .
We have here a list of measures for which new legislation is being created .
Regrettably , the budget line for minority languages is not included here as yet .
I ask you in all sincerity , in your office as presidency of the Council , to take up this matter , because since 1982 the efforts which have been made in this area have been exemplary , and it would be a great pity if these were now to be wasted .
Mr President , Mr Posselt , let me just repeat what I have said : I believe it is quite clear that the Commission must first present proposals ; these are the rules of the European Union .
We in the Council can only become involved on the basis of proposals submitted by the Commission .
However , in general terms , let me say that when it comes to minority rights , particularly in central and eastern European states , the conventions of the Council of Europe naturally have a major role to play , and I believe it is also very important to state that the work of the Council of Europe should not be duplicated .
In my additional capacity as representative of the Council of Europe , I personally think that it is very important to let the Council of Europe get on with its work and to leave the Council to act on initiatives tabled by the Commission .
A tremendous amount has been achieved , and we are delighted that in many central and eastern European countries , where there have been problems with minorities , such problems have now been addressed and in some cases settled .
Thank you very much , Madam President-in-Office of the Council .
As I said , Mr Imaz San Miguel is not here , which deprives us of the chance also to hear the opinion of a nationality with such a strong and complex identity as the Basques .
However , Mr Habsburg-Lothringen is with us , and has one minute to put a supplementary question if he wishes to do so .
Mr President , Madam President-in-Office of the Council , allow me to begin by saying how enormously satisfying it is for me to have the privilege of addressing you by this title and what great pleasure this gives me .
Madam President-in-Office of the Council , one question which is naturally of great interest to me in this connection is how you view the situation of the rights of European ethnic minorities .
This matter has arisen time and again in the European Parliament , but has of course never reached the House ; it always seems to get stuck , as it were , in the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights .
Given the fact that we are now discussing the enlargement of the European Union , when each of the prospective Member States will also be bringing along its own problems in respect of ethnic groups and minorities , do you not think it is time for the European Union to reach out to the public at large and seek to define a law for European ethnic groups and a proactive system for the protection of minorities ?
Mr President , Mr Habsburg-Lothringen , I too am delighted to be here today giving concise answers to your questions .
As you know , according to the rules of the Union , this would also require an initiative from the Commission .
However , I would like to reiterate what I have just been saying .
I believe that it is really the role of the Council of Europe to be reflecting on the rights of European ethnic minorities , since it has already done a lot of work in that direction .
Why should we - and this is my own personal view - always repeat the same thing in the European Union as we have already anticipated or conceived in the Council of Europe ?
For my part , I would have thought that quite apart from an initiative by the Commission - if an initiative were forthcoming , that would of course be marvellous - we should continue to pursue the matter of a European law for ethnic groups primarily in the Council of Europe .
Madam President-in-Office of the Council , I still have three further supplementary questions on this issue , which will bring us to the end of Question Time .
However , Madam President-in-Office of the Council , as you will see , when we give the floor to the Habsburgs in this House , we do so in chronological order , that is , to the eldest first and then the youngest .
So Mr von Habsburg now has the floor for a supplementary question .
Madam President , allow me to say how heartening it is to see you in this position .
My question is as follows : do you not agree that it would be intrinsically more correct if we were also to address the issue of political representation when dealing with problems of nationality and language , because without the political representation , no regulation will ever be fully effective ? And do you not agree that when it comes to the rights of these ethnic minorities , there should be a special focus on the political representation of these groups , because - the way I see it - the system which has been adopted in Belgium constitutes the best solution .
If we look at the German Cantons of Mr Grosch , who was elected with 16 000 votes , while I - as has been pointed out to me - needed 980 , 000 votes to get elected , then I consider it quite fair and equitable that we should ultimately recognize that there is more to this than counting heads .
I shall finish in a moment ; just a few more words , Mr President .
I just want to say that groups really are as important as individuals as regards rights within the Community .
Thank you very much , Mr President .
( Laughter )
Mr President , Mr von Habsburg , I too am delighted to be addressing you in your new capacity .
Perhaps in this instance I can make an exception and give a personal answer .
Personally , I think you are quite right .
Of course this matter is something which we should look into further , and we can get our cue from Article 128 - which I cited earlier - namely the first section , which states that the Community shall contribute to the flowering of the cultures of the Member States while respecting their national and regional diversity and at the same time bringing the common cultural heritage to the fore .
As I indicated earlier , however , it is up to the Commission to table a proposal here .
Then the Council can become involved too .
The President-in-Office has dealt very fully and sympathetically with this question .
I come from a part of the Community where we have an ancient and very rich living language but it is at some risk .
The European Union 's efforts to support this minority language are immensely appreciated .
In the past the European Union has been criticized on the grounds that it is going to be a great melting pot in which small communities and minorities will all be lost .
I would point out that , in the past , the individual states and kingdoms which now compose the European Union persecuted and tried to stamp out these minorities , but the European Union now supports them and gives them practical assistance in the form of a budget and , in the case of Ireland , a minority language office in Dublin .
Does the President-in-Office agree with me that it is very appropriate that the European Union should engage in this political activity in order to make the point that we do not want to destroy but to support and maintain minority cultures and languages ?
Mr President , Mr McCartin , allow me to repeat that the European Union naturally seeks to protect all particularist and minority groups and takes an interest in all the various languages .
It is incorrect to say that support is given to groups which seek to exert a negative influence here .
As I have already pointed out , the starting point is the aforesaid Article 128 of the Treaty , which states quite clearly that the Community shall contribute to the flowering of the cultures of the Member States while respecting their national and regional diversity and at the same time bringing the common cultural heritage to the fore .
I believe that is the correct intention and that is how we shall be proceeding in future .
Mr President , I have been following the line of reasoning of the President-in-Office : rather than the Council going ahead , she calls on the Commission to take the initiative .
What is this about ?
It is about the protection of minority rights , and the right to preserve one 's linguistic heritage , etcetera .
This is provided for in the Treaties .
The Commission is guardian of the Treaties . As a result , its first obligation is to respect the Treaties .
Why are they playing this game with us ?
Why is it being sent from pillar to post ?
This was the game that crucified Christ .
If you tell us the Commission , and the Commission says the Council , you hang minority rights .
Why ?
Since the Commission has an obligation to respect the Treaties , the Council should not order it , the Council should request it to put forward a proposal in accordance with such and such an article of the Treaties so that we can move towards protecting these rights .
Why are you avoiding this ?
What are you concealing ?
Mr President , Mr Ephremidis , I am sure you are just as familiar with the Treaties as I am .
As you know , I am speaking here of Article 128 ( 5 ) , which quite clearly lays down the right of the Commission to take the initiative .
I believe that all the other procedures are of an informal nature .
Of course , it is possible to approach the Commission informally , but the basic formal right to take the initiative lies with the Commission .
There is nothing I can do about that .
Mr President , Madam President-in-Office of the Council , as Vice-President of the inter-parliamentary delegation for relations with Slovakia , I am constantly involved in intensive discussions as to how minority rights are actually handled within the European Union of 15 and how they will be handled in the applicant countries .
The questions are always the same : is there an evaluation ?
How are minority rights developing within the various states ?
What model should really be adopted as the best practice ?
Are we in a position to produce exemplary projects and say that these really work , that this is the way things should be , and can these models be compared with one another ?
Mr President , Mr Rübig , I would like to add the following : all Member States of the European Union naturally operate on a democratic basis , fully uphold human rights and meet all the criteria that we are imposing on some of the prospective Member States .
You are aware of the Copenhagen criteria .
These include the process of full democratization , that is to say , democracy .
This naturally goes hand in hand with the effective protection of minority rights .
That is the basis of the agreement .
This is also the starting point for renewed political dialogue with Slovakia , for example , a process which I personally am very much involved with in that country .
Ladies and gentlemen , that concludes Question Time .
Questions Nos 15 to 43 will be dealt with in writing .
When we started Question Time we welcomed Mrs Ferrero-Waldner . That welcome has been repeated in a polite and friendly manner throughout the afternoon .
Now that we have finished Question Time , I repeat that welcome but , at the same time , I must express our thanks because , ladies and gentlemen , whether or not we are pleased with the answers , we must recognize that they have all been given with that sense of responsibility , effort and willingness to reply which this House deserves .
Thank you very much , Mrs Ferrero-Waldner , and I predict that we shall have six months of intense but pleasant and fruitful work .
( The sitting was suspended at 7.10 p.m. and resumed at 9.00 p.m. )

New codecision procedure after Amsterdam
The next item is the report ( A4-0271 / 98 ) by Mr Manzella , on behalf of the Committee on Institutional Affairs , on the new codecision procedure after Amsterdam .
Mr President , many think that the Amsterdam Treaty , although disappointing in some respects , has achieved a very important institutional result with the new codecision procedure .
Parliament 's position in relation to the Council is indeed much more balanced as a result , and Parliament , in particular , as the legislator of first instance on a proposal from the Commission , can offer the Council an immediately adoptable legislative product .
The so-called first reading can in this way also become the only phase of examination by Parliament , substantially shortening the Union 's legislative programme and enabling Parliament to be more involved in Community legislation than in the past .
The motion for a resolution before the House is a document of guidelines that moves in two directions .
The first direction concerns our working procedures which must be adapted , including through the subsequent work of the Committee on the Rules of Procedure , the Verification of Credentials and Immunities , to the new political dimension of the Parliamentary stage after the proposal by the European Commission .
The possibility of concluding the procedure after one Parliamentary stage means that this phase has to be structured , with a series of measures that ensure that this procedure is not unnecessarily long , that there is genuine , effective dialogue with the Council , in addition to the dialogue with the Commission , that there is responsibility in the proposals and in the decisions , and that there is transparency .
All this must be done while making sure that there is no loss of flexibility in the Parliamentary game and in the dialogue with the other institutions . Besides , certain legislative committees have rightly underlined this .
The change in the legal nature of the first stage is naturally reflected in the second stage as well , the so-called conciliation stage .
This stage is actually enhanced by the increased interinstitutional dialogue which takes place at first reading .
Thus , the second direction taken by the document in question is aimed at a new interinstitutional agreement , and it is absolutely necessary that the opinions of the legislative committees that have accumulated the most experience in this procedure be taken into account when negotiating this agreement .
Mr President , Commissioner , as you can see , the basis of this motion is the radical change that the Amsterdam Treaty has brought about in the legal nature of the initial Parliamentary stage .
For this reason , all our efforts must go towards the introduction of this initial stage , with as much elasticity as possible .
On the other hand , I would consider it frankly absurd - although with all my respect to the Members who presented two amendments along these lines - if the European Parliament refused the procedure outlined in the Treaty , retaining a second reading nonetheless .
If this were the case , this motion would turn into a counter-reform , unacceptable not only politically but especially in terms of constitutional legitimacy .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , on behalf of the committee , I express my thanks and appreciation to Mr Manzella for the constructive and balanced fashion with which he has treated this subject that is so important to the European Parliament , namely a new codecision procedure in the Amsterdam Treaty .
Mr President , with regard to the first reading of the new codecision procedure , I would like to briefly discuss several matters .
It is important that we realize , as the rapporteur also stated , that the completion of the codecision procedure made possible by the Amsterdam Treaty can only be implemented in practice following the first reading if the exchange of information and the informal contacts between the Council and Parliament are strengthened at first reading .
In addition , the rapporteur and the chairman of the relevant Parliamentary committee with authority in the field should theoretically be able to begin informal discussions with the Council , or at least with the chairman of the relevant Council working group , following an initial exchange of ideas in the Commission .
It is also essential that the representative of the Council actually takes part in the committee meeting , is present during the voting and that he is given the opportunity to make his position known before the vote .
With regard to the second reading and the conciliation procedure , I also have two more remarks .
It is essential that the representative of the relevant Council working group explain to the relevant Parliamentary committee the main issues in the common position adopted by the Council at first reading .
The Committee on Research , Technological Development and Energy would welcome a strengthening of the role of the rapporteur in the conciliation procedure .
The Council must also provide Parliament 's rapporteur with the opportunity to explain his or her position to the Council .
In this way , I believe that a mutual process of information exchange and persuasion can take place and I therefore hope that these suggestions will be adopted .
Mr President , most of the Members who are involved in the committees dealing with this report , the rapporteur and also the draftsmen of the opinions have discovered , in the course of the past week , that the changes to procedures in this House which arise from the Amsterdam Treaty have much greater effect than could be suspected at first or second glance .
These changes are certainly positive , but partly problematic , and in any case are of a complex nature .
I thank the rapporteur very warmly for his difficult work in the finely spun web of interactions , of action and reaction , in the network of relationships between the various bodies of the European Union .
I do not want to discuss all the aspects of the written opinion of the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights which was approved unanimously in committee .
I will restrict myself to paragraph 3 of the existing resolution , to the question of contacts with the Council and in what form , to what extent and when these should take place , and what the legal quality of the contacts would be .
In our view , this question was answered very inadequately by the rapporteur .
The Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights has approved such contact , but only informal contact .
The report is questionable in that it authorizes the rapporteur to negotiate at first reading .
This authorization means that Parliament has commitments regarding others and that a situation of trust is created regarding others , without a vote to this effect taking place .
We consider this to be too far-reaching , particularly as there are now amendments which , firstly , no longer grant such a right to the shadow rapporteur , and which also provide for the removal of the obligation to report to the committee .
The Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights considers informal contacts to be necessary .
These must be incorporated , but further-reaching negotiating powers must be implemented in transactions and back-to-back transactions .
If the rapporteur is to have such rights , the Council must also be obliged to act independently and without being able to commit itself at an early stage .
Mr President , first of all I congratulate Mr Wieland on his first speech before the European Parliament , and I also congratulate Mr Manzella on his report .
On behalf of the Committee on Civil Liberties and Internal Affairs , I would stress that the main emphasis of the changed procedural rules must lie in the preparation for the first reading .
From this point of view , I share Mr Manzella 's opinion .
The opportunities which the Amsterdam Treaty offers Parliament must be used to the full .
It must be possible to conclude a legislative procedure at first reading without the Council having to draft a common position , which , as we all know , requires a vast amount of time .
Parliament 's legislative procedures can be tightened considerably if advantage is taken of the opportunities offered by the Amsterdam Treaty .
The Committee on Civil Liberties and Internal Affairs requests this quite expressly .
I would like to draw your attention to the fact that , with regard to our powers , for the first five years after the Amsterdam Treaty has come into force , many policy areas will be removed from the legislative powers of the national parliaments , will be Communitized and will be made subject to the unanimous decision of the Council and only the consultation of Parliament .
This concerns policy areas which are traditionally Parliamentary policy areas .
It is very difficult to tolerate the fact that , in this respect , Parliament is only consulted .
For this reason , we request that the Council treat us as though we had a right of codecision .
Thirdly , the codecision procedure , the consultation procedure has also gained in importance .
We propose that there be a permanent Conciliation Committee in the European Parliament which is composed mainly of permanent Members who regularly deal with the policy areas of conciliation and thus , in this function , are dealing with the Council .
It is not acceptable that we diminish our importance in relation to the Council by using this committee only in individual cases .
This puts us at a disadvantage in relation to the Council .
Therefore , at least in the opinion of the Committee on Civil Liberties and Internal Affairs , we should consider setting up a permanent committee for conciliation issues to make it clear that Parliament has gained new importance in the area of conciliation also and that we are prepared to exercise our Parliamentary role vigorously .
On the whole , Parliament is faced with a new challenge .
We must ensure greater quality in our legislative work . This will be shown in the organization of the procedure .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the report by my friend , Andrea Manzella , on the implementation of the Amsterdam Treaty deals with the most important task of the European Parliament , apart from its budgetary powers and appointment of the Commission , that is , joint legislation at European level .
We must be aware of the dimensions of what we have now achieved in terms of codecision : before Maastricht , there was nothing , after Amsterdam , 75 % of all legal acts are decided jointly by the Council and Parliament .
However , this great success should not distract us from the subject areas which still remain open : agriculture , competition , taxes , Economic and Monetary Union , foreign trade and social dialogue .
If these six areas are not included , the European democratic deficit will not have been eliminated .
We now find ourselves in a new situation , the Council must first of all get used to the fact that it no longer has the last word .
But the European Parliament must also change its work fundamentally and concentrate greatly on legislation .
For this , a measure of self-criticism is necessary .
We can no longer speak on all topics by means of resolutions and urgencies .
We will now be involved less with ardent appeals than with the concrete work of integration which will determine and , I think , give new impetus to , the everyday work of the European Parliament .
Mr Manzella 's proposals therefore point in the right direction .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the extension and simplification of the codecision procedure is indeed the most important institutional change in the Amsterdam Treaty .
This offers our Parliament the chance to become a more fully-fledged legislative body .
In his outstanding report , Mr Manzella has proposed to make maximum use of the new provisions .
My group agrees with him that a new institutional agreement must be entered into , and we call on the Council and the Commission to take action on this matter as soon as possible .
We also share his threefold concern for , first of all , better information exchange between the institutions and better planning of activities ; secondly , an improvement in the linguistic and judicial quality of the texts ; and thirdly , a transparent procedure in all its stages .
In view of the new possibilities to complete the entire procedure following the first reading , the rapporteur has investigated how Parliament , the Council and the Commission can capitalize on this situation .
The discussions in our committee have led to a balance between the concern for efficiency on the one hand , and the concern for transparency and broad decision-making on the other .
I am very satisfied that my amendments requiring the committee chairman and the rapporteur to report , too , on their informal contacts have been accepted .
After all , it would be extremely questionable if the simplified codecision procedure restricted legislative work to a privileged club of only a few Members of the European Parliament .
We therefore do not agree with the proposal by Mr Nassauer .
This proposal would not only mean that George Orwell 's prediction would come true within this Parliament , but it would also mean , in particular , that the Union would cut itself off even more from the opinions of the European public and of the national parliaments .
The present resolution does not do that ; it has taken the proper direction .
My group will approve the resolution .
Mr President , I have a very small correction for you , Mr Schäfer , about something that you said which I totally disagree with : happily , since Maastricht the correct wording is no longer " the Council and Parliament ' but " the European Parliament and the Council ' .
This small correction would enable me to agree completely with you , because I , Mr Manzella , want to limit myself to the role of the European Parliament , because we are not fulfilling our duty .
If we take part in the Conciliation Committee , there is always the chairman - a minister from the presidency - , there are always 14 representatives of the Council , and luckily we always have one of the Vice-Presidents at conciliation , as well as the rapporteur and the chairman . But , unfortunately , I must ascertain , Mrs Neyts - and this comment is directed at you- that a number of us are absent .
I understand your point , and I understand that of Mr Nassauer , but regardless of which of you is correct we must always make sure that 15 Members of Parliament are present .
Whether we do that using a combination , Mr Manzella , of a number of permanent and a number of alternating members , I am prepared to make any compromise , because I do understand what you mean : if we have a fixed group of 15 permanent representatives , we cannot allow those who disagree in the partsession to be present during the conciliation .
My most important point , Mr Manzella , and we will support your outstanding report , is that we , the Members of Parliament , like the Council , must always be present on the committee with 15 members .
If we must have a few more permanent members with a certain alternation , I can live with that .
Let us make a compromise .
Mr President , I believe that our rapporteur is right : with Amsterdam , the codecision procedure has taken a great step forward , further legitimizing the role of the European Parliament and , especially , providing citizens with new instruments .
This aspect on representative democracy has often been underlined : the more codecision is extended , the more citizenship grows ; these are relationships between extremely important things .
I believe that the report by Mr Manzella highlights this aspect , and I am not letting friendship get in the way when I say that we have been fortunate to have a rapporteur who is a legal expert but who also has great political awareness .
Parliament is showing that it understands one fundamental thing , that is , that it has become substantially equal in legislation : it is a co-legislator having effects on legislation and effects on control , meaning effects on comitology , with a tremendous simplification of the procedures as well , making them more efficient as a result .

Allow me to say briefly in passing that I confirm and endorse what Andrea Manzella already said with great vigour , rejecting an amendment that would destroy the meaning of the report ; indeed , I do not see why the European Parliament has to underestimate the importance of being able to conclude an act of legislation at first reading .

I have a final observation , Mr President : the codecision procedure is also closely linked to the debate on subsidiarity , which is a debate we all know is still under way , with the letter from Chirac , the Cardiff Summit , and the future informal summit that will be held in Innsbruck .
It is very important because we must bear in mind that the European Parliament , when legislating , must also naturally be respectful of the autonomies and , especially , must ensure that its own legislation is of a general nature , meaning that it concerns laws of a general scope .
Nothing good comes out of European legislation that is too cumbersome , whereas much good is done with European legislation that can be adapted for acts of a general scope .
I know very well that the issue being debated today does not concern the hierarchy of laws , however , we certainly should mention a criterion regarding the general scope . Besides , in various documents on codecision we have already had an opportunity to mention this .
This is in favour of European democracy and in favour of a just interpretation of subsidiarity , which of course must not be an excuse to renationalise policy but a democratic coordination of the various levels that contribute to the construction of Europe .
Mr President , Commissioner , I must begin by saying that is an honour for me and a stroke of luck that it is I who must speak , on behalf of the PPE , to congratulate Professor Manzella on his report .
I do so with great admiration ; admiration which began when I learnt through his book the foundations of what I know about parliamentary law .
I believe that our colleague , Mr De Giovanni , has already discussed the two great and outstanding essential qualities of this report .
In it , the superior work of a clever politician and a great lawyer are united .
As regards the politician , I would like to highlight his sensitivity towards that concept that involves truly bringing Europe closer to the citizens .
We need to realize that we must begin with these procedural issues .
There is nothing that moves the idea of Europe further away from the citizens than debating a directive which we are not going to hear of again for years - sometimes 10 years or more - and which then reappears without there being a connection between one stage and the other .
Therefore , I believe that we must all support that political objective .
As regards the undoubtably great lawyer , I would firstly highlight his accuracy and the importance he gives to aspects which , for others in this Hemicycle , would be subsidiary or ancillary , such as the quality of legislation , the quality of standards , the quality of drafting and the translations .
All of the points made by Mr Manzella in that respect are totally relevant .
But there are also practical aspects , such as appropriate management of time , appropriate management of deadlines and the establishment of interinstitutional agreements in this field .
Finally , I would like to underline certain aspects which , although I agree with them and I see them as objectives to provide Parliament with a form of self-discipline , perhaps go slightly too far .
I am referring to the explanation of the two amendments and the misunderstanding that may have occurred in connection with them .
Mr Manzella , for example , suggests the institutionalization of informal dialogue , yet he knows better than anyone that , by its very nature , what is informal steers clear of institutionalization , and steers clear of being established within a code .
That would be one example .
Another example is the need to give explanations in writing .
I share his aim , but maybe it is not totally adjusted to reality .
Why ?
Well , in fact , we all know that what is found in a rule can be used against Parliament as an institution , and not against third parties .
We must be cautious and not include in a rule obligations for third parties , which are wishful thinking in the last analysis ; nor must we include in a rule issues which would only be binding on us , and which could even cause us problems before the courts of justice .
Mr President , I would like to conclude by emphasizing that , in my opinion , there is a misunderstanding in those two amendments and that , in any case , we are all aware of the importance of this report and the need for this Parliament - which is already relatively old , which already has some real power of codecision , and which is a co-legislator on equal terms with the Council - to mould all of this into internal rules and interinstitutional agreements .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , 70 % of the areas dealt with in the European Union will be subject to codecision by the European Parliament following ratification of the Amsterdam Treaty , which should be concluded by the end of 1998 .
Up to now , this figure was only approximately 35 % .
Therefore , in a few months , we will become a true legislator in additional areas of European integration .
We have not only been granted greater powers , we also have the burden of greater responsibility for European legislation which is close to the people , comprehensible and to which all individuals can relate .
The amendment of Article 189b , now Article 253 of the EC Treaty , offers the European Parliament a new opportunity to be involved in a greatly changed legislative procedure , the main points of which are as follows . Firstly , the legislative procedure will take up less time .
The third reading , for example , will no longer exist , and other simplifications are possible .
Secondly , those involved in the procedure , the Commission , Parliament and the Council , must prepare the texts more carefully and also formally , as the first reading may now end the procedure and at this stage a regulation can become law .
Thirdly , the European Parliament may exert its influence at an early stage in the procedure .
For this reason , even at first reading we require a structured dialogue between the institutions involved , not a round table of people who are potentially interested but not really competent .
Fourthly , Parliament must consider and maintain carefully its parliamentary and political influence on the public .
This should lead Parliament to consider at which reading , first or second , it considers itself to have greater influence .
We must therefore adapt our Rules of Procedure fundamentally and we must continue to use to the utmost the powers accorded to us by the Treaty and to fully utilize our responsibilities .
Together with the Council and the Commission , we must establish a clear interinstitutional framework which reflects the new balance of power in the interinstitutional structure of the European Union and makes it practicable .
Finally , we must give our voters an excellent form of legislation which is close to the people , of a quality which shows them that not everything in Europe is complicated .
On behalf of the PPE , I would like to express to the rapporteur , Mr Manzella , our thanks and recognition for the care , competence and political perspective with which , in his excellent report , he found solutions for almost every issue .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I believe that one of the positive contributions of the Amsterdam Treaty has been that it strengthens the role of Parliament as a co-legislator , opposite the other branch of legislative power that is the Council .
And , as is well know , this strengthening of Parliament 's role was supported during the Intergovernmental Conference by the Commission .
The increase in legislative issues submitted for codecision represents , nevertheless , a challenge for all of the institutions and calls on us all to improve our work and coordinate our action in a constructive way in order to guarantee that the new procedure can successfully achieve its result .
In that respect , the excellent report by Mr Manzella which we are debating today is a particularly timely one and , in my view , contains many well-presented suggestions which are , in fact , especially useful in enabling us to tackle this new extended codecision procedure .
Therefore , I would like to sincerely congratulate the rapporteur on his work .
The pleasing result that the codecision procedure has had up until now is due , to a large extent , to the coherent way in which Parliament has worked , and it has done so from first reading through to the conclusion .
There are , in addition , some circumstances which favour it in particular , such as the fact that there has been continuity in terms of the rapporteur and the chairman of the Parliamentary committee for each issue .
This evidently contrasts with the situation in the Council where the presidency changes every six months .
There is also continuity in conciliation , with the participation by Parliament , including the three Vice-Presidents who belong to the Parliamentary delegation , which undoubtedly offers an undeniable advantage .
I believe that this new codecision procedure will be successful if we are able to work together and take advantage of the experience which has already been accumulated in a pragmatic and flexible way in order to tackle the important work which we must carry out from now on .
Certainly , a great deal of work is going to accumulate as a consequence of this increase in Parliament 's authority .
And in that respect , I must say that I support , in particular , the various measures contained in the report aimed at increasing transparency , democracy and the very legal quality of Parliament 's amendments .
In my opinion , Mr Manzella is right when he underlines in his report the importance of the first reading stage .
The Treaty offers the possibility of concluding the legislative procedure at first reading . This represents an important change , particularly if we take account , in fact , of this increase in the number of subjects which will be submitted for codecision .
However , there are other reasons which I would like to point out here .
This first reading is a particularly important stage in the procedure because it is the stage at which each of the institutions carries out an especially detailed analysis of the Commission 's proposals . It consequently provides an opportunity for all to clearly demonstrate their concerns , to emphasize their own interests - minority , sectoral or majority interests - and to ensure that they make their voice heard at that stage .
It is thus particularly important , both for Parliament and subsequently for the Council too .
Furthermore , a detailed political debate at first reading , although it may not be the end of the legislative process , might allow us to reach a conclusion more easily at second reading .
At second reading , more strict requirements enter into play , involving majorities . In that way , we manage to avoid the conciliation phase , which should undoubtedly be avoided as far as possible because we already know how long and complicated it usually turns out to be .
Moreover , if Parliament takes more care over its amendments at that stage , this would obviously contribute positively to the debate .
Until now , we have seen at times how , due to lack of time , Parliament 's amendments at second reading have been a mere reiteration of the amendments which were not accepted at first reading .
And at times , perhaps not even a careful analysis of the Council 's common position has been carried out .
For its part , the Council should also adopt a more open attitude in order to find common solutions which take Parliament 's amendments into consideration .
I see that sometimes there is a type of paralysis , that is , that Parliament has a second reading in which the amendments from first reading are reiterated and the Council , for its part , does not want to move away from its first position and practically does not take account of Parliament 's amendments .
With the extension of codecision , I believe that there must be more fluidity , more flexibility . If Parliament has tabled amendments , the Council must take them into consideration , examine them , and determine how formulas can be found to reach agreement , while avoiding conciliation which is usually a particularly rare formula .
Obviously , if no agreement is reached at second reading , there is the possibility of conciliation , but we should try to resolve the problems beforehand .
Finally , I would like to tell the House that the Commission is prepared to play an active role in all the stages of the legislative procedure , and particularly at first reading , as Mr Manzella 's report proposes .
I believe that we can collaborate and contribute ideas on a mutual basis .
On the one hand , we must do so with the Council working group itself ; on the other hand , we must do so with the rapporteur and the relevant Parliamentary committee , to try to push the process forward and to facilitate the drawing up of a modified proposal aimed at reconciling as far as possible the positions of both parties .
I know that Parliament has often asked us to play the role that corresponds to the Commission and that it has reproached us where we have not done so adequately .
We are going to do everything possible to follow those suggestions we have received from Parliament .
I am also convinced that , if we achieve positive results in the debate on a new decision concerning comitology , on the basis of the proposal recently presented by the Commission , this will facilitate a rapid conclusion of a large number of cases which are submitted for codecision .
According to our calculations , at least 70 % of the cases submitted for codecision have involved some problem concerning comitology . It would be a great relief for all if this matter could be resolved once and for all , giving due recognition to Parliament 's rights without decreasing the efficiency of the system when applying the implementing measures .
I finally want to demonstrate my support for the proposal to review the Interinstitutional Agreement currently in force concerning the codecision procedure .
This should be modified in accordance with the terms of the new Treaty and with current practice .
I have no doubt that that will be a relatively easy task to allow our collaborators who have contributed so effectively up until now to the success of interinstitutional dialogue can achieve it .
There are some formal interinstitutional procedures provided for in the opinion at first reading which might mean that the procedure becomes slightly complicated .
Therefore , I would recommend to Parliament that it should try to move forward in the most pragmatic and flexible manner possible .
Mr Manzella 's report represents the adequate framework to achieve this objective and the Commission wants to show that it is prepared to participate in an active and constructive way in the negotiations , in a spirit of collaboration , in order to ensure the success of Parliament 's strengthened role in the legislative procedure .
Actually , I never need to teach my old friend Oreja anything , he certainly knows everything better than I do . But it is important for the new Members of Parliament to know that it is only out of wise self-limitation that we carry over amendments to the second reading which were not adopted at first reading because , according to the Treaties , we theoretically have the right to come into the second reading with all new amendments .
But we previously decided not to do that , to prevent eternal discussion .
Therefore , my friend Oreja , the fact that we are bogged down with amendments that were not adopted at first reading testifies to the self-control of Parliament which is essential for a good conclusion to the legislative procedure .
Thank you , Mr Janssen .
You do not need to answer , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12.00 noon .
Implementation of the Amsterdam Treaty : implications of closer cooperation
The next item is the report ( A4-0257 / 98 ) by Mr Friedhelm Frischenschlager , on behalf of the Committee on Institutional Affairs , on the implementation of the Amsterdam Treaty : implications of closer cooperation .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , this report by the Committee on Institutional Affairs is part of the follow-up work involving the decision regarding the Amsterdam Treaty .
In this case we want to make decisions on how closer cooperation can be evaluated and applied , not least because the European Parliament would like further proposals from the Commission in the foreseeable future on the reform of the institutions ; that is what these reports are for .
The significance of the pressure towards institutional reform following on from Amsterdam can be seen in the example of the work done by the Committee on Institutional Affairs in the area of closer cooperation .
What was the intention of the Amsterdam Treaty ?
Obviously , it intended to allow closer cooperation , and the idea behind this was that people acknowledge that there is political heterogeneousness , there are various levels of political development in individual countries and obviously different demands for integration . For this reason , there should be differentiated integration - and this is what is essentially new about the Amsterdam Treaty - within the institutional framework of the European Union .
The second aim was that , in further-reaching integration measures and demands of a large majority of Member States , the practical veto of a minority of states or perhaps of a single state should not prevent these additional integration measures , except in constitutional areas such as the amendment of the Treaty for purposes of enlargement , etcetera .
This was the intention of the Intergovernmental Conference , and the European Parliament 's position on this was always very hesitant as it was afraid that it would lead to a Europe à la carte , and this is a very justified reproach .
It was for this reason that the European Parliament , in the form of the Tsatsos / Méndez de Vigo report , incorporated very clear and very , very restrictive conditions to allow closer cooperation , and it also succeeded in this .
In this area the result of Amsterdam was certainly to allow closer cooperation in principle , but the requirements , the conditions , were made so restrictive that in the final analysis it leaves very little scope for the future : in the first pillar there is practically none but in the third there is a very little scope for legislative measures to implement the action programmes .
But even this very modest scope was restricted in the Treaty by the provision that , for important reasons of national policy , each Member State of the EU can , by requiring unanimity , prevent any far-reaching demand for integration on the part of other Member States or the large majority of Member States .
So once again a national veto consisting of national interests has been incorporated with the result that , yet again , one of the main purposes of this Treaty provision has been thwarted , in that true , far-reaching integration has de facto been rendered impossible by a majority decision .
It was always Parliament 's line that , with all restraint regarding closer cooperation , it should be possible to go over to that side as a last resort , to actually be able to carry out differentiated integration of this kind by means of a veto .
I will come now to the conclusions .
The scope of this closer cooperation is very narrow ; it is in no way justifiable to bring back this national veto , and this is why we request that the Commission remove this veto , this blockade , from the Treaty by means of proposals which advocate amendment of the Treaty .
In general , we have achieved the result that this closer cooperation in no way fulfils the political requirements of the European Union .
For this reason , we have kept to the European Parliament 's old wish that it is essential , for the future of the European Union , that the principle of unanimity be replaced , under certain circumstances , by a general majority voting procedure .
This is the main political substance of my report , and I hope that the majority of this House agrees with this opinion .
Mr President , closer cooperation between Member States is a means of European integration which must allow the obstacles to be overcome ; obstacles which are due partly to the often divergent expectations of Member States and partly to the continuation of the rule of unanimity by the Amsterdam Treaty , .
Admittedly , this latter provides for closer cooperation to be used as a last resort , that it will be accompanied by strict conditions and that it must involve a majority of Member States .
Nevertheless , even under strict conditions , everyone would prefer not to have to implement the mechanisms of this closer cooperation .
Citizens will still perceive it as an admission of failure , and rightly so , if you remember that the construction of Europe has always had as its main objective the implementation of joint projects as part of a single structure .
Furthermore , it will be noted that a sort of competition exists between the institutional reforms , which must assure the enlargement and deepening of Europe and closer cooperation , which is a means of pressure aimed at forcing the construction of Europe and thus at avoiding paralysis should the intergovernmental procedure fail .
This procedure is , however , not capable of responding to the major future challenges of the construction of Europe for it contains the seeds of its own destruction .
I would remind you here of the words used in the Treaty of Rome to outline the European project , " an ever closer union among the peoples of Europe ' .
Who does not see that closer cooperation goes in the opposite direction , that is , towards what is known as a two-speed Europe or a Europe à la carte ?
Therefore , whenever possible , institutional reforms must prevail over closer cooperation .
This latter will never be an adequate framework or the ideal solution for taking up the main challenges of European Union .
It is a " spare tyre ' and must remain so , even if Parliament considers it something that cannot be ignored in order to make progress in certain areas .
The rapporteur is right to call on us to firstly search for politically constructive solutions .
Finally , it is to be regretted that the Amsterdam Treaty requires only that the Council and the Commission regularly inform the European Parliament of the development of closer cooperation .
In order to respect the institutional balance , Parliament 's involvement should become the rule : this is , moreover , what the Committee on Civil Liberties and Internal Affairs wishes .
And , as the rapporteur requests , the process of launching any closer cooperation must be submitted to the democratic control of the European Parliament .
Closer cooperation was only adopted at Amsterdam to navigate between two pitfalls : paralysis or fragmentation .
In the current state of affairs , we can unfortunately not do without it .
But it should still be limited , moderate and democratically controlled .
I congratulate the rapporteur on how he tackled the difficult task of drawing up this considerate report .
Mr President , closer cooperation was , during a certain period of time - before the Intergovernmental Conference - , the star topic .
It seemed as if closer cooperation was resolving all the important and worrying issues regarding the construction of Europe .
Since the Amsterdam Treaty , it must be recognized - and Mr Frischenschlager does so in his excellent report - that closer cooperation has actually turned out to be much less important than it seemed it was going to be .
Why has this happened ?
Why do we have this result ?
Surely it is because the problems which , somewhat hypocritically , closer cooperation claimed to solve have been solved in a different way .
Thus , that government which used to block part of the agreements in the Council has been replaced by another , which seems to have a different attitude .
So , in addition , issues such as security and defence , for example , which also cause difficulties in certain Member States , have been in some way resolved through the Petersberg missions .
Finally , the issue of enlargement , for which some people set the date for the year 2000 , as we already know after reading Agenda 2000 , is going to take much longer and that , in addition , surely the problems of enlargement will be resolved through transition periods , as has happened with all previous enlargements .
Therefore , after all , closer cooperation has not served to solve those problems which had a difficult political solution .
I am pleased with that , Mr President , because there was something hypocritical about closer cooperation .
The European Union 's true problem is that there are still certain subjects which are subject to unanimity .
This is the only reality , as Mr Frischenschlager states very clearly in his report .
And given that - as we know - it is extremely difficult to achieve unanimity with 15 countries , it is hard to imagine what it will be like with 25 countries .
It will surely be tremendously complicated .
Thus , closer cooperation , which has been extraordinarily confined to issues which come under the first pillar , will serve little use .
I have had difficulty determining those issues to which closer cooperation can be applied under the first pillar .
It will be possible to apply it to the third pillar , to those issues which involve cooperation , after the five years of the transition period ; and certainly , through constructive abstention , it will be possible to apply it to the second pillar .
But I will return to my principal point , to the point we should worry about in this Parliament : the most important thing , the really important thing - and it is highlighted by Mr Frischenschlager in paragraph 16 of his report - is that we have to try , in future revisions of the Treaty , to replace unanimity with qualified majority .
That is the only way in which we can fulfil our role , the only way in which Europe will be capable of being not only democratic , but , more particularly , effective .
Mr President , I would like to congratulate our colleague Mr Frischenschlager on his excellent report .
The fact that there are only three amendments - two of which come from the Liberal Group - is testimony to that .
Closer cooperation is one of the major innovations of the Amsterdam Treaty .
At least that was the original intention .
What was written into the Treaty this time was not the right to opt out but the right for Member States to pursue integration within the single institutional framework without being blocked by a veto .
The need to overcome the paralysis imposed by the veto became all the more urgent with the prospect of enlargement .
A positive , constructive approach to European integration , therefore , underlay the original idea , and therein lies its added value .
Of course guarantees had to be built in .
Closer cooperation could not endanger what had been achieved together so far - the so called acquis communautaire - and could not lead to a permanent rupture between the Member States .
The Treaty specifically provides for a number of safeguards in respect of these and other conditions .
However , unfortunately during the negotiations a major change was introduced to accommodate British insistence on the veto .
The provisions in the Treaty now allow any Member State to block the majority vote needed to trigger closer cooperation for ' important and stated reasons of national policy ' .
For the first time enshrined in the Treaty is the notorious Luxembourg Compromise of 1966 .
The rapporteur recognises this by repudiating that specific point .
By introducing the veto into the procedure closer cooperation loses much of its potential and turns it largely into a theoretical exercise .
That is the gist of the amendment submitted by the Liberal Group and which Mrs Spaak would have defended if she had been here today .
The merit of closer cooperation was that it provided time to convince others of the advantage of cooperating in a particular field .
Now the Treaty does not even provide this temporary solution to a deadlock .
That means that we are left with the basic problem of a worrying lack of consensus about the direction of European integration .
That is the problem with what was finally agreed on closer cooperation .
I hope the Commissioner can comment on that point .
Mr President , closer cooperation between states , and also between social actors , is legitimate if it expresses the common values of the Community , if it pursues objectives of social progress and development and if it takes into consideration the necessary solidarity between Europeans .
I would add that it is also a current need if progress is to be made on a whole series of issues .
For example , on the issue of common economic policies , the French government , in its own way , is looking to encourage possibilities for closer cooperation within the group of 11 countries of the euro area .
Certain social issues should also be mentioned , such as the structuring of European networks of services in the general interest .
It is also important to have the possibility of experimentation and cooperation , for example , of an interregional nature .
The fact remains that closer cooperation must be situated within a legal framework which clearly expresses all of this .
A minority of colleagues think that closer cooperation can do without a legal framework .
This is clearly impossible , for it may prejudice fundamental rights .
The Amsterdam Treaty is sometimes hesitant , for good reason , regarding concern for Community unity .
However , it is also sometimes hesitant for poor reasons , which demonstrate , I believe , that many of us are unfortunately influenced by the idea that Europe remains , above all , a competitive arena .
Our rapporteur demonstrates very well that there exists a significant obstacle to this process of closer cooperation : it is the national state veto .
I support his report and , in particular , the clause calling for the abolition of this veto .
There are other restrictions , such as the need to avoid causing distortions in competition or the Commission 's obligatory initiative in first pillar matters , which we could also discuss .
I have only one fundamental reserve to express to the rapporteur , which does not prevent us from agreeing on the outcome .
It concerns the idea that a qualified majority vote is sufficient , an idea which others have also expressed here .
I am in full agreement with the importance of the qualified majority vote , but I insist on the fact that , besides the law , besides coordination , besides Community programmes , tools for differentiated integration must be provided for , as far as they are positive and constructive .
I think that the issue is thus not a closed one .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , unlike the rapporteur , I see a clear change in the position of the European Parliament on this issue .
Incidentally , this change of opinion happened , to a certain extent , as soon as the report came into being .
I am very pleased about this , I welcome it and also congratulate the rapporteur on his report .
When this idea was introduced , there was still a very clear hope in the European Parliament that an instrument had been found which could unblock the process of integration .
I believe that this optimism has since given way to the view that , rather than solving the actual problem , it suppresses it , that is , the issue of the two-thirds majority , the issue of a majority vote on future integration .
However , I believe that there was also a fundamental error , that is , the view that only the decision on a higher speed of integration was involved .
In actual fact , it is , of course , a question of direction , of decisions on political direction .
What better than the first " wild ' cooperation experiment , that of the Schengen Agreement , to prove that Community law in no way intended to draw up the Schengen Agreement in the form in which it was finally drawn up by a few .
I am therefore pleased that we are emphasizing the exceptional nature and strict conditions of institutional unity and that we are concentrating ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
There is not a great deal to be said , because this report rests on a view of reality that is just so out of touch with what is going on among the citizens of the nations of Europe .
The citizens of these countries should be consulted , but this is not done , because if the citizens of these countries were confronted with the project presently on the table , they would either laugh out loud or go away in tears .
In every facet , what we have here is a totally unrealistic project that , to Danish citizens , at any rate , is almost a farce .
This project is being implemented to the chant of ' an ever closer Union ' as its main thrust , together with the wonderful realization that monetary union and economic policy would , of course , force citizens into a political union .
Then it goes on to state that only the Community system is able to give the necessary guarantees with regard to democratic control , judicial control and solidarity .
Thus , the entire basis of national democracies is swept away , and paragraph 10 goes the whole hog in stating that a qualified majority , rather than unanimity , will now be the norm .
I must say that if this proposal were laid before the citizens of Europe , it would be greeted with scorn and a definite thumbs-down .
Mr President , I should like to congratulate the rapporteur on his report , which covers a very difficult area .
The difficulty is perhaps symbolised by the various euphemisms that have been coined to describe closer cooperation , reinforced cooperation or even the forbidden F-word , flexibility .
The aim of closer cooperation is to allow some States to go faster or further than others provided that this does not lead to a hard-core Europe or override the national interests of other Member States .
The assumption clearly shared by many in this House that the EU is a one-way journey in which closer integration is an end in itself is a very dangerous and unpopular one with most of our citizens .
This danger is made greater by economic and monetary union .
I hope that the fully fledged common economic policy referred to in recital F will involve those countries who choose to , or have to , remain outside economic and monetary union .
I also welcome the acknowledgment in paragraph 5 that closer cooperation should be a last resort .
However , paragraphs 10 to 12 cause some difficulty .
The agreement at Amsterdam that closer cooperation can be stopped by any one Member State for important reasons of national policy was , I believe , a necessary acknowledgement of the concerns that Member States have about this option .
It seems strange to me that Mr Frischenschlager 's report should call for a reform of this Treaty before it has even been tested .
I am sure that this ' virtual veto ' , as it has been described , will only be used as an exceptional option in the last resort .
I therefore do not regard it as the mere theoretical exercise that Mr Brinkhorst described .
The United Kingdom , for instance , has already shown that it is prepared to allow closer cooperation in the third pillar .
I see no reason to think that the United Kingdom or any other government will use this virtual veto in the frivolous sort of way that appears to be envisaged by the rapporteur and others who have spoken .
However , we will have to see .
With that major reservation my national delegation and myself are happy to support this report .
Mr President , miracle weapons have never lived up to their reputation .
This was so in the ancient world , but it is also the case in German mythology .
One or two examples of the many show this clearly .
When tested , the Achilles heel did not really prove to be strong , and even miracle weapons in our century proved to be an illusion , which is fortunate for Europe and for democracy in the European Union .
In this respect , it is good that the supposed miracle weapon of closer cooperation , of which some promised so much prior to the beginning of the last Turin Intergovernmental Conference , was not actually launched in Amsterdam .
In this respect , it is good that Mr Frischenschlager 's very sensible report - and it is for that reason that it is such a good one - shows with great clarity the limited scope and the limited efficiency and desirability of this new form of variable geometry .
Closer cooperation in its European form with a compulsory field of activities for the Commission also , with democratic participation of the European Parliament , and with constitutional control by the Court of Justice is essential .
Anything else would have been detrimental , after all .
The main point made by the Frischenschlager report , therefore , is that the laborious process of European decision-making in the first pillar , or at least in accordance with the first pillar , cannot be replaced .
Shortened forms of this laborious dialogue , short , simple ways to achieve great new European solutions do not and will not exist .
This is why we should remember that the magic potion only works for the Gauls , for Asterix and Obelix .
We Europeans , on the other hand , are required to recreate our common Europe laboriously each day .
The only formula which leads to success is to never stand still , and we heard in the debate this morning on the Austrian presidency how this formula is used again and again .
We must build our common Europe together .
Mr President , let me begin by saying that I think the report which Mr Frischenschlager has presented is very interesting and well-written .
The explanatory statement includes extensive examples of how difficult the provisions of the Amsterdam Treaty are to interpret with regard to integration and closer cooperation ; for example , the question of whether a proposal for closer cooperation can be based on the somewhat confused Article 235 .
Examples are also given of the dangers which are associated with the actual aim of the Treaty 's provisions on flexibility or closer cooperation .
According to the analysis , the aim is to substitute a legal instrument for political will in order to advance together towards more integration .
However , on that point we must ask whether there really is anyone who believes in a European cooperation , a development of the EU , without political will and , above all , without the will of the people ?
What future would we see then ?
We would not see , I am afraid to say , a democratic Europe of the citizens .
Although this report is well-written and the analysis is good , it is also very contradictory .
The conclusion is that closer cooperation should be avoided so that we do not create a two-speed Europe .
However , at the same time , the report itself could help facilitate such a development by proposing the abolition of the principle of unanimity and the Member State 's veto .
That is precisely what guarantees that the EU does not progress faster than the political will and the will of the people .
I cannot therefore vote for this report , nor can I vote for any of the amendments .
Mr President , closer cooperation is , in my eyes and the eyes of most others , an emergency solution , a last resort .
It is , however , an emergency solution which can open up possibilities .
Correctly used , closer cooperation can strengthen integration in the Union .
Wrongly used , it becomes a dividing force .
With the help of flexible integration we can get around short-term obstacles .
The history of the EU has several examples of this , including the UK 's attitude to the Social Charter and the Schengen Agreement .
In certain situations , temporary flexibility in practice , or increased integration , can strengthen the Union by weakening the requirement for unanimity .
The possibility of flexibility means that the discussion does not always have to be conducted with consideration for a small minority of integration opponents .
EU integration cannot always adjust to fit the weakest link in the chain .
Even though closer cooperation does not cover the second pillar , there is an interesting idea that the objectives of the Maastricht Treaty could be fulfilled there .
It includes , among other things , the WEU which , according to the Treaty , is an integrated part of the Union 's development and has the task of preparing Union decisions relating to defence .
The existence of neutral countries obstructs integration in the second pillar .
Here we could open a discussion which might be able to get further than the Amsterdam Treaty 's current solution .
Obviously the objective is for those Member States who for various reasons choose to remain outside to be included as soon as possible .
However , the path to increased integration has not been and is not always going to be totally straight .
History shows that it is easier to join an existing cooperation .
Correctly used , and in certain very special cases , often security issues , increased cooperation can be in the interest of European integration .
Only then should it be tested by qualified majority voting , which is , of course , the obvious decision-making method .
Mr President , I must say that I agree with Mr Méndez de Vigo when he said that there were many illusions in relation to closer cooperation , a topic that certainly seemed to play a star role at the Intergovernmental Conference ; a great deal of time , comments and speeches were dedicated to it .
There was even a sitting in which , in a monographic manner , many hours were spent discussing the scope of closer cooperation .
It was even given other names ; variable geometry or differentiated rates of integration were suggested .
Finally , it was decided to give it the name of closer cooperation .
The reality is , on the one hand , that it was essential to have some discussion on closer cooperation , and on the other hand , that - as other speakers have shown here - it is , in fact , difficult to see how it corresponds to the various pillars .
Closer cooperation cannot be applied to the second pillar , because there are already other instruments within the second pillar for such application .
It is not easy to know within which limits closer cooperation can be applied to the first pillar ; perhaps the third pillar presents the greatest possibilities in this respect .
However , I would like to make one thing clear here .
I was very pleased with Mr Frischenschlager 's report .
I believe that he presents a very clear and systematic study , gives a summary of the various provisions to be applied , and puts forward some approaches which deserve to be given particular emphasis . He also does something which is interesting for us as members of the Commission : he asks us a series of questions which oblige us to state our position in relation to each one of them .
Since the debate is already well advanced , I want simply to try to give some replies to the questions that Mr Frischenschlager puts to us as members of the Commission .
Firstly , as regards the scope in terms of areas of application of closer cooperation , I note his request that we prepare a study on the potential fields of application of this closer cooperation .
We are going to do so .
I want to commit myself here - in front of the House - to carrying out this study , because it also seems to me to be a very sensible request to which we must respond positively .
In terms of his remarks on the launch of closer cooperation , it seems obvious to me that to proceed to political dialogue with a country which is opposed to such a launch evidently forms part of the Commission 's obligations .
The Commission must try to talk to that country , ask it why it objects and set out the Commission 's reasons if it believes that the cooperation should go ahead ; consequently , the point made that one of the Commission 's tasks is to try to convince that country of the reasons which would help seems to me to be perfectly valid .
On the other hand , as regards the emergency brake provided for in the new Article 40 of the Treaty on European Union and the new Article 11 of the Treaty establishing the European Community , it must be remembered that its inclusion forms part of a balance which was particularly delicate and which was discussed at the end of the last Intergovernmental Conference .
Nevertheless , I note Mr Frischenschlager 's comments and I believe that we must consider how we can manage in practice to abolish that quasi-veto .
It is not the only such case provided for in the Treaty .
Remember that there are others in which the use of that quasi-veto appears , for example , everything that comes under the second pillar .
We are not talking already of strategies concerning foreign policy , for example , when we know that the strategy is determined unanimously . We are subsequently very pleased to think that the Council can adopt decisions with a majority , despite the fact that we know that any country can invoke a national interest , thereby breaking that majority principle which had provided us with so much relief .
Here , a similar situation is presented .
These are , so to speak , devices inserted into the Treaty .
We hope that some day , with a new reform - since there will be new reforms of the Treaty - we might be able to free ourselves of these commitments to which we are currently tied .
With regard to democratic scrutiny , the report calls on the Commission to undertake to withdraw any proposal for closer cooperation where Parliament delivers a negative opinion .
Naturally - and I am sure that Mr Frischenschlager will understand - , I cannot commit the will of the Commission in this matter , particularly since our right of initiative is limited to the first pillar .
But apart from that , from a political point of view , it is obvious that the Commission , when dealing with a topic as sensitive as this one , will always be very careful to take into consideration the position of the different players involved in closer cooperation and , in particular , of course , the European Parliament .
This is totally logical .
Consequently , I am giving you a legal response , but at the same time I am giving you a political response that we will give serious consideration to the points put forward by Parliament at a given time .
I would like to end by congratulating once again the rapporteur on this initiative which , along with other institutional reports tabled this week , is proof that interinstitutional dialogue has got off to a good start .
It will be followed by other reports currently being prepared by the Committee on Institutional Affairs and which will be presented to this House in October or November .
In short , I think it is up to all of us to do everything in our power to follow this path , to hope for a rapid entry into force of the Amsterdam Treaty and to then proceed - once the Treaty is approved - to the necessary institutional changes .
Thank you , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12.00 noon .
Action plan for the free movement of workers
The next item is the report ( A4-0269 / 98 ) by Barbara Weiler , on behalf of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs , on the communication from the Commission entitled ' An action plan for free movement of workers ' ( COM ( 97 ) 0586 - C4-0650 / 97 ) .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the free movement of workers is one of the essential foundations of the European Union .
The right to free movement , which is enshrined in Article 8 , allows each European citizen to enter the territory of any Member State in order to work or to seek work there .
Yet only approximately 2 % take this opportunity .
Undoubtedly , cultural and language barriers are important reasons for this reluctance .
But there are also many other obstacles which are of a political nature , for example , the fact that overdue regulation reforms are blocked in the Council , the considerable information deficits which exist at all levels , slow transposal into national law in the Member States , and bureaucratic administrative practices , such as a variety of petitions which are available to us and which include rulings of the European Court of Justice .
The Commission 's action plan contains a sound strategy to overcome these problems .
All those concerned are to be involved in developing free movement .
This means the citizens , national , regional and local authorities , the social partners , but of course the European institutions too .
I therefore welcome the Commission 's action plan and , in particular , the legislative proposals announced .
I would also like to thank the Veil High-Level Panel for its comprehensive proposals , some of which are included in the Commission 's proposals but also in my report .
I consider them to be brave yet pragmatic .
I would also like to thank the committees which were asked for an opinion and which added some important points to my report .
In my report I concentrate in particular on 31 requests to the Commission and the Council .
The first concerns coordination of social security .
Of course , it should not be the case that a person 's acquired entitlements in the home Member State lapse when he goes to another Member State .
I have requested , inter alia , that the Commission also draw the necessary consequences from the most recent Court of Justice rulings - Kohll and Decker , for example - and present these to Parliament .
The second concerns tax treatment .
Naturally , mobile citizens must not be penalized by discriminatory double taxation .
The third relates to access to employment .
I would not overrate the importance of mobility for the labour market situation , but I consider it right that this aspect was dealt with at the Luxembourg Employment Summit .
It is certainly more important for the future than at present .
The fourth concerns information and cooperation .
By this I mean in particular that , in future , employment offices should have better facilities with a view to also providing greater transparency for job seekers .
The fifth involves the freedom of entry and residence , even for third-country nationals .
The sixth relates to the recognition of educational qualifications , which must be greatly enhanced .
In conclusion , I would like to come to a rather unpleasant point .
I have heard that the PPE will not approve the report because of political demands for third-country citizens .
Of course I regret this .
I also consider it to be strange behaviour because we in the European Parliament generally work together constructively , particularly in the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs , because I made an effort to incorporate most of the 40 amendments , but also because I consider Mr Pirker 's current amendments to be decidedly destructive and populist .
I believe that we , on the left of this House , also treat the concerns and needs of our citizens carefully .
We also want to improve slowly and gradually certain requirements and restrictions concerning freedom of movement for citizens from third countries .
However , I cannot support Mr Pirker 's amendments .
Abolishing discrimination against third-country nationals cannot wait until we have a Community migration policy .
Unfortunately , in your amendments you call for a policy of isolation and demarcation .
Any attempt to prevent free choice of work , for reasons including nationality , must not be allowed to take place .
For this reason , we demand a sensible policy for the necessary integration which will bring Europe forward .
We must finally do away with the contradiction between legal entitlement and legal reality , which has unfortunately been in existence for 40 years .
Mr President , free movement of workers is one of the four freedoms granted in the Treaty of Rome .
In my view it is the least developed of these four basic freedoms .
It is clear that there are barriers to free movement of workers and consequently I congratulate the Commission for producing the action plan to try to resolve this problem .
However , the Commission must investigate indirect barriers to free movement of the work-force , such as pension portability , housing costs , health care systems and education systems , to see how they can be overcome .
I thank my colleagues on the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights for their support and sensitive suggestions but I urge the Commission to take this subject seriously as it can only help the profitability of the European Union if people are more ready to move for work .
Mr President , on behalf of my group , I want to sincerely congratulate Barbara Weiler on the great deal of work she has done on a theme that is , of course , very close to all our hearts .
Parliament has always striven to defend this fourth fundamental freedom , which is also a symbol for European citizenship and integration .
Commissioner , we hope that Parliament and the Commission will continue to fight against the tendency in some countries to fall back on oneself , to erect institutional and actual barriers against the free movement of persons .
In contrast to what is thought by some Member States , free movement will not result in a drain on budgets or loss of social security , and it is time that we understand that Europe needs mobility , that mobility gives something to society , it does not take anything away from society .
We in the Socialist group therefore thank the European Commission for this action plan and we hope , Commissioner , that the Commission quickly comes up with concrete legislative proposals , because there is still a great deal of work to be done .
This is true , for example , for the right to residency , which happily no longer applies only to those who are employed , but also to retired persons , students , the unemployed and family members , as long as you can , of course , prove that you have sufficient income and health insurance .
But , in both Community and national law there are still a great number of hindrances , great heaps of administrative obstacles that bring misery , especially to retired persons , people with temporary contracts and those being posted abroad .
The report is correct when it says that we must tackle this problem .
I honestly do not understand why the PPE does not want to support some of these very legitimate demands which , as a matter of fact , are supported by the Commission .
My group believes strongly that , regardless of the nationality of the family members , the right to family life is a fundamental human right .
I have seen that the European Commission indeed plans to implement this right to family life , and we want to support that 100 % .
Finally , my group also stands behind the gradual elimination of all forms of discrimination , certainly discrimination between citizens of the Member States and citizens of the European Union , but also the gradual elimination of discrimination between citizens of the Union and citizens of third countries who are residing here permanently .
I know that the latter is a very difficult aspect of the Parliamentary debate and I have noticed , by the way , that the European Commission also wants to do something about this in a gradual fashion .
I have also noticed that the PPE group theoretically supports this standpoint , but still links the right to free movement of subjects of third countries to a common European policy of immigration .
My group cannot support this strict linkage .
It does not seem reasonable to us to make migrants who have lived for years in the Union wait until the Council has completely finished the third pillar , and only then give people the right to travel , to look for work over the border or to transfer their social security rights over the border .
A European integration policy must indeed rest upon the responsibilities and duties of citizens of third countries , but please let us not forget that these citizens still do not have a package of rights which we as Europeans do have .
Commissioner , we support this action plan of the Commission wholeheartedly , and we wish you every success in its realization .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , freedom of movement - and here we share the same opinion - is the focal point of the Treaty on European Union .
Here we created many legal conditions to allow this to take place .
We continue to have many problems in achieving freedom of movement , not only of workers .
I now welcome the action plan presented by the Commission to improve freedom of movement for workers at least .
I welcome it because the Commission presented very specific proposals here .
In this context , I also welcome Mrs Weiler 's supplementary proposals because she believes , quite positively , that bureaucracy should be eliminated , social rights must not fall by the wayside , citizens should be informed , mutual recognition of training is necessary , and a social insurance card should be introduced , perhaps to prevent , too , the abuse of a directive on posted workers .
There are many positive points on which we are in agreement .
However , you are now being too ambitious , Mrs Weiler .
In the context of immigration and residence of third-country nationals , you have demanded the same rights for third-country nationals as for citizens of the Union .
Looking at it systematically , we can only approve it if Union-wide rules have been drawn up in advance on the migration , admission and residence of workers in the European Union , which apply to all Member States .
You are doing things the wrong way round .
Your second request is the immediate abolition of visa requirements .
The Commission has now announced that it is a very ambitious goal to consider this . You want to achieve this immediately , without any pre-conditions .
This is regarded as entirely realistic by others who think that we should introduce a transitional period , wait five years and then the Council decision should be passed .
We must not forget that the third countries must also ensure that they have sufficient border security to prevent problems in terms of people crossing the borders into the Union , and as a result within the Union .
Thirdly , you insist that the right of residence be extended to all relatives , independently of nationality , and also to all partners .
In this you are clearly taking the same line as Mr Lehne .
In doing so , you are opening the door to abuse .
I believe you have taken on too much .
You have lost all sense of what is feasible .
I agree with certain passages in the report and would support it if Mrs Weiler would support our demands that Community rules be established concerning migration , residence and asylum , so that we may then realize completely the principle of freedom of movement , including for third-country nationals .
I agree with some of your proposals , but there are some important points with which I do not agree .
Thank you .
Mr President , I think that we are dealing here with some good proposals from the Commission and also with a good report from Mrs Weiler .
Yesterday we heard from Mr Bangemann and the Liberal group who pointed out that the interests of the national states are decreasing and globalization continues to increase .
If we look at Mrs Weiler 's report in that context , I think that we should also have the courage to decide amongst ourselves that we must not discriminate against employees from other countries who work here with the necessary permits , because this is what it is actually all about .
I must say that just now I could not believe my ears when I heard Mr Pirker 's contribution to this discussion .
This can be absolutely nothing other than a " statement ' made in the context of the German elections .
I had always thought that the purpose of the European Parliament was to exist outside of party politics , to rise above this .
I deplore the fact that the Christian-Democratic group , in this instance , does not feel itself capable of doing this .
Still , I would appeal to them to support this report .
Ladies and gentlemen , it simply cannot be that , due to these small differences , Mrs Weiler 's report must go without the support of the Christian Democrats .
If I had not been able to believe my ears today , I would not be able to believe my eyes if that happened tomorrow .
That being said , Mr President , I would now like to say only that I am quite disappointed with the Commission 's answer to the written questions I submitted as part of the Kohll and Decker matter .
The Commission is also being very cautious about this matter , and I think that it is also involved with the German elections , and those elections have to be over some day , after all .
As Europe , we must be able to rise above the national and state interests .
I appeal to the Commission to do that as well .
Madam President , first I should like to congratulate Mrs Weiler on her excellent report .
In it , Mrs Weiler consistently defends the principle that free movement in the European Union must involve all those resident in the EU area , and not just workers and their families .
Students , pensioners and citizens of third countries who come to live here must also be free to move within the Union area .
The EU 's four basic freedoms have until now only embraced the free movement of the workforce .
Nothing has been said about people .
The workforce is seen as a resource that must be able to move freely within the single market along with other resources .
It is still a question of people , however , people who have human needs and feelings .
The fact that they should want to move can be due to other factors than changing demands in the workforce .
I was very surprised and disappointed by the PPE amendments that aim to qualify this principle in respect of citizens of third countries that are legally entitled to reside in the Community area .
I fully support Mrs Weiler 's proposal that visa requirements should be abolished for family members of migrant workers now living here .
When we speak of family members , be they Union citizens or citizens of third countries , we should also take into consideration the changes that have taken place when it comes to the notion of the family .
Nowadays , a family may also mean partners living together unmarried of the same or of different sex .
They must be accorded equal status to those in traditional families when determining benefits .
I definitely hope , Madam President , that the PPE will not overturn this important report .
I think this is such a valuable report that it should be approved unconditionally by Parliament .
It would be very embarrassing if we did not get consensus on it .
Madam President , allow me to go back a little and also to go into greater detail .
My thesis is that as Western Christians , as rationalists , as Europeans , we cannot be in favour of categorizing people into first and second class and shutting them in behind state borders .
I refer to the Bishop of Hippo in today 's Tunisia , the spiritual father of the Latin Church , based his treatise on grace on the essential equality of all people , even if we do not have to follow Luther 's ideal of equality regardless of what we have achieved and what we owe .
I refer here to the European enlightenment which , since Antiphon and Hippias of Elis , has argued the basic idea of equal freedom .
I also refer to the European Movement of the post-war period and its demonstrations against boundaries .
Mr Pirker and Mr Pronk , in the year of our Lord , 1998 , contrary to Community law , you are putting forward a type of conditionality to which free movement is linked , because you know that the condition will not be established so soon .
You are asking for the removal of all references to groups which are particularly subjected to discrimination today : third-country nationals , relatives of any nationality , common law spouses , workers with precarious contracts who are seeking work , migrant workers , students , pensioners , unemployed persons .
That , Mr Pirker , does not create any so-called logic of classification , although this is in any case only another term for what one wishes .
If we are to use big words here , then we should say that these amendments must be rejected for being unchristian , anti-rationalist and completely and utterly anti-European .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , firstly I would like to congratulate the rapporteur on her excellent and open report on this issue .
Allow me , first of all , to observe that this morning , when the Austrian ViceChancellor presented Austria 's programme for the presidency of the European Union , I was proud to be Austrian .
Now I am slightly irritated .
In contrast to what was said by Mr Pirker - who today created a Fortress Austria , a Fortress Europe - , this morning we spoke about the enlargement of the European Union , with all the spirit that belongs to it and all the political perspectives associated with it , with certain conditions and transitional arrangements , of course .
In the preliminary phase , however , we are introducing purely discriminatory measures and are not even in a position to integrate workers and their families from third countries .
We are applying a double standard but , apart from that , the proposal concerns a gradual implementation of these measures .
I considered this to be only practical .
On the one hand , we in the European Union talk about the freedom of movement of goods , we want to strengthen it and implement it .
Where it is a question of the freedom of movement of people , of the social rules and measures involved , we obstruct it .
Where any kind of discriminatory rules are concerned , we disgrace ourselves .
This must not be allowed .
I assume that tomorrow reason will prevail and we will be able to take the initial steps in this direction , as otherwise in many cases our deepening process will succeed only to a very poor extent and this should not and cannot be the case .
Excuse my rather emotional outburst , but that is how I feel today .
Madam President , obviously the free movement of the workforce is one of the basic rights of citizens in the EU .
This is one of the four basic rights that comprise the cornerstones of European integration .
These freedoms concern , as they must , the citizens of the Union first and foremost .
Barriers that impede free movement , like red tape relating to residence permits , problems of the equivalence of qualifications and questions of social security would only get worse if we tried to alter the status of citizens of third countries before we update Community labour legislation .
At the moment , legislation makes it impossible to put the citizens of the Union and a workforce originating outside the Union on an equal footing .
Completely equal treatment is not a politically realistic aim , either .
Because the radical action called for by Mrs Weiler to change the status of workers coming here from third countries is without any legal base ; the core of the report remains of necessity very vague .
The academic pass system that Mrs Weiler stresses will improve the situation regarding the equivalence of qualifications ; it is in itself to be supported , but its introduction must rely very much on cooperation between national authorities in the spirit of subsidiarity .
Mr President , a great deal has been said this evening about our position .
That is , of course , always enjoyable in a debate .
As exemplified by what has just been said , however , I must say that these comments are totally erroneous .
I , and I think my group as well , envision a Europe where everyone can travel freely and can reside freely .
The problem is simply that we do not have a common visa policy .
In the United States there is a common visa policy , and unrestricted travel and residency is therefore possible in that country , not only for the citizens of the United States , but also for citizens of third countries .
Unfortunately , the situation here is different .
There are many socialist governments which resist changing this situation .
I cite , for example , the government of Great Britain which refuses to take part in a common visa policy .
It is then very strange , of course , when you hear from that side of the House that we are responsible for delaying this matter .
No , Mr President , we want to do what is possible within the present legal framework , but we cannot go any further than this , because the better choice is the enemy of the right choice .
We must keep this in mind , and this applies to the Commission as well .
Commissioner , there are a tremendous number of events taking place at this instant .
There are a terrible number of complaints , especially from citizens of the Union who , in one way or another , have found themselves in difficult situations .
A great deal can be done about this .
A great deal can indeed be done about this , but it too easy to simply say : then everyone must come ; one broad , enormous family .
I always find it so striking that it is only in this context that one hears from the other side of the House about family politics .
Then it happens all at once .
I cannot believe my ears about what I am hearing .
This is all wonderful but , Mr President , our standpoint would lead to improvement in the long term .
As regards what is proposed by Mrs Weiler , with every good intention , and with every appreciation for what she has said , her proposal would not lead there . It would only mean that we would remain in our present situation , while we really want to move forward .
Madam President , I would like to take the opportunity to thank all those who have contributed to this very important debate and to thank Mrs Weiler for her contribution .
I discovered recently that this is a highly sensitive subject , irrespective of at what time of year and in what year it is being discussed .
I agree with Ms Oddy that we have to take the subject seriously and I am not satisfied that this is a freedom that has been developed as quickly as some of the other freedoms that were guaranteed , be they goods , services or capital .
This is a freedom that needs to be addressed and I agree with Mrs Weiler that the whole question of mobility is fundamental .
We cannot talk about a European employment strategy and about adaptability unless we are going to take on board what needs to be done about providing greater mobility in the European labour market .
That does not exist at this time .
The action plan on free movement of workers was adopted by the Commission in November last year .
It aims essentially at placing the right to free movement of workers in the overall context of other European Union policies and actions , with express emphasis on two key issues that underpin the whole action plan .
The first is citizenship .
Improving the exercise of the right to free movement is for the benefit of the EU citizen since this right is an essential part of European citizenship .
The second concerns the question of employment policy .
The improvement of free movement of workers is a contribution to the better functioning of the European labour market .
Since November 1997 the Commission has been actively working on the implementation of the action plan in order to fulfil the commitments that were announced in the plan .
Legislative proposals are being considered by the Commission to amend and update the core legislative text on free movement of workers .
We are talking here about Regulation 1616 / 68 on the right of free movement and Directive 360 / 68 on the right of residence of workers and their families .
These two basic legal texts have not been significantly modified for 30 years .
The time is now opportune and appropriate , given the single market , the single currency , the whole question of enlargement and the need for our employment strategy to be strengthened .
The new legislative proposals will cover key issues such as the improvement of the right of residence for job seekers and trainees and the reduction of bureaucratic obstacles for all workers .
I agree with Mrs Van Lancker in this regard .
There has to be improvement of the conditions for family reunification of European Union workers and encouragement of a space for professional mobility based on the recognition anywhere in the European Union of comparable professional qualifications of EU workers , irrespective of the Member State where they have been obtained .
This includes matters such as professional experience , diplomas and qualifications .
The proposals build on the earlier proposals we made back in 1989 and also on the action plan itself , as well as on the recommendations of the high-level panel on the free movement of persons chaired by Mrs Simone Veil .
Last week the Commission adopted a communication to the Council and Parliament on the follow-up of the report from the Veil group .
The communication highlights the importance of concrete proposals to enhance free movement .
I am pleased to recall that there have been some important legislative advances before the Council in the area of free movement of workers . The Council has recently adopted two Commission proposals concerning the free movement of workers , these being the directive on supplementary pensions and the regulation on the extension of Regulation 1408 / 71 concerning the coordination of social security regimes to special schemes for civil servants .
The Commission proposal to extend Regulation 1408 / 71 to third country nationals legally residing in one Member State is also on the Council table .
These three proposals were covered by the action plan .
The Commission is also actively working on the simplification of Regulation 1408 / 71 which is one of the most important pieces of legislation for the effective exercise of the right of free movement .
Moving away from the legislative developments , the action plan also announced actions aimed at better transparency in the employment market and better information about employment market facilities .
The European Parliament also called for such actions in its resolution .
To this end there are several key actions that have been launched quite recently .
Within the information initiative ' Citizens First ' a new action called ' Permanent Dialogue with the Citizen ' was launched at Cardiff just a month ago .
A new route map for job-seekers has been presented with a view to reinforcing , through a practical and user-friendly guide , information for citizens who wish to exercise their right to free movement .
At the Cardiff Summit also , the EURES database was presented on the Internet so that it is now fully accessible to all citizens who want to consult job offers in all of the Member States that are available through it .
Various actions to enhance information for scholars , practitioners , judges and citizens on the right of free movement of workers have been launched .
A range of conferences and seminars have now been completed in all of the Member States , including the EEA states .
There is a follow-up to these actions .
A major conference will be held in Brussels in October in order to celebrate the 30th anniversary of the entry into force of Regulation 1612 / 68 and also to look to the future .
I am therefore able to confirm that the efforts by the Commission to comply with the commitments set out in the action plan are going forward at a reasonably good pace .
In this context the resolution from the European Parliament is very important .
I must say that I am satisfied by the coincidence of views between both institutions here .
I would like to highlight that the resolution of the European Parliament stresses the importance of free movement of workers in the same way as does the Commission : through citizenship and employment .
It is important to stress that both areas are closely related nowadays in Europe and they correspond to the European citizens ' main concerns .
We know that European citizens are worried about the employment situation in Europe and that they are interested to know the possibilities of finding employment in another Member State .
Furthermore European citizens are more and more aware of the existence of a Europe-wide area of professional mobility .
They want to know how they can fully benefit from that .
The action plan - and the resolution of the European Parliament - fully endeavours to meet these concerns .
So the action plan is essentially focused on free movement of workers .
However we have not overlooked the fact that free movement , as such , includes a range of other concerns that go beyond the situation of the working population .
Such other concerns are referred to in Parliament 's resolution and they include : the elimination of border controls , including the insertion of the Schengen acquis in the Treaty ; the right of residence for students , retired people and inactive persons , in line with the concept of European citizenship ; the creation of an area of mobility for students with respect of academic qualifications obtained in the different Member States ; and the problems stemming from the disparities in fiscal legislation in the Member States as well as the interaction between fiscal and social security systems .
All these concerns are carefully taken into consideration by the Commission and are the object of initiatives under the action plan .
Finally , despite its relatively limited scope in such a wide context , the action plan on free movement of workers aims to create political momentum in the area of free movement .
The plan emphasizes the strong link between all of these various areas and although more work is certainly needed , it is an important starting point for implementing a coherent approach with the aim of obtaining for the benefit of the citizen a wide area of mobility through a border-free Europe .
I strongly believe that the European Parliament and the Commission are following the same objective .
I welcome the important contribution from the European Parliament in this respect .
I give you my undertaking that I will pursue the agenda that will lead to greater freedom of movement and to that freedom being enhanced in the better Europe that we look forward to .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I would merely like to clarify two points and answer one question , all of which will surely help to objectify the debate .
Mr Pirker , I would like to quote once again point 7 in my list of requests , that concerning visa requirements , as you unfortunately worded it wrongly .
I call on the Commission , notwithstanding the provisions of the Amsterdam Treaty , to submit without delay proposals for the abolition of visa requirements applicable to third-country nationals moving within the Union , provided that they are members of the families of migrant workers or posted workers .
It is , therefore , a modified request .
My second point concerns a question from , I believe , a Finnish Member .
Unfortunately , I have now forgotten the very finesounding name .
I suspect she is Finnish .
You observed that the European educational pass is very vague .
I suspect that you mean point 23 of my report , in which I call on the Commission to continue its work on the introduction of a European training passport .
This European training passport was presented by Commissioner Cresson .
We in the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs have discussed this European training passport in great detail and I believe that all groups , even the PPE , considered it to be a good idea .
Madam President , I have a question for the Commissioner .
He gave a good response but it is not clear to me what the Commission 's view is concerning the main point of difference between the two sides of the House .
We should know to what extent the Commission wants to incorporate the wishes of Mrs Weiler - the wishes , I would not say of the whole House but maybe the majority of the House - concerning third country nationals ?
Third country nationals are not included in our action plan except as family members .
You must remember that we are talking about reunification regulations .
They apply to family members irrespective of nationality .
They have applied that way for 30 years .
One of the big problems that I have discovered in recent days is that an awful lot of people in very senior positions have not understood that reunification has already existed for 30 years by way of law .
I do not have time to go into the details of it this evening , but it is a very interesting exercise just to look back at exactly what has been in place for 30 years as regards ascendants , descendants and other family members - some provisions are statutory and some require reunification to be facilitated .
I am trying to deal with this in a proposal before the Commission at this time .
It is important to remember that .
Thank you , Commissioner Flynn .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12.00 noon .
Insurance against civil liability ( Fourth Motor Insurance Directive )
The next item is the report ( A4-0267 / 98 ) by Mr Rothley , on behalf of the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights , on the proposal for a European Parliament and Council Directive on the approximation of the laws of the Member States relating to insurance against civil liability in respect of the use of motor vehicles and amending Directives 73 / 239 / EEC and 92 / 49 / EEC ( Fourth Motor Insurance Directive ) ( COM ( 97 ) 0510 - C4-0528 / 97-97 / 0264 ( COD ) ) .
Madam President , this title sounds very technical but in fact it concerns a relatively practical problem .
The aim is to improve protection for victims of traffic accidents in other countries .
The proposal for a directive which we are debating is based on Parliament 's first legislative initiative in accordance with the Maastricht Treaty .
I would encourage the Members of this House to avail of this instrument more often .
You have the right to do so after all !
The aim is to improve protection for victims of accidents outside their country of residence .
This concerns approximately 500 000 accidents per year , at least inside the European Union .
Why in another country ?
If an accident occurs in the home country with a vehicle which is registered in another country there is no problem .
That is dealt with by the green card bureaux .
A French national who has an accident in France involving a Danish national has no problem .
But if he has this accident in Denmark , problems arise because the insurers were not able to agree that these cases could also be dealt with by the green card bureaux .
This is why we need this directive .
The solution which we propose is not based on the harmonization of the liability law , as was occasionally proposed in the past .
No , we are only simplifying the rules .
We are not changing the substantive law .
We are not changing the jurisdiction of the courts .
We are not weakening the law ; we are merely removing boundaries .
I would suggest that the Commission adopt it as a maxim of its legal policy : no weakening of laws , only removal of boundaries .
What do we propose ?
Firstly , the victim must no longer apply to an insurer in the other country ; he can apply to a representative of this insurer in his own country , which means that all insurers in the European Union are obliged to have a representative in all other countries of the European Union who can deal with the claims .
The second is an essential factor .
We set a time limit .
This applies both to the representative of the insurer in the victim 's country of residence and to the insurer himself .
Normally , the claim must be dealt with within six months .
If this is not done , interest on arrears will be payable ; this is probably high enough to accelerate the settlement procedure .
If the Commission and the Council approve the proposal , interest on arrears will be between 11 % and 12 % .
The Commission added to this mechanism an idea for which I am grateful , an idea for a body providing compensation .
This compensation body , which will also be active in the victim 's country of residence , should , however , be restricted to just a few cases , for example , where the insurer in the other country has not named the claims settlement body or representative , or where the representative or the insurer does not reply within this six-month period , or gives an unsubstantiated reply .
Then the victim should be able to call upon this compensation body in his own country .
This idea from the Commission is excellent but we should restrict it to these instances .
I would like to thank very warmly the insurance undertakings .
They participated energetically in this directive , as did the accident victims ' organizations .
I can say today that this proposal , as it currently stands , is supported by all European insurers and by all European accident victims ' associations , with the possible exception of some minor changes in wording .
I assume that the Commission will also accept most of Parliament 's proposals .
I am pleased that it has been possible to have an initial exchange of opinions at the preparatory stage under the British presidency .
Already , at first reading , this may be a model for future cooperation between Parliament and the Council .
I am confident that the Austrian presidency will approve the common position .
There is an amendment from Mr Wijsenbeek .
Incidentally , everything was approved unanimously in the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights .
Mr Wijsenbeek knows that in theory I am in favour of his amendment .
But I believe that it is not appropriate in this context .
In conclusion , I would like to encourage the Commission to continue along these lines in terms of policy so that the people of the European Union can feel at home , not only in their own region or in their own country , but throughout Europe .
Madam President , I would firstly like to thank the rapporteur for his proposal , and also to congratulate him on it .
The Committee on Transport and Tourism has opted to give its opinion with a conclusion and without amendments , in order to lend coherence to the overall proposal .
This directive really does improve considerably the protection of accident victims outside their country of residence .
The fact that a great many citizens are affected by this proposal is underlined not only by the current holiday period but also by the one million frontier workers .
As the rapporteur said , an estimated 500 000 accidents occur every year outside the victim 's country of residence .
These are accidents concerning which the formalities can become difficult , the relevant contact persons are sometimes difficult to locate , and - even worse - in some cases it may take a long time for the compensation to come through .
We hear of delays of up to eight years .
The current directive introduces a direct right of action for the victim , which applies not only to the person responsible but also to the insurance undertaking .
The information centres will have to provide the victim with all necessary information and the claims settlement body or , if applicable , the compensation body , as designated , will in any case accelerate the procedures .
In addition , the directive also concerns accidents occurring between EU citizens in third countries - thankfully , this was added - and this also prompted the Committee on Transport and Tourism to recommend that this directive should perhaps also be given greater consideration in negotiations between the EU and third countries .
However , this directive will only take fully into account the claims to which these victims are entitled if , in our opinion , the proposed minimum figures contained in the Second Motor Insurance Directive are adapted .
The above Directive 84 / 5 is approximately 15 years old .
Consequently , in certain cases the minimum rates no longer cover the possible costs by any means , particularly in the case of serious injury .
In addition , these minimum rates vary between countries by up to 90 % .
Unfortunately , supplementary insurance is the only guarantee of appropriate compensation .
This is why the Committee on Transport and Tourism is retaining its proposal .
It is very good to reduce delays and provide correct information but , if the minimum rates are no longer enough , this does not help the victim sufficiently .
I thank the rapporteur once again for his work and I thank you for your attention .
Madam President , I would like to congratulate the rapporteur on this important report .
It is an important first too for Parliament .
It is the first time that a Parliament resolution has been used as the backdrop for a Commission proposal for legislation .
It is the first time that Article 138b of the EC Treaty has been used as a call for legislation .
This is an important directive .
It is both a consumer-friendly proposal and also an important plank of the single market .
It will help the victims of motor accidents that occur outside the victim 's home country in another Member State .
Each insurance company will have to appoint a designated representative or agent in each Member State and the victim will process the claim directly with that designated representative .
The advantage of this is that it will speed up claims considerably and ease language problems .
At present the average claim processed abroad can take up to eight years and cost at least 15 % more than a claim processed in one 's Member State .
This proposed directive will also ease the situation with - as the rapporteur explained - the deadline requirements and the penalties for non-compliance with the deadline .
On behalf of the Socialist group , I commend this report to the Commission and Parliament as an important new consumer measure .
Having a road accident is stressful enough without the added inconvenience and strain of having to wait for years while insurance companies in different countries settle the claims .
This proposal is imaginative , creative and I would like to thank the rapporteur both for producing the original resolution and report and now for reporting on the Commission 's proposal .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , it is difficult to add something original after the speeches by the Members ; this is due to the unanimous consensus expressed on every aspect of the report by Mr Rothley in my committee , the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights .
In substance , we all say the same things .
So , only a few aspects should be stressed .
First of all , even if it has already been said , I would like to point out the degree of transparency that results from this and the gain in transparency .
It is worth noting that this directive marks the first time that the European Commission responds to a request presented by the European Parliament pursuant to Article 138b . But this means a gain in transparency , because there have been times when Parliament , considering itself deprived of the power to initiate legislation , has intervened in proposals presented by the Commission with a series of amendments which have been excessive in relation to the original framework of the proposal itself ; a rather inappropriate intervention .
We have the instrument , fully demonstrated in this case , with which to define proposals that convey the will of Parliament in a more organic and rational way .
Secondly , I would also like to underline that the unanimous consensus expressed by the legal experts of the Committee on Legal Affairs is fully shared by all the European insurance companies and consumer associations ; this , too , is a fact that is not insignificant and that should naturally be pointed out .
I do not think it necessary for me to dwell on the content , also because it has already been abundantly illustrated by my fellow Members .
I truly believe that Mr Rothley 's report should be adopted in its entirety , because it represents a top-level compromise .
It is a compromise in the noble sense of the word , that is , it is the synthesis of a series of innovative incentives and concepts that first came from the European Commission and then from the Members of the European Parliament , especially the Committee on Legal Affairs , in collaboration with the insurance companies and consumer organizations that I referred to just now .
I believe that in this perspective this aspect should be underlined .
In my opinion , the amendments presented by the Committee on Legal Affairs must be approved in their entirety .
The only amendment unrelated to the unanimous work of the Committee on Legal Affairs is the one by Mr Wijsenbeek with which I do not agree , not because I am against the substance , but because the translation in all the languages of the forms used to declare the accident and prepare the notification of claim already exists .
I know this from first-hand experience from an accident in France some 10 years ago .
The forms are written in various languages , but they are the same colour and the questions are presented in the same way , which is why I consider the amendment superfluous and believe that it should be rejected .
I would also like to emphasize that the idea of creating a compensation body should be understood in a context of subsidiarity and freedom , where Member States will be free to choose within the public or private structures the compensation body they consider most appropriate .
In addition to these observations , I would finally like to thank Mr Rothley .
Madam President , I would first like to give my compliments to the rapporteur .
I would also like to express my appreciation for the way in which he has achieved compromises in the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights . He is ultimately the initiator of this private Member 's legislation .
In that regard , therefore , it is truly a beautiful piece of work that adds something real for citizens of the Union .
The citizen is becoming increasingly mobile and that means that he crosses the border much more frequently . Because the traffic situation is unfortunately still so different there , an accident can sometimes occur .
But the situation can be even more complicated than the average case presented in Mr Rothley 's report .
Imagine - I have taken an arbitrary situation - a Spaniard and a Greek have an accident in Italy .
In that case , if they should have to initiate legal proceedings , there is still a problem about where they should initiate those proceedings .
This shows the magnitude of the problem of equality of rights in the Union . It is still not true that every citizen can initiate legal proceedings with equal treatment and equal status everywhere in the Union .
To this day , foreigners are often placed at a disadvantage .
Finally , Madam President , I would like to say something about my amendment .
It has been rejected here by the rapporteur who said that it must be somewhere else , and by Mr Casini who said that it exists already .
That is true , Mr Casini .
I am in favour of integration .
But , if citizens come into conflict with each other , they have a sort of basic distrust and they may think that they are being cheated by someone .
If there was a single document , not only in their own language but also in a number of other languages , so that they could mutually determine that it is indeed the same form with the same wording , then we would be working towards the integration of the citizen .
What could be more beautiful than this , and what are we doing here other than promoting this integration ?
I have , therefore , re-tabled this amendment at the instigation of the insurers , and I appeal to you once again to adopt it .
Madam President , in the case of Denise Matthews against the United Kingdom , which was handled by our neighbour , the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights , a court other than the European Court of Justice in Luxembourg has ruled for the first time that the European Parliament has full legislative authority .
And why ?
One of the strongest arguments for the Committee on Citizens ' Rights was the right of initiative of Article 138b . Among other things , this article provides the European Parliament , according to the Committee on Citizens ' Rights , with full legislative authority .
This is a historic moment , Madam President and Commissioner .
For the first time we have made use of the right of initiative and I fully support Mr Rothley , not only in his personal appeal to you , Madam President , but also in his appeal to Commissioner Monti to continue in this new direction .
In the interest of the citizens we must make more use of this right of initiative .
I will not go into the content . I support the amendment tabled by Mr Wijsenbeek , because he is correct .
That is another matter .
But , the most important point I want to make here is that we are extraordinarily grateful to Mr Rothley for the initiative with which he has supported the legislative role of the European Parliament and he deserves our appreciation and support .
Madam President , the increasingly apparent difficulties concerning the settlement of claims to the detriment of the victims of traffic accidents abroad have for a long time required a regulation to solve the problem .
On the one hand , a growing number of citizens are affected and , on the other hand , the procedures which currently exist are insufficient to provide a fair solution for every case .
The aspects which need to be solved most urgently are : guaranteeing the victim the direct right of action , and ensuring the payment of compensation .
These were issues that needed to be resolved and I believe that the amendments tabled have contributed very successfully in this respect .
I must naturally thank Mr Rothley for the excellent work he has done .
Nonetheless , although we support in general terms the aim of these amendments , we have some reservations with respect to Amendment No 33 to Article 5 . It appears to us that the drafting of this amendment might be more beneficial to the insurers than to the victims themselves .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the proposal for a European Parliament and Council Directive that we are considering tonight has been keenly awaited both by drivers and by insurance professionals and international automobile associations .
It must be underlined that this text is due to the initiative of Parliament .
It was in response to a clear expectation and Parliament has proved that it was able to take its legislative responsibilities seriously by providing a work of quality .
We should all be pleased with this .
The stated objective is to simplify the procedure of claims settlements for injured parties by facilitating access to the other party 's insurance company .
In order to achieve this , the proposal for a directive proposes four measures : the introduction of a direct right of action ; the appointment of a representative of each insurance company in every Member State who will have responsibility for settling claims ; the establishment of information centres ; and finally , the creation of compensation bodies .
Admittedly , this legal construction may seem a little heavy , a little complex , what the French familiarly call " a gasworks ' .
The amendments tabled by the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights aim at complementing the text , even at giving it greater coherence and rigour .
We will therefore support them .
In conclusion , I would like to acknowledge the remarkable work of the rapporteur , Mr Rothley , who has been able to bring clarity to a complex text and who has proven his great talent as a jurist .
I would like to congratulate all my colleagues in the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights , in particular two of them who combine both charm and competence , Mrs Palacio and Mrs Mosiek-Urbahn .
Madam President , it truly may be the time that is almost inviting us to talk in confidence , to talk among friends .
For me , too , the previous speeches have already been sufficiently detailed as regards the technical aspects to allow me to speak of the history of this directive . I can speak of how the European Union today is still a frontier territory where a person , a Member with a good idea , with the Treaty behind him and with a great deal of firmness and a strong ability to negotiate is able to initiate something that is important for all of us at the stage when we feel that we are , I will not say consumers , but , rather , like the man in the street .
Madam President , this has not been an easy directive .
Thirty-six amendments were tabled by Mr Rothley , but another 36 amendments were tabled by the various members of the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights , twenty of which were mine .
Subsequently , Mr Rothley - with firmness , as I have said , but also with a great ability to negotiate , and a great ability to understand the concerns regarding the issue of subsidiarity - accepted 10 compromise amendments .
This meant that it was possible for those 36 final amendments to be adopted unanimously in committee , and I hope that tomorrow , if not unanimously , that we will approve the report by an overwhelming majority .
Mr Rothley , I have considered the history , the short history , from Parliament 's original resolution where use was made of Article 138b . I have considered it and when I am told that in the European institutions we only do very abstract work , work that is very distant , and that we do not concern ourselves with specific problems , I will show them this work .
And the only thing that I regret is that from this it will not be evident how extremely pleased and honoured all of us have been to work with you .
Madam President , the previous speakers have already discussed in sufficient detail the content and advantages of this report .
I would , therefore , like to discuss only two points which I consider to be particularly noteworthy because they bring us significantly closer to a citizens ' Europe .
The first concerns the citizen-friendly content of the planned directive .
It really is high time for this important area to be dealt with .
As a result of mass tourism and the free movement of goods , services and persons , the volume of traffic moving from one state to another is greater than ever before .
The danger is correspondingly high that citizens are victims of an accident which occurs outside the home country and from which claims could arise against other EU citizens or their insurance .
It is , therefore , particularly welcome that the directive will provide road users in the Union with such comprehensive , fast and effective protection and which will go beyond the mere direct right of action against the insurer , by having an agent of the insurer in the victim 's country , by means of mechanisms to locate the latter , if necessary , and by means of a centre in each Member State which can itself deal with compensation should difficulties arise .
We would never have achieved this multi-faceted protection for citizens , at least not at this time , if Parliament had not taken the initiative itself .
I now come to the second point which I wish to discuss .
This is the first time the European Parliament has availed of the right of indirect initiative conferred on it by the Maastricht Treaty .
Parliament , as the elected representative of the citizens of Europe , is entitled to have the legislative initiative .
If the European Parliament makes frequent use of its new initiative it must in the long term strengthen its influence on the European Union 's legislative system .
This increases , at the same time , the indirect influence of the voters on policy in Europe .
The result can only be to improve the standing of the European Parliament among the people and thus to increase its political authority .
I therefore expressly thank the rapporteur for beginning this initiative here in Parliament .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to congratulate the European Parliament and the rapporteur , Mr Rothley , for three reasons : for the content of this directive , for the institutional motive and for the approach taken .
I am pleased with the content because , as Mr Rothley said , this directive is aimed at citizens so that they feel at home not only in their country , but also in the rest of Europe .
This proposal for a directive in fact concerns a large number of citizens and concerns a difficult moment in their life , a difficult experience , when they are victims in a Member State where they do not reside of a road accident caused by a motor vehicle registered and insured in another Member State .
The second reason is institutional .
It has already been underlined , but , on behalf of the Commission , I want to place particular emphasis on the fact that this is the first time that Parliament has made use of Article 138b . I must say that I am delighted as a Member of the Commission that this institutional ' first ' has occurred in an area so relevant to citizens ' lives .
The third reason why I am satisfied and pleased is the way in which this problem was approached , with the positive contribution of consumer citizens and the insurance industry which helped make this proposal for a directive possible .
None of the motor vehicle insurance directives already in force take into particular consideration the specific problem which is dealt with here of compensating the victims .
From a legal point of view , they are covered by the green card system , but in practice they encounter difficulties in obtaining compensation from the insurer of the party liable .
The purpose of this proposal for a directive is to provide such victims with another legal instrument in order to offset the practical difficulties that they encounter .
I would like to emphasize that the proposal does not involve excessive costs for the insurance industry and national governments . Another positive aspect of the proposal is its pragmatism , and if the rapporteur will allow me to say so , I believe that he appreciates pragmatism in proposals for legislation .
The new structure does not entail any increased costs , because Member States and the insurance companies can to a large degree avail themselves of existing structures which can be used simultaneously for different purposes .
In addition , even if the measure we are talking about means some costs for the insurance companies , the benefit for the company is quite substantial , in that the new mechanisms would lower the costs that are usually borne by the victims in the country where the accident occurred .
Such costs include , for example , translation of the police report , and fees paid to lawyers because the victims are not familiar with the procedures in force in the Member State where the accident occurred and because they cannot deal with the insurance company without the assistance of a legal expert .
I will now turn to the individual amendments .
The Commission is very happy to accept Amendments Nos 1 , 2 , 3 , 6 , 7 , 9 , 12 , 16 , 18 , 20 , 21 , 25 and 31 .
These amendments improve the wording of the language and offer useful clarifications in the text .
The Commission also agrees to accept partially Amendments Nos 15 , 17 , 19 , 28 , 29 , 30 , 33 .
Point ( a ) of Amendment No 15 on extending the right to accidents that occur in a third country cannot be accepted .
This problem needs to be examined more closely in the light of other international agreements .
Amendment No 17 is an excessively simplified version of the Commission 's initial proposal .
As for Amendment No 19 , we cannot accept in a directive suggestions regarding persons who might assume the role of agent to process the claim .
In Amendment No 28 , there has to be a description of the tasks to be performed by the information centre .
In Amendment No 29 , reference to the Member State where the insurance company has been authorized to operate is not appropriate .
In Amendment No 30 , the deadline could delay compensation of the victim ; furthermore , there is an erroneous reference to Directive 84 / 5 / EEC that does not contain any provision referring to the compensation body .
In Amendment No 33 , there is no reason to indicate the type of entities that could act as compensation bodies .
In the same point , in cases where the insurer cannot be identified , the Commission could accept the intervention of the compensation body only if the final responsibility lies with the guarantee fund in accordance with paragraph 4 of Article 1 , of Directive 84 / 5 .
For another group of amendments , the Commission can accept them in spirit or with a few adaptations : I am referring to Amendments Nos 5 , 10 , 13 , 26 and 27 .
Of these , I would like to very briefly look at No 26 and No 27 .
We will not accept the parts that would lead to excessive and harmful harmonization and a procedure to compensate the victim that is burdened with too many time limits and made more complex by procedural details .
I finally come to the various amendments that the Commission cannot accept because they do not in any way improve the text proposed and might create confusion regarding the meaning of some of the provisions .
I am talking about Amendments Nos 4 , 8 , 11 , 22 , 24 , 35 , 36 and 37 .
Moreover , the Commission may not accept Amendments No 14 or No 34 , and this in order to guarantee the overall coherence with the three directives already in force for motor vehicle insurance matters .
The Commission also cannot accept Amendment No 23 ; it could accept a stronger version of Article 3 , paragraph 6 , but not the wording proposed in Amendment No 26 .
The best solution could be a compromise between the Commission proposal and what is suggested in Amendment No 26 .
Lastly , the Commission also rejects Amendment No 32 , because in some Member States the information services are provided free of charge by the public authorities .
There is no reason to introduce additional costs .

As far as Amendment No 37 is concerned , Mr Wijsenbeek , the use of multilingual forms for collisions could , in our opinion , be introduced through a voluntary agreement between the insurance organizations and not necessarily through a directive .
I am sorry if I have burdened with a list of amendments something whose great value must nonetheless be emphasized . This proposal is extremely important because of the institutional innovation , the closer involvement of citizens and the fact that it proves that the single market can be achieved on the initiative of Parliament , in addition to the initiative of the Commission , reconciling the interests of consumers and the readiness of the industry to collaborate .

Thank you , Commissioner Monti .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12.00 noon .
Building a sustainable Europe
The next item is the report ( A4-0233 / 98 ) by Mrs Hulthén , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection , on the communication from the Commission on environment and employment ( Building a sustainable Europe ) ( COM ( 97 ) 0592 - C4-0655 / 97 ) .
Madam President , employment and the environment , which is what the Commission 's communication is about , are two areas which for a long time and on many occasions have come into conflict with each other .
But since things have moved forward , not least in the area of the environment , it has been shown how erroneous and out-ofdate that actually is .
The environmental aspect and environmental awareness have become a more integrated part of society .
In spite of the development which has taken place , there is still a lot left to do .
In this report , which I have tried to prepare with valuable contributions from others , not least from the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs , I have tried to put forward proposals on how we can go further in building a sustainable Europe .
I would also like to say that in the time that work on the report has been going on , I have discovered that there is enormous inventiveness and development locally and regionally around the Union .
In order to be able to see at all the development in a sector like ' green jobs ' , it is important to have a reasonable definition of what a ' green job ' actually is .
The Commission 's definition is attractive , almost philosophical , but perhaps not so practical to use for gauging properly what it is actually about .
That is perhaps the first inquiry which should be made when this work is continued .
In order to be able to make comparable statistics and take proper measures it is necessary to have a clear and distinct definition of the subject .
There are four main areas in which I think the jobs of the future could be , and where a change in the current situation is entirely necessary for the sake of sustainability .
These are the energy sector , construction , waste and , not least , the agricultural sector .
This is perhaps one of the most important areas in which the Union has the power to bring about a change , and where it is important that something happens to change the current path .
We know that during the last 15 years an increasing number of organic farms have been created in Europe .
Consumer demand for environmentally-correct food has grown constantly .
However , so far , the Union has shown relatively little interest in following this trend and satisfying the consumers ' demands .
If we are to make a change and get this stimulus for ' green jobs ' , we must also begin in the agricultural sector , where the Union actually has the opportunities and resources to do something .
This is a very bitter pill to swallow .
The methods to stimulate this development and get the environment and employment to go together can look very different .
The consumers are perhaps one of the most important parts in this ; they must be made aware .
It is they who are making demands .
Unfortunately awareness is not genetically determined , but is something which has to come from experience .
Therefore , consumers must have the opportunity to make choices , to get information and to find out what products exist and what demands can be made .
Aware companies are equally important ; aware companies with producer liability .
That does not come of itself either .
Both carrots and whips are needed from the political side to drive developments forward .
It is also about aware authorities which accept their responsibility and which recognize the opportunities they have , such as in relation to public procurement , to stimulate the development of more environmentally friendly companies , a development which goes in the right direction .
It is also a matter of us giving training , and stimulating technical development and cooperation between scientists from NGOs , trades union movements and , not least , authorities .
There is an awful lot to do in this area .
In order to manage this sustainable development , we must go through sector by sector and perhaps also sometimes cast out this or that old holy cow which has been left over from before .
We have a clear responsibility and a clear task , not least from the citizens of Europe .
We need a better environment , but we also have 20 million people unemployed who need jobs .
That is where the challenge lies .
Twelve amendments to the report have been submitted .
Of these 12 , there are two which I can support .
They are Amendment No 3 and Amendment No 11 from Mr Virgin .
I am not against the others on principle , but I do not think they make the report or the Commission 's proposal any clearer ; in fact , the opposite is true .
Madam President , Mrs Hulthén , your report is truly very interesting and I thank you for having accepted the conclusions of the opinion of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs .
I congratulate you on your contributions .
I think that we will all agree that the deterioration of the environment has become one of the greatest problems we are currently faced with due to the type of development of the industrial society .
Dirty , smelly rivers , rubbish and waste all around , and the irritating smoke in the cities are perhaps the most visible signs of a planet - our planet Earth - which is increasingly polluted . And there is also another form of pollution that is less apparent yet closer to us : the illnesses caused by physical and chemical pollutants .
The Commission 's communication on the environment and employment is aimed at establishing the general principles of a strategy to allow for the creation of synergy between environmental policy and employment .
It is a question of creating jobs that decontaminate the air and the water we pollute , that recycle and reuse the waste we produce , and that reforest our felled woods . In addition , research and technology must meanwhile improve the damage to the environment which will , supposedly , also improve our society .
As I believe that we devote more time to talking about the environment and employment than actually implementing real and quantifiable measures to solve these two serious problems , I would modestly call on the Commission to criticize , within the context of the launch of this European strategy , our current " throwaway society ' .
It is only in this way , I believe , that we would realize our objective .
Madam President , the environment creates employment .
This slogan has been around here for a long time .
It was around as early as 1993 , when the decision on a new development model was taken at the suggestion of Commission President Jacques Delors .
The inefficiency caused by over-exploitation of natural resources and insufficient use of labour should be replaced by sustainable development .
In addition to this change of emphasis , Delors also requested that the field of environmental protection become a new area of employment .
The improvement of our environment and quality of life - which has not yet been discussed - should be used as a means to create new jobs and to thus help reduce unemployment .
For completely inexplicable reasons , the Commission neglected this important approach towards an economic policy which brings together the fields of environment and employment in such a way that they strengthen each other .
This statement by the Commission was long overdue .
Now , of course , we expect that this paper will not be forgotten again , but that it will be represented actively in the monitoring committees by the Commission representatives and that they will propose using money from the Structural Funds for the environment , precisely in those areas to which funds have not yet been allocated . We also expect that these changes will be approved quite quickly in the Commission so that the good work which we have on paper and which really is a good start , can also be implemented .
It is therefore logical , of course , that the Commission should advocate a new regulation on the Structural Funds , that the use of funds in this innovative area should be set at an appropriately high level , and that environmental authorities and organizations should also be involved in planning , evaluation and implementation .
Madam President , Madam Commissioner , I asked if I might speak to defend and support the general context of Mrs Hulthén 's report , which seems to me to be generally correct , especially when the ' environment ' at present employs over 3.5 million people in the European Union and the annual growth forecast that is generally accepted , particularly in studies by the OECD itself , is around 5.5 % .
And thus , in a Europe in which not only employment but also the progressive and inevitable inclusion of the environment in the European Union 's policies is a constant challenge , employment and the environment have become two sides of a single coin , a counterpoint to a now-outworn development model , based on price-investment ratios involving the excessive exploitation of natural resources .
I would also like to take this opportunity to emphasize that the coming reform of the common agricultural policy basically demands , and reinforces the need for , the attribution of sufficient weight to environmental questions , also in the light of this sustainable development strategy to which we have pledged our support .
We must also underline the role of the Structural and Cohesion Funds in developing environmental policy , particularly this link between the environment and employment .
There is no doubt , for example , that the rule that 50 % of the Cohesion Fund must be applied to the environment has contributed very positively to improving the quality of life in the Cohesion states , but it has also increased the amount of environmental investment in the Cohesion states , making the link between the role of the environment and job creation more obvious .
In addition , it is now generally acknowledged that the sectors and companies that are investing in ecological processes , production systems and products will find themselves less and less able to compete within the European Union and in trade between the Union and third countries .
This is why we are declaring our support for Mrs Hulthén 's report , and also why we challenge the Commission to submit some practical proposals , after this communication , in line with the report Committee on the Environment of the European Parliament .
Madam President , we are now discussing a good report which contains a lot of good ideas for the Commission to work on .
I would like to congratulate Mrs Hulthén on this .
The report raises important questions about how environmental policy can contribute to creating new , meaningful jobs in the EU .
As data from the Commission 's communication shows , the environmental sector is expanding strongly with an estimated growth in the coming years of 5.5 % .
This is very pleasing .
The explanation is partly peoples ' increasing commitment to environmental issues .
This changes their demand towards environmentally friendly goods and thus strengthens employment in the environmental sector .
Political decisions on emission limits , etcetera , have yielded results in the form of investments and therefore jobs .
Yesterday we had a debate on financial instruments .
If they are used in the right way , they can undeniably contribute to a better environment and increased employment .
However , excessive use or defective environmental charges risk having the opposite effect .
I also believe it is important to stress the fact that growth has an important function in this context .
With increased growth the opportunities for us to invest in a better environment increase .
That is exactly what is happening . Growth in our modern society is coming through new sectors .
The environment is undeniably in the front line .
The European Council 's recommendations on how we can increase employment in Europe are clearly closely linked to the subject we are discussing this evening .
Some of these ideas are expressed in the amendments proposed by the PPE Group .
I hope that the rapporteur will be able to support all these proposals if she is allowed to sleep on it .
Mr President , we agree with Mrs Hulthén 's report and the opinions of the Committee on Regional Policy and the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs .
In the opinion of the Committee on Regional Policy , in fact , confirmation is given of something that is very clear : " the patterns of production and consumption today are far from sustainable ' , as stated clearly in the fifth action programme on the environment .
And naturally , the industrialized countries are essentially responsible today for the environmental situation in the world .
In the Amsterdam Treaty , employment is linked to the environment , and these two sectors are linked to the remaining policies . Yet we all know that decisions on economic and agricultural issues are adopted that have nothing to do with the protection of the environment .
Therefore , we are in complete agreement that local and regional authorities should participate where projects related to the Structural Funds and the environment are involved .
We also support the use of those people who , in some regions of the European Union , come from industry and who could receive training to allow them to work , in fact , in jobs treating water , treating waste , treating contaminated land and caring for natural areas .
As the OECD rightly states , the environment sector is a sector which might experience a growth of 5.5 % in the coming years in terms of generating employment .
We are not used to seeing other sectors with such a level of growth ; it is more usual to see a decline .
It is , therefore , essential to link employment and the environment .
Madam President , I would like to begin by congratulating Mrs Hulthén on an excellent report on two very important and pressing themes , namely , the environment and employment .
Information from Eurostat shows that we have around 3.5 million environment-related jobs in the EU today .
We also have the modest estimate from the OECD of an annual increase in environment-related jobs of 5.5 % .
This shows quite clearly that the combination of necessary environmental investments and ' green jobs ' is not only good economics , but also a way to combine underused human resources and overused natural resources .
Since Commissioner Bjerregaard is here at this late hour , which I really appreciate , I would like to urge the Commission to approve as soon as possible Sweden 's action plan for employment and ' green jobs ' which has been waiting for approval from the Commission since November .
Otherwise , the signals from the Commission will be very contradictory .
Naturally , my group is going to support this report , but we would appreciate it if we also received support for our amendment , which I consider to be an important addition to paragraph 45 , that is , that the countries which want to introduce a tax on energy and a carbon dioxide tax should take a lead and show the other countries what can be done to fulfil the commitments which were made in Kyoto .
Madam President , Commissioner , after so many years spent preaching to , and so much energy deployed in convincing , the developing countries that they should abandon the wasteful growth example of the North and commit themselves resolutely to the ascetic path of sustainable development , the European Union has realized that it , too , could do with sweeping its own back yard and admit that persistent unemployment and massive exclusion are not sustainable ways of life .
Does this mean that we are abandoning our wonder at productivist technologies , so voracious in their use of natural resources and so misanthropic ?
Are we now recognizing that the aim of development is an improvement in living conditions , a reduction in inequalities and the mass diffusion of knowledge ?
Are we now going to place the people at the heart of this development dynamic ?
The environment is transverse .
Upstream it feeds on policies of growth , education , training , and employment ; policies of public health , taxation , promotion and the labelling of public services .
Downstream it expresses the stable emergence of the environmental conditions in the fields of energy , transport , agriculture , industry and tourism .
Cooperation policy should generate policies of co-development .
However , we must not sink into otherworldliness .
We know that , in the short term , there will be no net creation of jobs on a large scale .
In addition , integrating the environment into economic policies often amounts to incorporating new costs .
Taxing pollution sometimes creates competitiveness differentials , thus destroying jobs .
We must , nevertheless , continue to move forward .
In order to do this , in order to reduce these risks and to control these perverse effects , we must envisage a global environmental and employment policy .
It is the only way of establishing a level of coordination which will make all efforts promoting the environment and employment both just and efficient .
For this , clear objectives are needed , and undoubtedly financial means which are more substantial than the mere mention of Structural Funds .
Madam President , I would have liked to say that there was once a time when people believed that the environment destroyed employment .
But it was not long ago that this way of thinking prevailed .
Today , everyone has realized that it is only by respecting natural resources and using raw materials and energy economically and carefully that jobs can be secured in the long term and thus sustainable development can be introduced .
I think it is very important that the Commission has submitted its statement on the environment and employment to Parliament this year , after careful preparation by means of a hearing , and that we are discussing it now , at the beginning of the Austrian presidency , which will deal with ways in which national employment projects can be implemented .
I thank Mrs Hulthén , the rapporteur , for the competent way in which she took on and prepared this report .
We certainly still have a great deal to do in order to translate into concrete terms the issue of which jobs can be created where , not to create too many jobs by means of repairing the environment , where there is still plenty to be done , but in particular to create jobs where new industries are working on preparing for more environmentally friendly operations and creating the necessary infrastructure .
Even in the Kyoto process , if it is a question of the reduction of emissions , in this area it will also be a question of jobs because due to the thermal insulation alone in buildings which already exist , many states will only be able to achieve half the necessary reduction in emissions .
Commissioner , I hope that the issue of the environment and employment will play a particularly important role in the debate which will take place in the next six months .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I totally agree with the view expressed by the rapporteur and the delegates during today 's debate : that we are discussing a very important topic , and therefore it is of course a matter of irritation that it has come up so late in the day . But that must not prevent us from studying the importance of the relationship between environmental protection and employment .
Firstly , allow me to address employment , because employment is now clearly included as an item on the agenda of the European Union .
We know that employment was included in the Amsterdam Treaty as a goal for the Union .
We held a extraordinary summit on employment last year in Luxembourg , and this year , for the first time , all 15 Member States have presented their action plans on employment to the Commission .
The Commission presented an initial evaluation of these plans at the Cardiff Summit , giving us the opportunity to scrutinize these policies from an environmental point of view and to discuss with our colleagues how to promote the existing synergies between the two policies .
One way of doing so would be to integrate the objective of environmental protection and sustainable development into the new 1999 employment guidelines .
As regards environmental protection , European commitment dates back further , and many have mentioned this , but it was of course given new momentum at the Cardiff Summit , where a reinforced strategy for integrating the environment into all other EU policies was approved .
Today , we are not only linking economics and the environment .
We are also adding a social dimension to sustainable development .
Balanced economic growth , environmental protection and job creation are not only mutually compatible ; they are building blocks of long-term development strategy .
In order to implement this new development model , there are certain principles - as outlined in the declaration - that must be adhered to , and I will briefly mention some of these .
We need environmentally-oriented investment .
We need higher levels of employment , and by that I mean we need a change in fiscal legislation - which , as Mr Virgin mentioned , we have also debated this evening , and almost just as late at that - by shifting taxation away from the workforce .
Finally , we need the involvement of all interested parties .
In connection with climate problems , I can see a number of possibilities in particular for creating jobs in new industries and services , whether it is a question of expanding the application of renewable energy sources , improving energy efficiency in terms of processes , products and buildings , or increased exports to markets beyond the Union .
All this would save money .
It would improve the environment and create jobs .
I agree with Mrs Graenitz in that it is very gratifying to see that the Austrian presidency will be addressing the declaration on the environment and employment at the Environment Council in October .
I hope the Council will take that opportunity to adopt a resolution that would serve to strengthen the commitment of the Commission and the Member States to take further steps in the areas of the environment and employment .
Madam President , I will stop here , but before I do so , I would like to express my appreciation to the three committees of the European Parliament for their excellent work on the report and their statements on the Commission 's declaration on the environment and employment .
In particular , I would like to thank Mrs Hulthén for the terrific job she has done as rapporteur , and I would also like to thank Mr Ken Collins , chairman of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection , for his active participation in the conference on the environment and employment hosted jointly by the European Parliament and the Commission last year .
And finally , I would just also like to express my satisfaction with the productive collaboration I have enjoyed with my colleague Padraig Flynn .
Thank you , Commissioner Bjerregaard .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12.00 noon .
( The sitting was closed at 00.05 a.m. )
Approval of the Minutes
Madam President , the reason I want to say something about the Minutes is my letter announced to the President yesterday .
I would like to sincerely thank all the Quaestors for the fact that they granted my request to present the legality , not the expediency but the legality , of the system of mandatory voting , financial discipline and the fiscal consequences of this to the legal adviser , in whom I have a great deal of trust .
Many thanks , Quaestors and also a word of thanks to Mr Falconer who set everything in motion on behalf of the ' backbenchers ' of this House .
Mr Falconer and the Quaestors , many thanks .
Madam President , during Question Time to the Commission I withdrew my question , but this was not noted in the Minutes .
Naturally we will rectify that .
Are there any other comments on the Minutes ?
Madam President , I notice from the voting record that my vote was not recorded for the first two votes , for which I was present , and which I thought that my machine had registered .
I voted ' no ' on the first vote and ' no ' on the second vote .
We will correct that .
( Parliament approved the Minutes . )
Mrs González Álvarez wishes to speak , on a point of order .
Madam President , I would like to make a request to the Presidency .
At the last partsession we adopted a resolution condemning the situation of the prisoners and those condemned to death in Equatorial Guinea .
The day before yesterday the Bubi leader Martín Puye died .
Imprisoned under terrible conditions in the jails in Equatorial Guinea , he was not allowed to talk to anyone , his food and water were rationed and he was in a cell measuring 1.5 m by 1.5 m .
We would ask the Presidency - since there is not enough time to table an urgent resolution - to call on the Malabo authorities to carry out an investigation and we ask that our institution takes the necessary measures to ensure that nothing similar happens again because various other prisoners are in the same situation as this Bubi leader was .
From now on we must ensure that such an event is never repeated .
This man was 58 years old .
It is terrible that he has died in such a way ; the other prisoners have not been sentenced to death but they are going to die in the same way due to prison conditions .
Mrs González Álvarez , naturally it is difficult for us to intervene from here .
We have to consider how our protests might be able to help in future .
It think I should perhaps refer this matter to the competent committee or even to the Bureau .
Mr Morris has the floor .
Madam President , on a point of order .
Last night during Question Time we did not come to the question that I intended to pose to the Council .
It is an important one .
At the present time there are five prisoners in a Saudi prison accused of apostasy and they are facing the penalty of death by beheading .
Two are Europeans and it is highly likely , as a consequence of appeals from seven Member States , that they will have their sentence of death commuted , possibly to a term of imprisonment .
Of the five , three are Filipinos and it is highly likely , as in the past , that the Filipinos - in other words the non-European people who are accused of apostasy in Saudi Arabia - will in fact be beheaded by sword .
I would appeal to the President and to the Parliament , and certainly to the Council , that we make an urgent appeal to the authorities in Saudi Arabia for mercy and clemency to be shown to all five .
We would be appealing in fact for the fundamental freedom of religious expression in Saudi Arabia .
I would make an urgent appeal , on behalf of these five people , for this action to be taken immediately .
Mr Morris , the Presidency is here today .
I do not know whether the gentlemen have made a note of that . If not , I would suggest that we resubmit your question in writing so that the Presidency can take up this protest .
Mrs Ferrer has the floor .
Madam President , I would like to say that I agree fully with what Mrs González said because it is not only a question of there having now been an unfortunate death - that of the leader of the Bubis - but also that there are another 10 or 11 people in danger .
I believe that this Parliament , which has very clearly stated that it is opposed to the death penalty in general and , in particular , to the death sentences of certain prisoners in Equatorial Guinea , should take action , at least through the Presidency of the Council .
We could pass this message on to the Council so that it contacts the authorities in Equatorial Guinea to intervene and , in any case , so that those authorities allow a visit by European Union authorities to monitor the situation of these prisoners and thereby guarantee justice for this people .
Thank you , Mrs Ferrer . We have noted your remarks .
That is how we will proceed .
Mr Smith has the floor .
Madam President , I have some brief comments which I hope the presidency will take on board .
I understand that the Government of South Korea , due to the industrial unrest in that country , have issued warrants for the arrest of 55 trade union leaders .
I would ask the presidency to make it quite clear that we do not approve , and fundamentally oppose such conduct .
Deliberations of the Committee on Petitions - Amendment of Rule 156 ( 3 ) of the Rules of Procedure - Amendment of Rule 156 ( 3 ) of the Rules of Procedure
The next item is the joint debate on the following reports :
Report ( A4-0250 / 98 ) by Mr Fontana , on behalf of the Committee on Petitions , on the deliberations of the Committee on Petitions during the parliamentary year 1997-1998-Report ( A4-0209 / 98 ) by Mr Evans , on behalf of the Committee on the Rules of Procedure , the Verification of Credentials and Immunities , on amendment of Rule 156 ( 3 ) of Parliament 's Rules of Procedure relating to the right of petition-Report ( A4-0158 / 98 ) by Mr Wibe , on behalf of the Committee on the Rules of Procedure , the Verification of Credentials and Immunities , on the amendment of Rule 156 of Parliament 's Rules of Procedure ( Right of petition )
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , for the Committee on Petitions the July partsession traditionally offers the opportunity to present its annual report but it is also a time for the Members of the House to debate the institution of the right of petition , our understanding of which seems to be at times inversely proportional to its importance .
The right of petition enables European citizens to have closer contact with the Community institutions by means of their requests , making these institutions aware of the preoccupations and expectations of citizens , especially when the intertwining of Community and national legislation ends up violating the rights of individuals .
Indeed , a lot of petitions , I would say too many , demonstrate that the Member States disregard or incorrectly apply these laws that they themselves helped approve at European level .
Whether we are talking about the more general case of discrimination between Community and national citizens or the more specific case of the threatened expulsion of Community citizens , only because they are unemployed , or the case of practitioners of liberal professions who fail to obtain recognition of their own diploma , there is an infinite number of extremely interesting cases that Community citizens submit to the European Parliament by petition .
These are human cases , sometimes painful , always rich in lessons , that we are trying to solve within the confined limits of our means , resources and competences .
This is possible also because of the contribution of the European Commission and its services which , I stress , unlike the Council and the Member States , are in constant dialogue with our committee nearly every day .
From the numerous cases examined and solved emerges a push to demand a more forceful and direct legislative role for the European Parliament that has the favour of the people and to promote a system of better information for Parliament itself and the institution of the right of petition .
An in-depth reflection is therefore necessary , also in view of enlargement , in order to determine new instruments and procedures for the effective handling of petitions .
The national authorities and the institutions , especially the Council , need to be more directly involved in these procedures , for too often they remain silent and do not act upon our requests for information or intervention .
In the report , we are also pleased with the fact that relations with the European Ombudsman are fruitful and constructive , in the interests of European citizens and of transparency of Community actions .
We would also like to see a better use of new information technology , providing the Parliament with the appropriate instruments .
Although quantitative figures should never prevail over qualitative figures , the figures are in themselves very eloquent .
I recall that in this period of time 1312 petitions were presented , 582 were declared admissible , 529 inadmissible .
I will again point out , however , that 959 petitions are still being examined , including petitions that , like the one received on hunting , bear more than 1 800 000 signatures , testimony of the interest shown by many citizens in this instrument .
I will conclude , Madam President , with a question .
We are aware of the fact that the institution of the right of petition has become an extremely important and delicate instrument to better draw the citizen closer to the European Union and to enable the Parliament to perceive citizens ' real expectations .
In short , in a Parliament that unfortunately still does not have the power to initiate legislation , the petition constitutes today an irreplaceable instrument for the full assertion of European citizenship to achieve that Utopian view cultivated by the great European minds and illustrated by Voltaire when in 1700 he claimed that Europe had to become the only continent where an Italian or German citizen who happened to be in France or elsewhere should never feel in exile .
If this is true , I ask you , Madam President : are the means , the instruments that we have given ourselves equal to our ambitions and to those expectations of European citizens I was talking about ?
Madam President , I apologise on behalf of Mr Evans who is unavoidably absent this morning , although he hopes to be back by lunchtime when we vote on this matter .
The Evans report is about allowing petitions in the European Parliament to be submitted in languages other than one of the 11 official languages .
There are two groups of what we may term non-official languages .
Firstly there are the languages of some of the regions of the European Union .
For example , from my own country you have Welsh or Gaelic .
Secondly , there are the languages of immigration in the European Union which , again from my own country , would be languages like Gujerati , Urdu , Bengali etc .
The proposal from Mr Evans is to allow people to petition the European Parliament in either of those groups of languages provided they are accompanied by the appropriate official translation .
This will benefit many millions of people who reside in the European Union , who are citizens of the European Union but whose first language is not one of the 11 official languages .
I hope that the House will be able to support the report .
Mr Evans ' amendment deals with this issue .
There are a number of other amendments which I am afraid we are opposed to on the grounds that they mostly draw a distinction between officially recognised languages and languages that are not officially recognised .
We believe that any of the languages commonly used in the European Union should be admitted , provided they are accompanied by the official translation .
Certainly one or two of the amendments are rather nonsensical , one of them implying that we are going to have to recruit staff who , for example , are capable of dealing with petitions in Welsh .
We are very happy for petitions to be submitted in Welsh , but we do not agree with the amendments which state that it should be permissible for them to be submitted without a translation .
I urge you to support the Evans amendment , but not to support the other amendments .
I hope that you will make this small but significant change on behalf of the people of Europe when we vote at 12 noon .
Madam President , my report is based on a proposal by Mr Dell 'Alba to make a small amendment to Rule 156 that would make it possible to submit petitions by electronic mail .
The essence of my proposal is that we approve this amendment by Mr Dell 'Alba , and that we thus allow petitions to also be submitted electronically .
My report also contains a second proposal , namely that these petitions should be entered in a public register and thus be available to the general public .
My report has been discussed a great deal .
However , I would say that the most valuable opinion on it so far is that petitions must be independent of the way in which they are submitted .
It must not matter if they are sent by fax , ordinary letter or by electronic mail .
I would also like to point out that the submission of petitions electronically is permitted in many corresponding bodies in the national parliaments and by our own Ombudsman .
In principle , three objections have been raised to this .
The first is that it is unfair in some way , because not everyone owns a computer .
It is , firstly , mainly men and , secondly , mainly people with high incomes who have computers .
It is , of course , a valid objection to say that this increases the options for those who have a computer and not for others .
At the same time , it must be said that when the typewriter was invented 50 or 100 years ago , they were not owned by everyone either , but perhaps the more wealthy groups in society .
However , it would be unreasonable to prohibit the submission of petitions by electronic mail just because only a specific group of people would be able to make use of this facility .
The second objection concerns the possibility of falsification , that is , if a petition is sent in by electronic mail , it is possible to sign it with a false name .
That is quite correct , that could be done .
However , I would like to point out that there is nothing in our current Rules of Procedure to say that the signature on a letter that has been received should be checked .
In my opinion , it is a matter for the administration .
If the administration wants to check the signature , it is possible to do so , irrespective of whether it has been submitted electronically or in the form of an ordinary letter .
The third criticism is that it will lead to an increase in the number of petitions , which will therefore require more personnel ; this , in itself , is also correct .
However , I believe that there are opportunities to streamline the work when making use of electronic means .
The most important point in this context , however , is that democracy has to cost something .
This could mean that we need more personnel in the Committee on Petitions , but democracy costs , so we must also be prepared to pay the small price in question .
In addition to the above-mentioned core question , my report also contains a proposal to place the petitions in a public register , as long as the person submitting a petition does not want it to be treated in confidence .
This is also a reasonable demand for the sake of transparency .
I would like to conclude by saying that , happily , this report has achieved unanimity in the Committee on the Rules of Procedure , the Verification of Credentials and Immunities .
Extremely small steps are , indeed , being taken here ( it is almost a mere trifle ) but they are nevertheless small steps towards greater transparency .
Every long journey does , after all , begin with a small step .
Madam President , we in the Committee on Petitions welcome this initiative and would very much like to see it adopted as soon as possible .
We believe that a rapid reform is necessary .
At the same time , like the rapporteur , I would like to congratulate the Ombudsman on having opened a home page where you can find a form on how to lodge a complaint .
It is a good model , also for us , when we come to realize in practice the amendment of the Rules of Procedure that this involves .
It is true that , under our current rules , the identity of the petitioner must be checked .
We must try to speed this up , and , at the same time , we must also perhaps make use of new legislative proposals regarding electronic signatures .
We share the rapporteur 's view that we must do more to develop the databases so that the general public can see what petitions exist .
In addition , we agree that petitions must be treated in the same way , irrespective of the way in which they have been submitted .
I am also looking forward to the proposal to amend the Rules of Procedure so that the petitions will be public , except in cases where the petitioner has requested that a petition be treated in confidence .
The interesting thing is that this amendment of the Rules of Procedure will conflict with Article 2.3 of the rules governing public access to documents as established by the Bureau .
These rules have a different approach , namely that to obtain access to a document submitted to Parliament , we should not turn to Parliament but to the person who produced the document .
This is an interesting conflict , but we have chosen the more correct line in this document , namely that they should be viewed as Parliament 's documents .
Finally , I would like to say that it is important that in future we also have opportunities to submit mass petitions .
At the same time , it is our responsibility as Members of Parliament to consider the nature of the matter and not the number of petitions when deciding priorities .
Madam President , I would like to congratulate the three rapporteurs for , as far as I know from the other committee , all three reports were passed unanimously .
Our task , as parliamentarians elected directly by the citizens of Europe , is to represent the interests of these citizens and to look after their concerns .
No institution or administration is infallible .
European regulations can prove unsatisfactory in practice , just as the best-intentioned transposal of European law into national law can be unsatisfactory .
We all know that administrations tend to act bureaucratically and that means at a distance from their citizens .
Proximity to citizens is one of the favourite expressions heard in the speeches of the Members of this House .
The Committee on Petitions with its practical work provides the guarantee that this proximity exists in practice .
The work of the committee is to provide redress in the case of shortcomings in or breaches of Community law and to protect the rights of its citizens .
Happily , the citizens of Europe are exercising their rights more and more frequently and so the number of complaints and petitions received has increased over recent years .
Unfortunately , the Secretariat 's staff resources have not automatically grown in line with the increasing volume of work in the committee , and we are endeavouring to speed up the process by which petitions are dealt with by adapting and tightening up our working practices and systems .
We also hope that the Wibe report decision on the amendment of the Rules of Procedure will win us further possibilities because it should mean that petitions could be submitted via the Internet and would make the administration and processing of the entire system faster .
It is not merely annoying that as long as several years can elapse before some petitions can be resolved .
It also gives a very negative picture of Europe .
There are many reasons for the length of time it can take to process petitions .
Firstly , it takes time for the documents to be translated and for a summary to be made available in the eleven languages .
Secondly , in most cases the Commission is asked for information and the Commission 's answer then has to be translated into all the languages before the petitions can be dealt with in committee .
The greatest problem , however , comes from the Member States whose responses to complaints , particularly where these are obviously justified , are evasive , slow and in some cases non-existent and are only moved to action by the threat of appearing before the European Court of Justice .
The fact that the European Commission report on this EU law lists 17 actions for treaty violation brought at the instigation of the Parliament in 1997 is the result of our work in the Committee on Petitions .
So , despite all the difficulties , it is gratifying that many petitions have nevertheless reached a successful conclusion .
The annual report describes several cases by way of example and I should like to pick up on one of them here .
It involves the case of a German employee who had worked for part of his career in Belgium and France .
He quite rightly applied for his pension in all three Member States and although the French pension fund granted his claim , it only paid out half of it on the grounds that he had to submit the pension rulings from Germany and Belgium before he could receive the entire amount .
However , as he was simultaneously experiencing difficulties with the German pension fund , where the matter had gone to court , he would have had to wait a considerable time before receiving his French pension .
At the initiative and intervention of the Commission , the French pension ruling was then changed and he was paid the full pension as the French authorities had acted on the basis of an old directive .
This was a case , therefore , in which national authorities had made an error but the intervention of the Committee on Petitions was successful and a citizen was granted his rights .
Not all petitions can be resolved so successfully .
Time and again we run up against the limits of jurisdiction imposed by the Treaty .
However , it is important that the citizens of Europe are kept informed and that they know they can turn to the Committee on Petitions for help in enforcing their rights and we will do everything in our power to help them obtain their rights .
Madam President , during the debate on the Anastassopoulos report earlier this week , many Members said that we must make every effort to bring this Parliament closer to the people of Europe .
That is an important objective .
In fact the possibility of petitioning Parliament and the work of the Committee on Petitions are one of the most effective means we have of allowing individual citizens to use Parliament in a clear and a direct way to address their individual concerns .
I congratulate Mr Fontana on the clarity of his report and also on the commitment he has shown , as Chairman of the Petitions Committee , to the needs of European citizens .
He is ably served by a competent and conscientious staff and , similarly , the reports furnished to us by the Commission are always thorough and well presented .
One could wish , on occasion , that its reports arrived rather more promptly at the Petitions Committee .
The determined boycott of the committee by any representative of the Council is still , sadly , a great omission .
I see no one here listening to this debate .
We failed to get the British presidency to take the needs of individual citizens seriously .
I hope that the Austrian presidency might address this issue and ensure that , as a matter of course , a Council representative attends every meeting of the Petitions Committee .
The Council would learn far more there about how Europe is really working than at any number of closed Council meetings .
I would also endorse the points referred to by other Members about the need to use modern methods - e-mail and the Internet - to present petitions .
Whilst I certainly endorse Mr Evans ' report , the prime concern is speed of consideration .
This is what Members really want to see .
Many thanks , Mr Perry .
I just wanted to point out to you that the Council presidency is here today .
Its representatives are here at the front and are taking notes industriously .
Madam President , I believe that the modification of the right to petition the European Parliament , in the sense that those languages which are official in an area of the territory of the Member States will be recognized , is a positive step .
We must remember that this Parliament approved , in December 1990 , the report presented by the Member from Luxembourg , Mrs Reding , which highlighted the importance of minority languages in the context of the European Union and the need to ensure that the citizens of all parts of Europe did not see the European Union as a body that was unconnected to their own identity .
We are not talking about recognizing more working languages or more official languages .
It is purely a matter of these citizens being able to send petitions to the European Parliament , which is the institution that represents all of the citizens of Europe , in their own language , where it is officially recognized in the corresponding Member State .
I would like to point out that many of these languages were banned in certain countries during very recent dictatorships , but democracy has recognized them and has also granted them their own official status .
We must also take into account the fact that these citizens have the right to use their mother tongue in the Court of Justice of the European Communities and in other legal bodies .
Therefore , the recognition of the use of the language itself on the part of the European Parliament would be an act of justice as regards the right to petition . It would be a good example , too , in the face of the future enlargement to include the countries of central and eastern Europe , where there are also minority groups with their own languages within each country ; these groups would then see that this European institution is open to the plurality of all the peoples of Europe .
Madam President , it is becoming increasingly evident that one of the more significant innovations of the Maastricht Treaty was enshrining the right to submit a petition .
This is a fundamental right given to each citizen of the European Union .
In the period covered by the report , the Committee on Petitions received 1 300 petitions .
Most of these petitions covered four main areas , namely non-recognition of qualifications , problems relating to free movement in the Member States , the environment and public health .
These are real issues raised by EU citizens themselves , and we ignore them at our peril .
The right to petition helps to break down barriers and creates a vital link between the working of the EU institutions and our citizens .
As a result of petitions submitted by EU citizens , Member States can be found guilty of infringing Community law .
I wish to refer briefly to Sellafield .
That nuclear installation on the west coast of Britain , far from the cosy seat of power in London , has been and remains a cause of serious concern to Irish citizens .
The only safe Sellafield is a closed Sellafield .
The Commission cannot continue to ignore what citizens are saying .
It is not a question of subsidiarity : trans-frontier pollution is a matter of concern to us all and has prompted numerous petitions .
Sellafield has an appalling record : it is accident-prone , it pollutes the air and our sea .
There is a long litany of incidents and disputes .
Why was British Nuclear Fuels unwilling to release enough information to the Radiological Protection Institute of Ireland to enable it to assess the safety of nuclear storage at Sellafield ?
A report by the Irish General Council of County Councils , published in June , warned that a nuclear accident at Sellafield could result in a disaster ten to a hundred times worse than Chernobyl .
Even a small earthquake in the Cumbrian region could breach the storage tanks .
This report , prepared by the Director of the US-based Institute for Research and Security Studies , accuses the United Kingdom nuclear installation inspectors of not taking a serious accident at Sellafield seriously enough and of not having an emergency plan .
It is about time the Commission clipped the wings of British Nuclear Fuels ' nuclear ambitions as it expands its empire to the United States .
In conclusion , as regards the petition by Mr Peter Downs in Ireland on the safety of riding helmets , I want to urge the Commission to come forward now with a progress report on the issues raised .
The proposed EN 1384 standard is a compromise which does not provide the best possible protection available , as required by the personnel protective equipment directive .
Only one out of 17 equestrian federations throughout Europe was consulted .
Why are we being denied safer standards when they exist , given that , for example , American standards provide better protection ?
So please come forward with a progress report , because lives are at stake .

Madam President , the amendment of Rule 156 ( 3 ) , proposed in the report by Mr Evans , is not a amendment of the rules governing languages , which are the responsibility of the Council , but the desire to ensure that citizens can use their own language in the complaints or petitions they send to the European Parliament .
Certainly , Mr Evans has made an effort , and has introduced this form of presenting written documents in the language itself along with a translation .
But this is not satisfactory : it is a formal solution but it is not a real solution .
And this is especially true , Madam President , for certain cases where the languages are official languages in one of the Member States of the Union .
In this case , Madam President , we believe that the petitions and complaints made by citizens in their own language should be accepted .
Madam President , I think everyone realizes that petitions , together with the right to appeal to the Ombudsman , constitute an important aspect of European citizens ' right of citizenship , and therefore I believe that in this sense we must encourage as much as possible this democratic activity and this right of citizens to information .
Petitions are also an instrument that citizens can use to become acquainted with the European institutions and an important moment for us parliamentarians and for the European institutions to learn about the most significant problems facing citizens and the most relevant aspects that should concern our actions .
It is worth noting that petitions are on the rise - there were more than 1 300 last year - but also more and more citizens are signing petitions - there are petitions with more than 30 000 signatures - which means that hundreds of thousands of citizens each year are using this important instrument of democracy .
This obviously necessitates improvements in the organization of the work of the Committee on Petitions , but ways must also be found to make it easier for citizens to use this instrument .
We are therefore in favour of the use of new instruments like the Internet and the use of languages other than the official languages , provided that there be a summary and a translation in one of the official languages .
It should also be noted that nearly half of the petitions are inadmissible : this means that European citizens are not being adequately informed about what they can request and how they have to send petitions .
Another important aspect is collaboration with the European Union 's structures : with the European Ombudsman in particular for limited petitions but also with the European Commission whose collaboration so far has been good but which can be improved in terms of both the time it takes the Commission to reply and the quality of its answers .
Collaboration between the Committee on Petitions and the European Parliament 's other committees should also be improved ; furthermore , as already stated , relations with the Member States also need to be improved , given the fact that the answers that we have had so far have been unsatisfactory and slow to come .
As a representative of the Greens , allow me to say that we are very pleased that European citizens consider the instrument of petitions very important in making known the environmental problems of their own area .
Madam President , I would like to begin by congratulating the three rapporteurs , although in my speech I am going to concentrate on the report by Mr Evans due to its great importance and interest in the languages and cultures of the European Union .
In fact , the languages which enjoy official status in a Member State will , from now on , be able to enjoy the same rights as those enjoyed currently by each of the 11 working languages of the European Union in terms of the right to petition the European Parliament , thereby promoting the development of the different cultures of the peoples of Europe .
And , Madam President , that is the aim of our amendment : to promote and develop the use of and communication in their own languages , by European citizens , respecting their own cultures and idiosyncrasies , with the Community institutions , in this case with the European Parliament .
By doing this , we are merely strengthening and developing the feeling of European citizenship in all the peoples of the Union . What we are trying to achieve is a situation whereby , if the case arises , a citizen , for example , from the Autonomous Community of Valencia , has the opportunity to contact the European Parliament both in Spanish and in Valencian , the latter being an officially recognized language in our Statute of autonomy .
This is a good opportunity to give meaning to the great effort that the European Union itself , through the Commission , has been making for several years to promote and develop the minority languages of the Union . This is , in particular , due to the ARIANE programme which received funding of ECU 3 700 000 in 1997 , and thanks , too , to the work carried out by the European Bureau for Lesser-Used Languages .
I will conclude , Madam President , with the hope that this House approves a report whose amendments aim to widen and consolidate the spirit of integration of the peoples and their cultures .
Madam President , the purpose of the reports by my colleagues , Mr Evans and Mr Wibe , is to extend further the right of petition provided for in Article 156 of our Rules of Procedure .
But , in these same texts , we find provisions which , anticipating difficulties that might arise from such reforms , turn them into a model of the status quo .
At a time when the European Commission 's translation services are seeking a hierarchy for documents so that , with the coming of enlargement which will bring the number of official languages up to sixteen , it will be possible to decide which texts require full translation , Mr Evans proposes a reform of the Rules of Procedure so that everyone can present petitions in a language other than the eleven official languages of the Union .
This is a fine idea for those who speak one of the minority languages . But how much time will be saved if the petitioner must attach a translation , or a summary , in an official language of the European Union ?
How hypocritical is this proposal which , put at its simplest , suggests that Parliament should receive documents which we all know perfectly well are quite pointless !
For his part , Mr Wibe suggests that the procedure for presenting petitions be simplified using electronic means , but he specifies that it would be necessary to send petitioners a letter inviting them to confirm the proposal sent by e-mail , as soon as the petition is received via the web .
So where is the simplification that we are promised ?
The chairman , Mr Fontana , notes in his report an increase in the number and frequency of petitions , with the corollary of increasing delays and difficulties in processing them .
Under these circumstances , where will be the efficiency and credibility of the Committee on Petitions , if we multiply the number of petitions to Parliament as suggested by the different reports which we are discussing this morning ?
To conclude , Madam President , we shall vote against these reports , not because they are bad , but because they do not solve the problems which are raised , since having noted that the Committee on Petitions is becoming clogged up , the rapporteurs propose yet more bureaucracy as a solution .
Madam President , one of the most important results of the Maastricht Treaty has certainly been the institution of European citizenship which has made every citizen of a Member State a citizen of the Union and has implicitly led to greater protection of citizens ' rights in the context of European construction .
Together with the figure of the Ombudsman , instituted by the Treaty , the right of petition , also sanctioned by the Treaty , is part of the logic to make up the democratic deficit that is still penalizing the Community 's citizens .
In fact , the right of petition is essential not only for citizens but also for the Union 's institutions , in that petitions enable the institutions to become aware of citizens ' real expectations .
We would , however , like to stress the fact that an effective examination of petitions always depends on an adequate presence of human resources , of responsible services , and we insist that the most appropriate means be used to inform European citizens regularly of the right of petition and even more so of the ways to reach the European Parliament , which is the collector of the petitions .
Finally , great importance must be attached to the admissibility of these petitions .
The President of the Commission , and we also , would like to see the Member States being more active in cases where infringements are reported , and underline the need for the Member States to provide complete and prompt answers to the requests for information and action that they receive from the European Commission and to abide by the obligation to help the Community to fulfil its own tasks , as stipulated in Article 5 of the Treaty .
All this , however , is unfortunately not the case today .
Mr Fontana , whom I thank for the excellent work that he does as chairman of the Parliament 's Committee on Petitions , rightly draws attention to the real powers of the European Parliament which currently only has the power of codecision , without any true legislative power that effectively enables voters to exercise , through those they elect , the democratic control of the measures that are taken .
The importance therefore of having access to the right of petition , which records the hopes and expectations of citizens and takes in their complaints concerning European legislation that they consider unfair , is a cornerstone of our democratic system .
Thanks to the various petitions sent to the European Parliament , we have certainly succeeded in making protective changes to what has become enforceable legislation , changes that are necessary to promote that European integration which we can no longer put off .
A final observation concerning the time of reply , which is too long : I do not know how , but we are going to have to study how to be quicker and more punctual .
Madam President , being an active member of the Committee on Petitions is very much an education .
The Committee on Petitions provides a constant source of information , knowledge - and sometimes a bit of bewilderment - as we probe the various complexities of legislation which inspire citizens ' complaints .
But it is here , in direct contact with the citizens of the European Union , that we find the flaws and limitations of European Union legislation .
For example , on the environment , we find that environmental impact assessments do not apply to projects which were planned before the legislation was implemented .
Therefore , a 20-year old plan can be taken off a shelf , dusted down and it does not need an environmental impact assessment for approval .
On mutual recognition of qualifications , the European Union still has a long way to go .
On access to social security benefits , governments collude with each other to deny citizens their rights .
All these things taken together act as an impediment to the free movement of citizens and the Committee on Petitions has continually drawn attention to this .
I would like to praise the Commission and thank it for its cooperation during my time in the committee .
However , that praise is qualified .
From time to time it could be more pro-active .
Matters coming before the Committee on Petitions could have been taken a bit further by the Commission before going on to the committee .
But , like Mr Perry , I reserve my criticism for the Council .
It very seldom cooperates with us , and the key to the resolution of very many citizens ' complaints lies in cooperation .
Unfortunately , this is not sufficiently forthcoming from the Council .
So , I am happy to support these reports , with those reservations .
I thank the rapporteurs for their efforts .
Mr Wibe has asked me to point out that his report is a work of historical significance .
I am quite happy to quote that for the record - although I will leave you to judge for yourselves .
So far in this debate none of the speakers has kept to the allocated speaking times .
If we continue like this , we will be half an hour late starting the voting this afternoon .
I just wanted to say that once , for the benefit of everyone , with a plea that we might perhaps keep an eye on the clock .
Madam President , I am speaking on behalf of the Group of the European People 's Party on the Evans and Wibe reports .
The Wibe report is one small step for man , one giant leap for the European Parliament .
We know that Mr Wibe , coming as he does from a Scandinavian background , is particularly interested in information technology .
This is a new insight , a new aspect of our work which has been particularly emphasized and underlined by his work and that of his Scandinavian colleagues .
We welcome it and it is right that he should be gently leading us into the 21st century in this respect .
As far as the Evans report is concerned , I am also speaking on behalf of the PPE Group .
I should like to point out that Amendment No 3 has been withdrawn .
It is not an amendment put forward by the PPE Group .
An identical amendment has been put forward by Mrs Ferrer and 28 others and that will be voted on .
Having made that preliminary remark , I should say that the PPE Group supports the Evans report .
We think it is a very workable and worthwhile compromise between two goals , one of which is to respect the Treaties and the regulations which are in place . The other is to recognize the right and desirability of people to be able to address their petitions to the European Parliament as far as possible in their mother tongue .
Mr Evan 's report seems to observe both those goals .
It conforms to the legal requirements of the Treaty and of the regulations .
It is an important step towards allowing the speakers of minority languages or the languages of Catalonia , Wales , Ireland , Sardinia etc. to appeal to the European Parliament in their own language .
Immigrant groups will also benefit .
It would be a pity if the European Parliament got itself too deeply involved in questions of linguistic arrangements that are more properly decided at national level .
We have our official languages .
We should observe their status in the Committee on the Rules of Procedure , the Verification of Credentials and Immunities .
I commend the Evans and Wibe reports to the House .
Madam President , the most genuine , direct , live contact that the European Parliament has with the citizens of Europe , individually and collectively , is the procedure within the Committee on Petitions .
This was highlighted by the three reports and I agree with them .
It was especially highlighted in the report by Mr Fontana , with which I also agree .
I would just like to comment that , while it renders some kind of account and mentions a number of petitions that have been dealt with , it does not tell us of the outcome .
In these cases did the citizen , the petitioner , get justice in the end or not ?
This concerns us .
And if they did not get justice , who opposed them ?
The Council , the Commission , the national authorities ?
What will happen after that ?
Perhaps there is then a celebratory debate , a time-consuming procedure with no outcome .
I would like to add , firstly , that this report must mention whether the people are satisfied after the petitions have been dealt with ; secondly , why , and who is responsible .
I would also suggest that this committee and its procedure be strengthened institutionally and legally so that , when a just petition is not satisfied , there is some kind of sanction .
Finally , I would suggest that the debate take place not once a year but , if possible , during each part-session - if we appreciate the importance of the institution - or even every six months so that Parliament can be brought up-to-date , and so that it can supervise and assist the committee in its task .
Madam President , I could almost repeat my contributions to the discussion last year word for word .
Every year we receive more and more petitions , even though a high percentage of the people of the European Union do not even know that they have the right to submit petitions on Community issues to the European Union .
In addition to leaflets , the use of new media could be used to inform the citizens of Europe of their democratic rights .
To the disappointment of the petitioners , the processing of petitions to the final outcome takes too long .
The Committee on Petitions has optimised its procedures .
In my view , cooperation with the civil servants in the Commission has improved considerably .
As has already been said , in most cases the problem lies with the Council , that is , with the Member State to be consulted in each case .
It requires real patience to obtain an answer .
It often takes months , frequently there is no answer at all and sometimes it is only the pressure of the Commission instituting proceedings which moves the Member State to act .
It is impossible to avoid the impression that , contrary to the obligation enshrined in the Maastricht Treaty , individual Member States are not taking the rights of petitioners very seriously .
I personally find it gratifying that the number of petitions taking action against failures to apply or to implement European environmental law has dropped considerably in the period covered by the report .
This could be taken to show that Member States are now taking the environmental directives more seriously .
A high percentage of the petitions relate to social issues and to migrant workers in particular .
Although the coordinating directive 1408 is positive , it often offers no help in resolving injustices .
In this area , in particular , the Council must show greater understanding to ensure that freedom of movement does not create disadvantages .
Here I should mention Mrs Weiler 's report on which we will be voting this afternoon .
Madam President , the European Union , which is defined as and acts as a Community based on respect for human rights , and which has always defended and undertaken to promote the cultural diversity of Europe , cannot ignore the right of a people to have the symbols of their identity recognized and respected .
Therefore , this Parliament , as the representative of the people who form the European Union , has shown itself on many occasions to be in favour of measures which contribute to preserving this identity , of which one of the most obvious symbols is its language .
In this respect , we should recall the Reding report on the situation of the Catalan language or the Killilea report on minority languages .
Today , Parliament has the opportunity to fulfil one of the agreements adopted in the Killilea report and thereby to reiterate its commitment to the defence of those languages which are part of the rich cultural heritage of Europe .
Therefore , I call on this House to vote in favour of the amendment that various groups and Members have tabled to the Evans report , asking that the petitions drafted in the official language of a part of the territory of a Member State might also be admitted for consideration .
I ask this to provide coherence with our own approaches and decisions and as proof of this Parliament 's commitment to the construction of a Europe which is respectful of the diversity of the peoples and cultures which form it and which constitute one of its most important riches .
It is not a question of increasing the number of official languages or working languages , it is rather a matter of allowing those citizens who have a language of their own which is recognized as such by the legislation of its Member State , to draw up their petitions in their own language . This is important because this language is one of the examples of the cultural wealth of Europe , its use is one of their rights and , by doing this , we will win many citizens over to the European cause .
Madam President , the collective rights of historic minorities and cultural diversity are assets that we all must protect and the European institutions have spared no efforts in doing so .
However , the right of petition is not a right of the peoples ; it is , in fact , quite the opposite .
It is an individual right anchored in the protection of human rights , which the Treaty recognizes not only for the citizens of the Union but also for any person , any human being who is in the European Union .
Therefore , nothing is more contrary to that spirit than the discrimination between those who have a minority language which is recognized in a territorial context and those other citizens , who are normally the most needy , whose language is also a minority language but is not officially recognized .
Madam President , the amendment by Mrs Ferrer is not in line with the Treaties and , in addition , represents a serious attack on an essential element of the European Union : the true protection of human rights .
The person most in need of the opportunity to forward a petition in his own language is not the European citizen belonging to a historic minority whose language is already recognized .
We must , therefore , be serious .
If we recognize this opportunity , we must recognize it without any limitations .
And it thus seems to me that the amendment by Mr Evans represents a logical solution to this extremely complicated problem .
Mr President , I am using my one-and-a-half minutes to give once again a very brief report to Parliament on my work as the President 's mediator for transnationally abducted children .
I was honoured to take on this role at the request of the Committee on Petitions .
As soon as we receive notice of any petition relating to the abduction of a child , generally a parental abduction , we telephone the parties concerned so that immediately they are aware that somebody in Parliament is directly responding to their concerns .
This gets round the difficulties that many speakers have referred to in relation to delays with petitions , although I acknowledge that the situation has considerably improved since the committee was recently reorganized .
I believe that when dealing with many of the petitions , especially those relating to abduction of children , speed is of the essence .
We make direct contact with the parents concerned , the judges involved and national authorities .
This is very much appreciated by those whom we contact . However , we are still very much at a disadvantage because many European Union countries appear to have a persistent record of failure to implement the Hague Convention .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to say that I agree with the excellent Fontana report in terms of its comments on the importance of the right of petition .
Petitions allow the institutions to become aware of the true difficulties and problems encountered by the citizens .
The right of petition is , therefore , situated at what we could call the heart of the relationship of trust between the citizen and the institutions which must take responsibility for the smooth running of the Union .
By sending a petition to Parliament , the citizen is not only denouncing what seems to be an unsatisfactory application of Community legislation , but is also demonstrating , at the same time , its trust in Parliament and in all of the institutions , with the hope that the error might be rectified .
I , therefore , welcome the fact that the collaboration between Parliament and the Commission has allowed us this year , too , - as rightly pointed out in the Fontana report - to find specific solutions and improvements in a large number of cases .
I must also tell you that the Commission , which is doing everything possible to bring Europe closer to the citizens , shares the position adopted by the Committee on Petitions on infringement procedures and appreciates the importance of the action that Parliament is taking in this area .
We are convinced that an essential task which we must fulfil is to guarantee complete respect for Community legislation and to detect the weaknesses in this legislation in order to improve it and ensure that it is put to more adequate use for the citizens .
It is precisely because of that concern of looking rapidly and in detail at the petitions that have been submitted to us , that I will only speak briefly about the Evans report .
It is true that the issue of the languages in which petitions are drawn up is essentially a problem which is Parliament 's responsibility .
However , it is also true that , through cooperation - which I would even go so far as to call creative - between the Committee on Petitions and the Commission 's services , the consideration of a large number of petitions could be resolved .
That is all I wanted to say to you .
I would congratulate once again the rapporteur and all of the members of the Committee on Petitions on the excellent work they have done .
Thank you , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place at 12.00 noon .
Report on the activities of the European Ombudsman ( 1997 ) - Public access to documents ( European Ombudsman 's special report ) - Amendment of Rule 161 of the Rules of Procedure
The next item is the joint debate on the following reports :
( A4-0258 / 98 ) by Mr Newman , on behalf of the Committee on Petitions , on the annual report on the activities of the European Ombudsman in 1997 ( C4-0270 / 98 ) ; - ( A4-0265 / 98 ) by Mrs Thors , on behalf of the Committee on Petitions , on the Special Report by the European Ombudsman to the European Parliament following his own-initiative inquiry into public access to documents ( C4-0157 / 98 ) ; - ( A4-0416 / 97 ) by Mr Crowley , on behalf of the Committee on the Rules of Procedure , the Verification of Credentials and Immunities , on the amendment of Rule 161 of Parliament 's Rules of Procedure .
Mr President , it has now become an established practice that the European Parliament follows the best traditions in the Member States , by inviting the Ombudsman to present his annual report in person .
Copies of the annual report for 1997 should have been distributed to all Members of the European Parliament .
The report is also available on the Ombudsman 's Internet website .
The website was recently redesigned so as to make full use of new technologies for communication with citizens .
From the beginning of this month we have begun regular publication on the website of all decisions following an inquiry .
The website also contains the new standard form for making a complaint .
This can be used by the rapidly increasing number of citizens who choose to send their complaints by e-mail .
The foreword to the 1997 annual report already contains a full introduction to the substantive themes of the report .
I will confine myself here to three questions concerning the future .
The first question is : what remains to be done before the office of the European Ombudsman is fully operational and able to deal effectively with citizens ' complaints ?
The second question is : what is the best way to help improve the quality of European administration from the point view of the citizen ?
The third question is : what can be done to help the many complainants with grievances about the application of Community law in the Member States , particularly when they try to exercise their right of freedom of movement ?
As regards the first question , it is important to recall that 1996 was the first full year of work for the European Ombudsman .
Between 1996 and 1997 , the number of complaints rose by 40 % .
In the first half of 1998 there has been a further increase of about 15 % .
As I have also experienced at national level , there is a steady rise in the number of admissible complaints , but the increase in the inadmissible complaints is even higher .
However , the citizen with a well-founded complaint which is inadmissible , does not usually go away empty-handed .
Especially where rights in Community law are concerned , the European Ombudsman always tries to tell the complainant which competent and effective body could deal with the complaint .
We are now able to process 70 % of inadmissible complaints in this way .
During 1997 , the Ombudsman 's office handled a total of 1 412 cases .
Of these , 1 181 were new complaints received in 1997 .
Four own-initiative inquiries were launched during the year and 101 inquiries were closed with a reasoned decision .
In 40 % of these cases , either the institution settled the matter , a friendly solution was found , or the case was closed with a critical remark .
In 59 % of cases no maladministration was found to have occurred .
A finding of no maladministration is not always negative for the citizen .
The process of complaint and inquiry gives the institution the opportunity to explain to the public what it has done and why .
In some cases , it even succeeds in convincing the complainant that it has acted properly .
Our goal is to decide on the admissibility of a complaint within one month and to close a case in which an inquiry has been launched within one year .
We have largely met the first target : only a few cases are pending for more than one month .
As for the second target , we have been successful in steadily increasing the number of cases resolved , but there is still a growing backlog .
I have been rather slow to apply for the resources necessary to establish the office .
Setting up an office , selection and training of personnel and establishing the right working procedures take time and I have insisted that dealing with citizens ' complaints must have priority .
However , it is obvious that we now urgently need more resources , to deal efficiently and properly with existing complaints and prepare ourselves for the new work which the Amsterdam Treaty will create when it brings the third pillar ( which includes Europol ) fully into the Ombudsman 's sphere of responsibility .
In its observations on the annual report for 1996 , the Committee on Petitions asked for a more precise definition of the term ' maladministration . '
I undertook this task and included a definition in the 1997 annual report , which Mr Newman welcomed in his report .
The Thors report on the Ombudsman 's own-initiative inquiry into public access to documents also demonstrates how the work of the Ombudsman and that of the European Parliament , especially the Committee on Petitions , can be made to interact fruitfully , to the benefit of European citizens .
In this connection , I wish to stress that the best way significantly to improve the quality of the administrative activities of Community institutions and bodies is to adopt a code of good administrative behaviour , in the same way as rules on public access to documents have been adopted by the Community institutions and bodies .
I have mentioned two important initiatives in this field in my annual report .
The first is the Perry report concerning the activities of the Committee on Petitions in 19961997 .
The second was taken by the Secretary-General of the Commission , Mr Carlo Trojan , who informed me in October 1997 that work had begun on drafting a code of good administrative behaviour for Commission officials .
I really hope that we will adopt the first code at Community level this year .
Adoption and publication of such a code is an important sign of a commitment to create a more service-minded administrative culture in relation to citizens .
It also means that both civil servants and citizens are aware of the standards in this field and know what an administration can be expected to do .
The last question I would like to raise here is the continuing high number of complaints from European citizens concerning the enforcement of Community law by public authorities in the Member States .
We have increasingly been passing on these complaints or suggesting that they be dealt with either as petitions to the European Parliament , when they include a matter of principle which needs political experience or pressure in order to be resolved , or by the national ombudsmen or similar bodies .
The Commission and especially its Euro-Jus legal advisers assisting citizens in the Commission representations in the Member States , also play a role in this field .
To my mind , it is important to realise that many of these complaints could be resolved easily and promptly at national level .
Our objective is to create an effective network of redress for these grievances , in cooperation with the national ombudsmen and similar bodies ( most often petitions committees of national parliaments ) .
In the annual report I have given an account of the activities in this field so far .
I would like to use this opportunity to thank all the Community institutions and bodies for another year of constructive cooperation .
I would especially like to address the Commission and the Commissioner responsible , Anita Gradin , and thank her for her firm and continuing commitment to open and accountable administration .
I would also like to thank the President of the European Parliament , Mr Gil-Robles , and his colleagues for their supportive and understanding attitude to the work of the Ombudsman .
My thanks are due also to the chairman of the Committee on Petitions , Mr Fontana , and to all the members of the committee for their clearly expressed interest and cooperative attitude in their contacts with the Ombudsman 's office .
Special thanks go to Mr Newman and Mrs Thors for their comprehensive and detailed reports now before you .
Thank you for your attention .
Thank you , Ombudsman .
As you can hear , we are very satisfied indeed with the way in which you have introduced your important work as Parliamentary Ombudsman .
We will now proceed to the debate , and I will begin by calling on Mr Newman , who is the rapporteur of one of the reports , to speak .
Mr President , during 1997 the European Ombudsman continued to investigate possible maladministration in European Community institutions and bodies .
He has done it thoroughly and comprehensively and in my report Parliament is asked to recognise this .
The democratically elected MEPs who serve on the Committee on Petitions have the task of monitoring the work of the European Ombudsman .
In our view , Jacob Söderman is an effective champion of the rights of citizens .
His work acts as a vital safeguard , because without an effective Ombudsman the individual citizen could easily be the helpless victim of maladministration by a powerful and sometimes out-of-touch European bureaucracy .
In last year 's annual report on the work of the European Ombudsman , Parliament asked him to come forward with a clear definition of the term ' maladministration ' .
He has responded to this challenge with a satisfactory formula , namely that maladministration occurs when a public body fails to act in accordance with a rule or principle which is binding upon it .
Perhaps more meaningfully , he also reminds us in his report of the examples of maladministration which he gave in his first annual report .
These include administrative irregularities or omissions , abuse of power , negligence , unlawful procedures , unfairness , malfunction or incompetence , discrimination , avoidable delay and lack or refusal of information .
Of course the Ombudsman rightly makes the point that these examples are not exhaustive and that he cannot take up complaints concerning political or judicial decisions or that involve value judgments on legislative acts .
The Committee on Petitions has previously supported a common code of good administrative behaviour for European Union institutions and bodies and we are pleased that the Ombudsman has also proposed such a code .
As he states in his report , this would surely raise the quality of the institutions ' administrative practices and enhance their relations with European citizens .
The administrative behaviour of the Ombudsman 's own office perhaps provides a useful example of the kind of practices which should be included in a code .
When the Ombudsman receives a complaint , the complainant receives a letter of acknowledgement which both explains the procedure for handling the complaint and , very importantly , gives the name and telephone number of the civil servant actually dealing with the complaint .
This kind of administrative practice turns the faceless Eurocrat into a real person to whom the complainant can relate and I hope the Commission will take this on board .
The Ombudsman has looked into the European Commission 's administrative practices when it has used the Article 169 procedure to bring infringements of the European Treaty before the Court of Justice .
This is a matter which bothers many of our citizens who , rightly or wrongly , feel that the Commission responds too readily to pressure from Member States , for instance , over possible infringements of environmental protection directives .
The Commission has also been accused of keeping complainants in the dark about the progress of this kind of complaint .
It is true that the Ombudsman was able to close his inquiries into the Commission 's practices in the infringement procedure without making critical remarks .
However , on the basis of our consideration of many relevant petitions , the Committee on Petitions believes that there are many unresolved problems concerning the application of the infringement procedure and we ask the Ombudsman continually to review the Commission 's administrative behaviour when it uses the procedure .
Perhaps the code of good administrative behaviour will also help in this matter .
I welcome the Ombudsman 's commitment to conclude his investigations and inform the complainant , normally within one year of receiving the complaint .
In order to help the Ombudsman to keep to this commitment Parliament will need to ensure in the budget procedure that his office receives the necessary additional staff .
In conclusion , I agree with the Ombudsman 's decision to target his latest publicity at citizens and organisations that deal with European Community institutions and bodies , as his powers are limited to investigating maladministration by such European Community institutions and bodies .
Other complaints of a European Union character can be considered through petitioning the European Parliament .
The Committee on Petitions and the European Ombudsman have complementary but distinct roles .
One of the Petitions Committee 's roles is to report on the overall work of the Ombudsman and our report to you today is that we are entirely satisfied with the way in which he has performed his duties .
Mr President , the work on increasing public access in the EU has started in earnest .
The Court of First Instance 's ruling on the Council of Ministers ' documents , the provisions of the Treaty of Amsterdam and new methods for the Council of Ministers ' work are all examples of this .
A particularly important contribution to increased public access has been made by the Ombudsman through the Special Report which we shall debate , and through several other initiatives .
Let me first point out that the Special Report is historic .
It is the first time that we in a part-session of Parliament have to make a decision on such a report .
The way in which we treat this Special Report can , in a way , create a model for the future .
The importance of the report from a legal point of view lies in the fact that the Committee on Petitions thinks and proposes that it should come under the Ombudsman 's mandate to undertake own-initiative inquiries .
On the other hand , we share the Ombudsman 's opinion that there are no grounds for formal recommendations , with the legal meaning that recommendations have under the Statute of the European Ombudsman .
On the other hand , as the Ombudsman also proposes , the Special Report gives grounds for political initiatives on the part of Parliament .
At this stage , it is therefore important for us to signal politically what we expect from the Commission in the proposal on openness which the Commission should put forward supported by Article 191a of the Amsterdam Treaty regarding the right of access to documents .
As we state in the report , what we expect from the Commission is , inter alia , the following :
We regret that the Amsterdam Treaty 's new rule to be adopted regarding openness formally applies only to the Commission , the Council and Parliament .
It was a disappointment to many of us that it was so limited .
Let us state that the new Article A in the Treaty is also obligatory for the other bodies , that is , that decisions should be taken as openly and as closely to the citizens as possible .
Today , on the basis of Ombudsman Söderman 's speech and Mr Newman 's report , we have talked a lot about the issue of a code of good administrative praxis , a code of conduct on good administrative practice and the significance thereof .
Such a code means that we adopt minimum standards for good administrative practice .
This means that it may be of significance to the other institutions that are perhaps not formally bound by Article 191a .
We also emphasize in our report that public access to documents is not worth much if not everyone can find out which documents exist and then request some of them .
If there is no register or journal of the documents that exist , we will have a so-called insider public access .
This report therefore requires rules on a register to be an integral part of the legislative proposals that the Commission should put forward as soon as possible .
In the debate following the Intergovernmental Conference it has been maintained that the rules to be adopted regarding public access can apply only to documents that are produced within the institutions .
In this regard we refer to the explanation of this which was attached to the Treaty .
There are good grounds for maintaining the opposite .
The declaration attached to the Treaty concerns expressly the correspondence of the Member States .
It is possible , as we are doing , to interpret this so that other incoming correspondence is public .
Only what the Member States have asked to be kept secret shall be .
In addition , I would like to issue a challenge to all the Member States who say they support public access , that they limit as far as possible requests to keep a document confidential .
We ought also to ensure that this is how it actually works .
I would like to thank the Ombudsman for this initiative .
We can confirm that it has led to practically all institutions and bodies having rules on public access , with the Court of Justice as a regrettable exception .
We can also confirm that , since the report came into being and for as long as we have discussed it here in Parliament , the publication of the rules has improved .
Practically all institutions have rules on access to documents in all languages .
They have published their rules on access to documents in the OJ or on their websites .
Even the Committee of the Regions has done so ; this constituted an addendum after the report was completed in committee .
Allow me also to say something about our voting procedure .
I believe the President is going to propose that recital D is a superfluous recital in the report .
There would have been an error there .
I hope that the President will make a decision on this at the vote .
When we are able to go further with public access , it is important for us in future to obtain more precise rules for all institutions , in which deviations from the principle of openness are as precise as possible and as small as possible .
Mr President , I should like to welcome the Ombudsman to the House .
I also welcome the Commissioner .
She has been a very active force in bringing forward some of the proposals that are being discussed here today .
At the outset I would like to point out to Members that my report deals with changes within the Rules to accommodate the operation of the Ombudsman and so on .
In that connection I should like to thank the secretariat of the Committee on the Rules of Procedure , the Verification of Credentials and Immunities for its assistance in drawing up this report , which was a very trouble-ridden one when it first started off in the last Parliament .
It is essential for us , as a Parliament , to guarantee the independence of the office of the Ombudsman .
In one sense , while we in Parliament are the representatives of the European citizens and while the Commission and the Council have their own distinct roles , the Ombudsman is the person who can interact between all those different institutions in a neutral and unbiased way ; who can make comments and decisions that are either favourable or unfavourable , on the basis of the rights of citizens and in support of those rights .
Therefore it is essential for us , as a Parliament , to have our Rules altered to guarantee that independence and also to show the link between Parliament - through its committees - and the Ombudsman .
From that point of view the Ombudsman and Parliament are the two central points of access for European citizens : because we are elected and because the Ombudsman is there to protect their rights if there is any maladministration or wrongdoing in the operation of the European institutions .
Originally in our own Rules of Procedure we had Rule 161 in its original format , which could have been interpreted as not guaranteeing the independence of the Ombudsman , particularly on issues such as : when the Ombudsman was due to come before Parliament , whether he could be called before Parliament to make requests for information , and whether a committee of Parliament could bring him before the committee to make requests for information .
Under the Treaties the Ombudsman has the right to adopt his own implementing provisions and regulations .
That occurred on a provisional basis when the office was set up and became fully effective in January of this year when it became fully operational .
Unfortunately it is only now that we in Parliament are coming round to amending our Rules of Procedure to take account of those rules concerning the Ombudsman .
To that end we have made some changes to Rule 161 .
It is important that Members should realise that our own Rules of Procedure are our guiding light with regard to the operation of this Parliament .
I know a lot of Members find them very technical , very boring and indeed at times pedantic .
But the reason that we have rules is to ensure the proper operation of Parliament and also the proper structure of relationships between Parliament and other institutions .
It is for this reason that changes are being made in Rule 161 .
The biggest change that is being made within the Rules is to ensure that the Ombudsman has the initiative with regard to informing Parliament and Parliament 's committee .
The one obligation required of the office of the Ombudsman is that an annual report must be submitted .
That annual report allows for debate to take place in this Parliament , which is what we are having at the moment .
Apart from this , Parliament guarantees the Ombudsman its cooperation , whether through access to documents , through giving information or through the Petitions Committee , guaranteeing that requests for information are followed up .
What we are doing here today in amending the Rules is first and foremost to guarantee the independence of the Ombudsman .
That is a very clear message which we can send from Parliament today to European citizens to show that , despite the changes in personnel within Parliament , despite the alterations in the Commission and despite a different Council presidency every six months , the one remaining certainty at all times is the office of Ombudsman : the final port of call for the protection of rights and fundamental freedoms and the guarantees of proper administration of all of the European institutions .
I commend this report to the House .
I would also like to thank the Committee on Petitions for their opinion , given by Mr Gutiérrez Díaz , which is very supportive of my own position .
Mr President , Mr Brian Crowley is presenting us with a proposal to amend Rule 161 of the Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament , after a fruitful exchange of opinions and observations in which the Committee on Petitions participated fully and actively .
As a result of the good work carried out by Brian Crowley , we today have a completely satisfactory proposal for amendment which , in addition , is in line with the opinion already previously given by the European Parliament .
The rapporteur 's proposal is categorical evidence of the complete independence of the European Ombudsman , and of the fact that the normal channel for the relationship between the Ombudsman and the European Parliament is the Committee on Petitions ; a relationship which is clearly confirmed in the proposal for amendment which we must vote on .
Therefore , Mr President , while congratulating Mr Crowley , I would also call on the ladies and gentlemen here to vote in favour of the proposal to amend the Rules of Procedure .
Mr President , Ombudsman , Madam Commissioner , what does the Maastricht Treaty mean when it requires the policies and decisions of the Union to be taken as closely to the people as possible ?
It means many things .
And one of these things is certainly the theme running through the Ombudsman 's special report , that is access to EU documents for the citizens of the European Union .
It is my honour and my pleasure , Ombudsman , to thank you on behalf of the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights not only for having taken an initiative which reflects the legal basis of your role , but also for having done the citizens of the European Union a great service in recognizing their rights .
In so doing you have admittedly also imposed an obligation upon the bodies and institutions of the European Union to review their practices .
For example , the Council must now ask itself whether it actually has the right to rule on what is and what is not legislation .
Parliament must also ask itself whether its rules of access have really developed in accordance with the Rules of Procedure .
In this respect , this special report represents an important step towards the fulfilment of the new Article 191a which , although it only actually contains rules on access for the Council , Parliament and the Commission , in light of the new version of Article 2 , second paragraph , must also be taken as a criterion for all bodies and institutions of the European Union .
I will conclude by extending a special word of thanks to Mrs Thors who has not only shed some light on the significance of the Södermann report , but through her work with the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights has also given an example which is admittedly not always followed in this House .
Thank you very much , Mrs Thors .
Mr President , Ombudsman , ladies and gentlemen , I would first like to congratulate the Ombudsman and Mr Newman , Mrs Thors and Mr Crowley for their excellent reports .
These discuss both the Ombudsman 's annual report for 1997 , the Ombudsman 's Special Report on public access to documents , and an amendment to Parliament 's internal Rules of Procedure applicable to the Ombudsman .
I have read all of these reports with great interest .
It is , after all , through the Ombudsman that citizens of the EU have been given the chance to know how our administration works .
In the Ombudsman 's annual report for 1997 , just as in 1996 , most of the Ombudsman 's inquiries relate to the Commission .
This is normal , bearing in mind that the Commission is the institution that makes most of the decisions that directly concern the citizens .
In Mr Newman 's report on the Ombudsman 's annual report there are four main questions that I would like to comment on briefly .
Firstly , like Mr Newman , I welcome the fact that the meaning of the term ' maladministration ' has now clearly been defined .
This clarifies the Ombudsman 's mandate .
It also facilitates our work and that of the Ombudsman in identifying how we are to combat this maladministration .
The second question concerns the importance of the citizens receiving information on their right to submit petitions to the Ombudsman .
I share the opinion that we in the EU institutions must continue this information work .
The information must also be improved with regard to the right to submit petitions to Parliament 's Committee on Petitions .
The third point concerns the Ombudsman 's efforts to improve the procedure for proceedings pursuant to Article 169 on the infringement of Community legislation by Member States .
It is a question of increasing the confidence of the citizens in this procedure .
The Commission itself has undertaken to inform the complainant when we intend to leave a complaint without action .
We are also going to communicate the Commission 's grounds for deciding that no infringement of Community law has taken place .
Finally , Mr Newman takes up the question of the drawing up of a code of conduct for the administrations in the Union 's institutions and bodies .
Parliament took up this matter in connection with the Perry report on petitions to the Committee on Petitions in 1996-1997 .
The matter has also been taken up by the Ombudsman himself .
We in the Commission support this proposal and have produced an initial draft for such a code of conduct .
This has been sent to the Ombudsman who has given us many constructive comments .
At the moment , we are working with a new proposal and revising it with broad internal agreement .
I am convinced that such a code of conduct will lead to us improving our administrative practices , and that we can improve relations between the Commission 's services and the citizens .
During 1997 , the Ombudsman also presented a Special Report on the opportunities the public should have to access documents .
The report is also discussed in Mrs Thors ' report .
The Commission supports the view of the report that access to documents is an important element if we want to create increased openness in the Union .
It is also a fundamental requirement for citizens to be able to participate in the public debate .
Increased openness will enable us to contribute towards an improved decision procedure , and thereby also to citizens having greater confidence in the Union 's institutions .
If we wish to prevent power abuse and corruption , openness is a good means of doing so .
Like the Ombudsman , therefore , I welcome the fact that the EU 's institutions and bodies are on the way towards implementing rules for public access to documents .
I concur also with Mrs Thors ' demand that every refusal to issue documents be explained with reference to why an exception is being made .
The question of access to documents is also closely linked to the existence of a properly-functioning register of documents in the institutions .
I consider this to be a very important instrument , both for our daily work and to bring about increased openness .
Mrs Thors also proposes in her report that there should be specific persons to whom the general public can turn with their inquiries .
For your information , I can tell you that the Commission has appointed such contact persons in all the DirectoratesGeneral .
In addition , there is a unit in the General Secretariat which will have central responsibility for questions of openness and for responding to what access to documents is available .
Finally , I would like to welcome Mr Crowley 's report on an amendment to Rule 161 of Parliament 's Rules of Procedure .
These amendments will further improve the Committee on Petitions ' already good relations with the Ombudsman .
Mr President , it has been established in the Amsterdam Treaty that openness in the decision-making process shall be one of the Union 's fundamental principles .
The Commission has already begun to prepare the proposal that the Council and the European Parliament will discuss regarding the right of access to documents in all three of the institutions .
We hope that there will be an initial working document as early as the autumn .
To conclude , I would like to thank Ombudsman Söderman for the good working relationship that we in the Commission have with him .
Mr President , Madam Commissioner , Ombudsman , I am happy that we can discuss the excellent reports by the European Ombudsman , and by Mr Newman and Mrs Thors , at peak listening time , as we say , because the matter fully deserves it .
We are dealing with the rights of the citizens in terms of the administration and the transparency of that administration .
Mr President , the difficulty of the role of Ombudsman derives from the fact that he had and still has to create , now and in the years to come , a whole set of rules and procedures .
He must put in place a theoretical and practical procedure for dealing with complaints .
I can say , having followed this matter , that Mr Söderman has applied himself to the problem with a great deal of energy and in a spirit of continuity , and I would like to congratulate him on behalf of the Socialist Group .
In particular , Mr Söderman has specified the notion of maladministration , which was contained , but not defined , in the Treaty .
The Ombudsman 's efforts to clarify the concept are on the right track and should specify the respective duties of the Committee on Petitions and of the Ombudsman .
These two are not rivals but should complement one another .
They are both instruments of a parliamentary democracy to monitor administration .
In this respect , it is essential that Parliament itself lays down clear procedures to deal with the Ombudsman 's reports .
Publicity is an efficient tool for combatting excess bureaucracy .
It is useful , therefore , to give the Ombudsman parliamentary rules on the use of this tool , in the course of this part-session , and I can say that the Committee on the Rules of Procedure , the Verification of Credentials and Immunities is getting on with this .
However , the specific cases described in the Ombudsman 's report , which are fascinating to read , show clearly that the work on complaints also makes it possible to objectify the debate .
Too often , citizens who are refused a request accuse the national or European administration of discrimination , and , in this respect , I think that the research carried out by the Ombudsman has a pedagogical value since it can be used to help our citizens have a better understanding of how the Community works .
However , if we consider that in 1997 , 1 181 new complaints were received from a population of 370 million , we believe that there is a long way to go , all the more so because only 27 % of complaints received fell within the mandate of the Ombudsman .
I would also like to comment on the special report on access to documents .
It is an essential principle of transparency , reinforced by the Treaty of Amsterdam , and at the request of the Ombudsman all the institutions are called upon to adopt rules in this area .
The European Parliament did it in 1997 , but , to my mind , Mr President , these rules are very restrictive , very formalistic , and above all they have not been the subject of any democratic debate within this institution .
I share the view of all those , including Mrs Thors , who deplore that a decision by Parliament in this context is in fact a decision by the Bureau , which is not empowered to do this , and , to see whether these rules are truly solid , I am waiting for the first case to be referred to the Court of Justice when , for example , a citizen is refused access to documents concerning Parliament 's property policy .
To conclude , Mr President , I would like to express one regret . Seventeen citizen 's complaints have been submitted by Members of the European Parliament .
This is a low number and it proves that we MEPs have to make a personal effort on the ground in order to enlighten our European citizens as to their right to call upon the Ombudsman .
Mr President , Ombudsman , Madam Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , on behalf of the PPE Group I want to take a moment to consider the Newman report .
First of all , I want to congratulate the rapporteur , Mr Newman , on his report .
Secondly , and more specifically , concerning the work of the European Ombudsman , I want to express the special appreciation of the PPE Group for the work that the Ombudsman and his team have done and for the annual report for 1997 .
The 1997 annual report has a remarkably clear structure and focuses , among other things , especially on elements that are indeed of great importance .
Apart from that , Mr Fayot has alluded to the great concern for the judicial context within which the European Ombudsman must function .
What is the mandate of the Ombudsman as laid down in the Treaty ?
How does one define the concept of maladministration ?
And , inversely , how does one set down rules for proper administration ?
I believe that these are elements which were requested by our group in 1996 , and we are pleased about the work which has been done on this matter in the current annual report .
We would also like to congratulate the European Ombudsman and his assistants on the openness and rapidity with which they have accounted for their activities , both to the Union and directly to the citizens and the associations in the Member States .
I believe that this is a good example for other European institutions , also concerning the use of new communication technologies .
There are many interesting figures in the annual report , but I will take a moment to reflect on only two of them .
Firstly , only 27 % of the complaints fall within the mandate of the European Ombudsman , 27 % of the complaints lodged , of which approximately two-thirds were declared admissible .
This concerns more than 1 000 new complaints .
Ultimately there are only a very limited number which fall within the activity mandate of the European Ombudsman .
Secondly , only 3 % of all admissible complaints have led to criticism from the Ombudsman or to a settlement with the institution concerned .
Our group draws three conclusions from this .
Firstly , the citizen has too little knowledge about the specific mandate of the Ombudsman and the role of the Commission in Parliamentary petitions .
Secondly , the Commission , Parliament and the European Ombudsman all have a joint responsibility for communication , but also , specifically with regard to the Parliament , for providing greater financial means .
Thirdly , we know that citizens have many questions regarding the institutions . There is a need for the European Parliament to approach them more positively .
Mr President , I have a question for you .
We have thousands of visitors here every week .
Why do we not provide the visitors with a booklet or brochure about the task of the European Ombudsman and what the Parliament does in this matter ?
Mr President , there are two reasons why the post of European Ombudsman is important .
Firstly , the right to consult the Ombudsman is one of the European civil rights which applies to all natural and legal persons who reside legally in the European Union .
This means that this right is a political right and represents a political project .
Secondly , the high number of complaints shows how essential this function is and that certainly not everything in the European institutions runs smoothly .
Allow me to briefly refer to the conclusions of my report ' Citizenship of the Union ' in connection with the operation of the European Ombudsman .
Firstly , it is of essential importance that the citizen becomes better informed about the role of the Ombudsman .
It is especially the task of Parliament to make sure that the citizen knows his or her European rights and knows how , where and when he or she can exercise these rights .
Secondly , the institutions must learn from the dossiers about them which have ended up with the Ombudsman .
The complaints submitted give a good picture of what is happening with the citizen and what the citizen finds wrong in European administration .
Every institution must therefore adjust its mode of operation to come as close as possible to the citizen .
Thirdly , the activities of the Ombudsman can be improved by establishing national agencies in the Member States .
This would strengthen the role of the Ombudsman and these agencies could serve to refer matters which the Ombudsman services in the Member States are authorized to deal with , and vice versa .
In short , we , as the European Parliament , must ensure that the Ombudsman also contributes to the process of bringing Europe closer to the citizen .
We have complete faith that the present Ombudsman , Mr Söderman , will do this .
Mr President , first I wish to congratulate all three rapporteurs on their excellent work .
Above all , I would like to express my thanks to the Ombudsman , Mr Söderman , for the splendidly energetic work he has done in the name of greater transparency , public access and EU credibility .
His contribution has been a major one and , during his short term of office , it may already be said that the institution of Ombudsman has established its position in the European Union .
It is also important that he should have produced the first special report on public access to documents .
I am in full agreement with the conclusions Mrs Thors expressed in her own report .
Unfortunately , working towards greater transparency often still leaves a bad taste in the mouths of those in some institutions , although I believe that we are making headway in this matter .
Another important point is that the Ombudsman has produced a definition of maladministration .
But it is by no means enough that we know what maladministration is .
We have to have rules of procedure for good administrative practice , as the Ombudsman has proposed .
I also hope that this Parliament sees to the matter of extra staff so that the Ombudsman gets the added resources needed , which is a vital matter .
Mr President , when we investigate exactly which agencies are at present involved in creating transparency for the European Union , it is with gratitude that we cite the fundamental work of the Ombudsman .
For this the Green Group wishes to thank him warmly .
As a result of this work , nearly all Union institutions have regulations that have to be observed whenever the general public wishes to receive documentation from them .
Now it is up to the public to examine and see how well these regulations serve them , and , if necessary , to use the machinery available to appeal decisions that deny them access to documents .
Through his work and findings , the Ombudsman has also obliged the Council and the Commission to justify more precisely why the institutions have not surrendered documentation to the public .
And the Council cannot hide away , for citizens must have the general right of access to documents from the institutions of the European Union .
There is , however , still a long way to go before we reach a stage where the refusal to release documents is totally justified and a rare exception .
That is why it is important that the European Parliament bear the responsibility in the drafting of a regulation on transparency .
It was gratifying to hear the Commissioner say that a working document on this matter might appear in the autumn .
The provisions must affect all the institutions , just as Astrid Thors said in her report , because good administrative practice must be observed .
It is very important that exceptions to making documents accessible to the public are strictly limited .
Rather too often such notions as general security and international relations are used as justification for denying access to documents .
Our group hopes that the Ombudsman might help to define these notions more exactly .
Mr President , I would like to congratulate the Ombudsman on this second annual report , which sheds new light on the work which he carries out at the service of European citizens , now that the various services and infrastructures have become operational and links have been established between Member States and their national Ombudsmen .
The Ombudsman 's services have been able to deal with the 1 200 complaints which they have received ; this is proof that this institution is beginning to be known but probably still not to a sufficient degree .
So I share the point of view expressed by Mr Newman in his excellent report .
Independently of the complaints being referred , the initiatives taken by the Ombudsman are therefore very welcome , particularly as regards the definition of this notion of maladministration , which is not always easy to grasp .
Thus , it should be possible to make a clearer distinction between the responsibility of the Committee on Petitions and that of the Ombudsman .
It is obvious that this relies on closer cooperation between the two institutions and thus supposes that the two bodies have the means - and this includes budgetary means - for their respective tasks .
In this respect , you know , Ombudsman , that my group will support your requests in this matter .
Finally , it is also necessary to provide the citizens with quality information , particularly thanks to new methods of communication such as the Internet ; this is for reasons of the transparency to which all European citizens are entitled .
Mr President , all three reports which have been submitted are , like the three preceding reports , full of good intentions .
We must acknowledge that Mr Crowley 's report responds to a clear wish for legal clarification of the texts , of our Assembly 's Rules of Procedure on the one hand , and the Statute of the European Ombudsman on the other .
It does so to the advantage of the latter , outlining for each their prerogatives and obligations , which is one measure amongst others of good operation .
On the other hand , the Newman report on the Ombudsman 's report returns to the need for cooperation between the Committee on Petitions and the Ombudsman .
How many times have we made this complaint ?
And yet , on reading the report one is tempted to conclude that either nothing at all is being done in this area or the Ombudsman is happy to present to us , on principle , declarations of intention which he himself knows carry no weight .
But here again , if there is to be fruitful collaboration , we need partnerships which work well .
On all sides , in fact , the accumulated delay is considerable .
There are 959 petitions waiting before Parliament and 227 referrals by the Ombudsman , carried forward one year to the next .
The Court of Justice has itself pointed out that the Community institutions must , and I quote " ensure the internal operation in the interests of good administration ' .
As regards Mrs Thors ' report , Mr President , it echoes the Ombudsman 's special report which requests greater access for the public to the documents of the Community institutions
We can only underwrite this complaint .
In fact , the construction of Europe has always been too far away , or even voluntarily hidden from view , for us not to laud this proposal .
But Mrs Thors also underlines , in her explanatory statement , that transparency is not the only necessary reform and that other structural reforms must be put in place in all the Community institutions in order to improve efficiency and clarity .
Mr President , first of all I should like to congratulate Mr Söderman on his excellent report , and also the rapporteurs who have given their views on the Ombudsman 's annual report and the transparency of the report .
I am delighted that it has been possible for us to discuss these reports this morning in conjunction with the reports on the Rules of Procedure and the annual report on the work of the Committee on Petitions .
These subjects belong together since the Committee on Petitions is not only responsible for cooperation with the Ombudsman ; we see again and again that the work of each complements the other , and in the course of the last year we have been able to build up a solid basis of trust between the members of the Committee on Petitions and the Ombudsman , Mr Söderman , which we can use to the benefit of the citizens of Europe .
Mr Söderman 's reports demonstrate both that complaints about the institutions are justified and that solutions to the problems are possible .
In relation to the initiatives concerning the transparency of the institutions , I can only urge the utmost caution .
Quite unilaterally , Mr Söderman grasped the nettle and was successful .
Precisely because the image of bureaucracy is inherent in the institutions of Europe , it is good and helpful for the citizens of Europe to know that there is an office which is bringing light into the darkness of bureaucracy and thereby opening up ways of presenting their complaints successfully .
But even the Ombudsman is bound in his work by the restrictions of the Treaty , and many complaints relate to maladministration , not in European , but in national institutions .
The second limit is the staff resources of the office and with the increase in the number of complaints and our policy of closeness to the citizen , we support the demand that the staff of the office be reinforced so that everything can be dealt with .
Mr President , in general terms , we agree with the rapporteur , Mrs Thors , in supporting the initiative of the Ombudsman to obtain greater transparency as regards all Community activities and to urge all of the institutions to provide information related to their field of activity to the citizens or legal persons who reside or have their home in any Member State and who ask for such information .
This is necessary because we must emphasize that it strengthens the democratic nature of these institutions , and it is appropriate to encourage , in particular , the Commission and the Council to progress towards this aim .
Perhaps this is the time to recall that positive indications are already being given in that direction .
For example , the Court of First Instance of the European Communities has just judged that a Council decision refusing access to certain documents must be overruled , since the reasons for the refusal were not clearly justified .
The documents had been requested by the Swedish journalists ' association ; it only received from the Council four of the 20 documents required , yet it had been able to get 18 of the 20 documents through the Swedish authorities .
Another indication is that the European Court of Justice has just given a ruling for the first time on the directive on the freedom of access to information concerning the environment .
Given all of this , we agree with this report and , naturally , agree that access should be allowed to documents within the rules of the game involved .
Therefore , ladies and gentlemen , we support this report and we congratulate both the rapporteur and the Ombudsman .
Mr President , I was extremely pleased to hear the chairman of the Committee on the Rules of Procedure , the Verification of Credentials and Immunities share the opinion put forward in the report on access to documents , namely that it is wrong for the Bureau to have adopted the rules on our own openness , and that they contain shortcomings .
I hope that , together with several committees , we can get this corrected quickly , as it is a disgrace to Parliament .
I am also pleased that the Commissioner has said that the Commission is prepared to adopt the system of having a register of documents .
What is lacking , however , is a response as to whether incoming documents will also be registered there .
Furthermore , I would like to say that our group cannot support recital G of the report .
It emphasizes confidentiality , which conflicts with the whole report .
The ELDR Group will also vote against paragraph 22 , which is quite simply incorrect .
Mr President , it is evident that with his work the Ombudsman has already played an extremely positive role in working towards increased openness within the EU .
I would like to take this opportunity to express my appreciation of Mr Söderman 's work .
The demands Mrs Thors is making on future rules on openness in the report are good , but I would like to draw attention to two points that I think are lacking .
The first concerns the fact that there are several important cases in the Court of Justice , such as the Guardian case and the journalists ' case , which have given greater importance to openness .
The court process also has several weaknesses .
It costs a lot of money to go to court and the proceedings take a very long time .
A way of making an appeal which is quick and costs nothing must be introduced in the new rules .
Secondly , the rights of EU employees to speak to the mass media ought to be strengthened by introducing freedom of communication .
Consequently , I will also be voting against recital G of the report .
Mr President , I believe it is not by chance that today , all day , we have been discussing , firstly the issue of petitions and now the issue of the Ombudsman .
I consider this association to be especially felicitous , because I believe that the citizen 's right to submit a petition to the European Parliament and the right to lodge a complaint to the European Ombudsman are two basic rights which are fundamental for the European Union .
They are of course parallel , complementary functions . They are of course distinctive functions which , in contradistinction , highlight the independence of the European Ombudsman .
However , the right to make a complaint , as well as the right to submit a petition , is an opportunity , a practical test , a continuous sounding instrument in some way of the operation of the European Union : direct , with the citizen , with the active participation of the citizen .
It is therefore an invaluable political tool , a component in the progress of the European Union .
A year ago exactly , as rapporteur for the annual report of the Ombudsman , I had the honour of presenting the views of the Committee on Petitions .
What I wish to say is that , today , I have the great satisfaction of personally welcoming the tremendous progress that has been made since last year .
This year 's report by the Ombudsman truly promotes , reinforces and advances the institution of European Ombudsman .
Mr Newman , our experienced rapporteur from the Committee on Petitions , has analysed the report and also the work of the Ombudsman .
I wish to say briefly that I think the European Parliament has made a good choice and the European Union has a worthy representative in the European Ombudsman , because really and truly Mr Söderman has constructed and is still trying tirelessly to construct this invaluable instrument .
I therefore thank and congratulate the European Ombudsman .
It was said previously that each year we repeat ourselves in this debate on petitions and complaints .
However , this year is no ordinary year .
We have some breathing space before the next elections , therefore it is necessary today to send a strong message to the people concerning their participation in the developments of the European Union .
Madam President , the facility that exists for Union citizens to appeal to the Ombudsman is one of the most important rights they have .
The extent of the Ombudsman 's efficiency depends largely on the resources he has available to him .
The office of the Ombudsman for Europe has gradually become inundated with petitions .
This is an indication that the public see the work of the Ombudsman as vital in correcting maladministration in the EU .
The common task of the European Parliament and the European Ombudsman is the protection of the rights of citizens and Union democracy .
The citizens of the Union have the right to require the office of the European Ombudsman who handles their complaints to have a sufficiently large legal staff available to it , one that has at least the same level of legal experience as the Community institutions under investigation .
With growing pressures of work the problem which the struggling Ombudsman has is the number of posts available and their level .
This is a state of affairs that will have to be remedied in the future .
Otherwise we will have a situation where the Ombudsman handling a case in respect of a citizen of the Union will have at his disposal only machinery which is inadequate and of inferior quality .
I hope that we can all give our support to the European Ombudsman in his vital endeavour to create a flexible , efficient and adequately resourced Ombudsman 's office .
Only in that way can we offer the citizens of the Union a speedy , high level service there .
Madam President , I would like to join the chorus of praise for our Ombudsman .
He has done a splendid job and it has rightly been recognised by Parliament .
His job has , in many ways , brought the citizens of Europe closer to us , an aspiration we continually speak about here in Parliament .
He has also , for many countries who do not have a tradition of Ombudsman , brought the role closer and explained it to the people - which was very important .
In his first report he pointed out how many people had petitioned , and which petitions were not admissible .
As I pointed out when I spoke earlier in this debate , he has also promptly responded to those who have petitioned Parliament .
This is very important because many people , when they write , feel that their letters disappear into some bottomless pit and nobody ever finds them again .
So that is terribly important .
I should just like to take this opportunity , while expressing my appreciation of our Ombudsman 's work , to raise also the issue of the need for a special children 's Ombudsman in Europe .
My work in the area of children and children 's rights clearly indicates that this is an important and very vital extension of the role Mr Söderman has been fulfilling so splendidly .
I hope that in the next Parliament we will address that issue and decide on the appointment of a special Ombudsman for children .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place during the next voting time , which is about to begin .
Madam President , the Spanish Interior Minister has stated that the assassinations in the Basque country of democratically elected representatives " are unacceptable for the entire European Union because they constitute an attack on the very essence of democracy ' .
And since this is the home of democracy in Europe and also the most visible expression of the peace and liberty which the large majority of Europeans enjoy , I would call on you , Madam President , to welcome a group of Basque local councillors whose lives are threatened due to their beliefs and who are here to attend our debates today .
Votes
I would just like to add to the Minutes that there is a small problem with the German , Spanish and French translations , which do not make clear that petitions must continue to be in writing , and thus may not be submitted by telephone .
My report is , of course , not affected by this .
I would just like this to be recorded in the Minutes before the vote .
( Parliament adopted the decision )
Madam President , I would like simply to draw the House 's attention again to the very negative effect of this amendment , which is to introduce two readings in all cases .
Thus , the aim of the amendment is to reject what we worked hard to achieve with the Amsterdam Treaty .
If accepted , the amendment would upset the report and not be a reform but a counter-reform .
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , before we vote on paragraphs 10 , 11 and 12 , I think I should give you the following information .
These three points together represent a compromise from the Committee on Institutional Affairs . The original text was much more strongly against having closer cooperation with majority voting , whilst at the same time giving any Member State not in agreement the opportunity of exercising a veto against this closer cooperation .
This compromise therefore also includes paragraph 12 which calls upon the Commission to include , in its work on the revision of the Amsterdam Treaty , a paragraph which once again does away with this national veto .
This compromise was accepted with a large majority and I would advise Parliament to adhere to this compromise , not least because the European Parliament has always spoken strongly in favour of replacing the principle of unanimity , except in constitutional matters , by qualified majority voting .
I considered it a mistake once again not to do away with the national veto on a concrete point where a majority vote is concerned , and am therefore asking you to adhere to the compromise .
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
Madam President , on a point of order .
Is it not right and proper that we should continue ?
Yesterday we started almost 30 minutes late .
Today , we have started almost 20 minutes late .
It is only right and proper that we should continue .
In fact , something should be done so that if you say the vote is at 12 o 'clock , the vote should be at 12 o 'clock !

( The President decided to extend the voting time after having checked that a majority of the Assembly were in favour )
Madam President , I voted against the Evans report because I believe that it was a very bad decision on the part of Parliament .
We demand the recognition of minority rights and regional languages at all levels .
We demand it at Council level , as we did in the Maij-Weggen / Dury report .
We demand it from associated states , but we do not demand it of ourselves .
In our Rules of Procedure we have failed to draw the obvious conclusions of what we demand of others .
The Evans report is poor because , on one hand , it fails to distinguish between our recognized regional languages and other languages . Secondly , I do not quite understand the point of the summarised translation for it can only mean that the petition is not read in the original language .
And if it is not read then there is no point in giving anyone the right to submit it .
I have the feeling that this is an attempt to mislead us and I should therefore like to make it quite clear that I believe we should stick to our official languages , but that between the official languages and all the other languages we also have the regional languages which we must secure and protect .
I voted in favour of the amendment of the Rules of Procedure proposed by the committee , in accordance with which petitions will be admitted even if they are drawn up in a language other than an official language of the European Union .
To be considered , a translation or summary in one of the official languages will be included , to be used as the language for subsequent procedures , including the correspondence from the institution to the petitioner .
As I was able to point out in my speech during the debate , this amendment precisely respects the very essence of the right of petition , which is , by its very nature , an individual right that the Treaty grants to every man or woman among us , without allowing any discrimination and , in particular , without making any distinctions between citizens and non-citizens .
The complementary - and therefore ancillary - rule is a procedural one which , irrespective of other considerations , respects the Treaties : in general , the procedure in a European institution must be carried out in one of the official languages .
The amendments tabled and rejected which discriminate , on behalf people 's rights , against some people and not against others in terms of drawing up a petition - because their language of use does not have territorial recognition - are , in the last analysis , contrary to the very essence of the right of petition .
I am happy to back this report which seeks to make the petition system in the European Parliament more accessible to our citizens .
My Labour colleague Mr Evans 's report puts forward a welcome reform to allow people who may be more comfortable using a non-EU language to use their mother tongue when sending us a petition .
Of course for administrative reasons we would still need a summary in an official EU language to enable the petition to proceed .
Since we recognize minority EU languages as valid when they originate in Member States , there is no reason why for example Urdu or Hindi should not also be recognized .
EU citizens who belong to ethnic minorities often face problems of racism which the majority of us need to be aware of so that they can be tackled .
Anything which makes it easier for such problems to be raised is to be supported - which is why nonEU languages should be as valid for use in citizens ' petitions here as any other .
Hautala report ( A4-0253 / 98 )
Madam President , it is most regrettable to find that neither in the original text of the Hautala report , nor in the amendments , is it specified that these vehicles only concern transport over a fixed distance .
Like with the rapporteur , we are anxious to prevent animals suffering stress , cold , heat , shocks , etcetera , and we would have voted in favour of most of the amendments as well as the text as a whole , if only the authors had given some consideration to the small livestock farmers who might take just two or three animals to market in a neighbouring village , small farmers who obviously do not have access to an air-conditioned vehicle , nor - most particularly - adequate financial means for such an investment .
In the absence of any such specifications , it is once again the small farmers who are penalised , perhaps even put out of work altogether , and we simply cannot accept this .
We are choosing to vote against certain proposals from the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy , as they constitute unnecessary detailed regulation and , to a certain extent , contravene the principle of subsidiarity .
We assume that the Commission 's technical experts have carried out a correct assessment of the requirements of proper animal transportation , but it is our hope that the Member States will provide supplementary rules taking local conditions into consideration with the aim of maximising the welfare of the animals .
The transport of animals within the EU covers a very large number of animals .
Every year around 14 million cattle , pigs , horses and sheep , etcetera , are transported between the Member States .
Most of these go to slaughter and some are exported , while at the same time the EU also imports a lot of animals , around 2.3 million .
In recent years we have again and again seen pictures showing the cruel and shameful way in which this transportation takes place .
The Commission 's proposal for improvements to current directives on the design of the motor vehicles and trailers which are used is a good starting point , but is not sufficient .
We therefore support the rapporteur , Mrs Hautala , in her report which aims to improve the Commission 's proposal with toughened requirements .
These include the design of the loading ramps and how the ventilation in the trailers could be improved .
The amendment that there should be regular inspections of vehicles to ensure that they fulfil the requirements is of the utmost importance , otherwise there is no point to the directive .
This is a step in the right direction in order to go some way towards eliminating the odious transportation of animals which currently exists in the EU .
The Commission 's proposal on common rules for motor vehicles and trailers used for the transportation of animals across land will be considerably improved by Mrs Hautala 's excellent report which contains proposals for less steep loading ramps , electrical lifting devices , better ventilation and temperature and continuous monitoring .
That is good .
With this in mind , I have voted in favour of the report .
However , the key issue must be to reduce the overall volume of animal transportation .
The best way to do this is to offer no support for the transportation of animals within the EU .
I have also backed this in votes in connection with the budget , among other things .
The concern for the safety of farm animals in transportation procedures is supported , but with reservations as to the success of the Commission 's proposals .
As plans will affect 14 million animals , regard must also be given to their owners , who will be paying for any changes in transportation specifications .
There are three main issues of concern which should be evaluated further before full support is given .
First , incline for loading ramps should not exceed 20º according to the Scientific Veterinary Committee ( 1992 ) .
This report allows for an increase of this number by an additional 5º .
Secondly , cavity implementations on ' light ' metal walls have two potential problems .
They could lead to increased bacteria levels if punctured and would increase costs for transporters .
This seems to be a less effective measure than possible alternatives if the issue of disinfecting the transport area becomes yet another problem ( ECOSOC opinion Dec . 1997 , ref : CES 1378 / 97 ) .
Thirdly , changes in roof structure and their purpose of protection from temperature variation and weather conditions are already in place with ventilation control systems .
With these obvious problems of changing veterinary suggestions for safety and increase in cost for the transporter , full support cannot be given to this report .
It should be considered whether such changes would significantly raise livestock safety or just cost of their transport .
We should consider if plans for safety are better implemented in other ways .
We are aware that the topic of animal transport is a very important one , and that efforts must be made in this field in order to reach political goals and solutions .
The citizens of Europe attach great importance to animal protection .
Studies which show that animals for slaughter are exposed to particular stress during transport and loading / unloading must therefore be taken very seriously and discussed at a political level .
Political guidelines are one thing , the partial implementation and technical execution of these principles quite another .
Just recently , in relation to the draft directive on bus design , we have on numerous occasions discussed new approaches to technical legislation - both in the Committee on Economic Affairs and here in Parliament .
This report gives us another opportunity to consider the advantages of this " new approach ' .
This procedure enables us to proceed and to make decisions in accordance with the planned allocation of roles .
As the representative body of the citizens of Europe , it is the role of the European Parliament to prevent concerns and anxieties from arising and to develop basic political concepts designed to guarantee the proper health and safety of people and animals .
The technical experts , the practicians , who work in this field every day , are on the other hand responsible for implementing these concepts on the basis of the political guidelines .
This process should also include provision for hearing and involving representatives of any relevant interest groups - manufacturers , consumers and other interested parties .
In this way we can ensure that rather than passing abstract legislation which is remote from practical issues and excessive , we promote streamlined , efficient and modern regulations and thereby finally help to complete the single market .
Overall , our group supports , on principle , measures which favour the well-being of animals .
However , it is quite legitimate to wonder about the validity of imposing uniform standards as regards the construction of vehicles intended for animal transportation , independently of their conditions of use and their operational character .
In fact , why impose the installation of an air conditioning system for the transport of animals in Finland or Sweden ?
Why lay down identical standards for animal transportation which apply to both short distance and long distance transport ?
These are some of the questions which we really have to ask .
What is the main purpose here ?
The desire to standardize everything or the useful and functional nature of the legislation ?
And there is another question : how can we apply European laws to the import of live animals from third countries ?
Unless we want to impose penalties on ourselves , it is essential that we apply our own provisions to all imported products , from the very start of the production chain , and not only from the time these products cross the frontiers of the European Economic Area .
Rather than wishing to legislate purely at European level , we should try to define these rules worldwide , in the context of the international negotiations of the WTO .
We shall be paying careful attention to this point , and many others , in order to see how the Commission does or does not defend European interests , particularly in terms of the reciprocity of legislative provisions .
Finally , we must be careful not to impose unacceptable charges on our farmers and , in this specific case , on our livestock farmers , even if the honourable reason is to ensure maximum welfare of animals .
We are at the dawn of a reform of several COMs and the Commission 's proposals for regulations worry us a great deal .
In fact , if they are adopted , they will bring about a significant reduction in farmers ' income .
If , in addition to these proposals , other Commission services impose draconian standards in all sectors , then the Commission will be penalising and discouraging the whole of the agricultural sector , as well as the whole of rural life .
Mr President , although I welcome the fact that British regulations already meet the standards of vehicle design as set out in this report for the transport of animals , this is one case where I would like all of Europe to be required to meet centralised EU-level rules , for the sake of the 14 million animals carried on European roads each year .
If they could vote , I am sure these animals would choose to travel in lorries or trailers with proper ventilation , adequate room per animal , decent lighting and sufficient loading / unloading facilities .
In particular , the last aspect needs to have proper minimum standards , since the experts - and common sense - suggest that loading and unloading of animals into and from vehicles is an especially stressful time .
I also share the rapporteur 's view that more needs to be done to ensure monitoring of ventilation and proper inspection of vehicles to see that they do in fact meet the letter and spirit of EU rules .
I hope that many countries will choose , as we have done in Britain , to go further than EU rules demand , but we need decent minimum standards of animal transport for the whole EU .
It is said that a society can be judged by how it treats its weakest members .
Some of Europe 's weakest inhabitants are its animals , on which we depend for food , so the least we can do for them is to transport them in civilised conditions .
The rapporteur has produced several very good proposals for amendments to the Commission 's draft directive .
However , I would like to raise an objection that I usually take up when discussing similar reports .
I ask myself whether this Parliament should concern itself with such technical matters .
Is this Parliament competent to reach detailed decisions on the internal height of each deck in order to determine the exact size in millimetres for the transport of piglets or lambs etcetera ?
This Parliament should instead set up frameworks and objectives such as , for example , that the transportation of animals shall take place in the best possible way for the animals .
Civil servants can then determine the means to achieve these objectives drawn up by politicians .
Rothley report ( A4-0267 / 98 )
I am delighted that Mr Rothley 's report has been adopted at first reading .
The proposed directive sets up the principle of direct action by the victim against the insurers of the person who caused the accident .
It obliges the insurer to propose compensation within a specified period and imposes a financial penalty .
These various measures , which are necessary , will improve the situation of the victims of road accidents throughout the European Union .
Extension of the scope of the directive to non-Member States of the Union raises difficult questions .
I am not certain that the directive is the proper instrument for this purpose .
No doubt we shall have to return to this problem at second reading .
The report presented by Mr Rothley is the kind of report which it is a pleasure to vote for .
First of all , it is a true institutional " first ' .
It is the first time in fact that we have been called upon to vote on a proposal for a directive based on the power of initiative accorded to the European Parliament by Article 138B of the Treaty .
Secondly , it is a proposal for a directive which , once implemented , will bring practical and efficient help to a large number of European citizens .
In fact , the number of European citizens involved in road accidents outside their country of residence is estimated to be approximately 500 000 per annum .
The rapporteur notes , in this connection , that it costs at least fifteen times more to settle an accident abroad than it does in one 's country of residence , and that it generally takes up to eight years !
This is enough to show that the initiative is both necessary and urgent .
The mechanism proposed by the Commission and amended by our Parliament comprises four essential , simple and practical measures to be set up in each Member State :
1.granting the victim a direct right of action ; 2. appointment by the insurer of a claims representative ; 3. setting up an information centre ; 4. creation or approval of a body providing compensation for the deficiencies of a defaulting insurer.I hope that these measures can be applied as quickly as possible , and I hope that all the Union institutions will work towards this .
This Directive will greatly benefit people involved in traffic accidents whilst on holidays in other European countries .
Tens of thousands of Irish people travel to Britain and the continent by car every year .
If you are involved in an accident in France with a Dutch tourist , it can be extremely difficult to get compensation afterwards .
Aside from the personal injuries that may occur , there can be terrible problems with paperwork , different procedures and endless delays .
I am contacted on a regular basis by people whose holidays have been ruined as a result .
While this Directive will not solve all of their problems , it will mean that making a claim against someone in another country for an accident that took place in a third country will not be as difficult as it is at present .
I also welcome the fact that the Commission has followed through on the European Parliament 's 1995 initiative highlighting this problem .
The Commission should retain the sole right to initiate legislation in order to ensure that EU legislation reflects the interests of all Member States .
But it is correct that Parliament should have the right to suggest legislation for problems that the Commission has missed and where a Europe-wide approach is the best solution .
Madam President , I am very pleased that we have finally been able to adopt a clear stance on matters in Kosovo with a very large majority .
Unfortunately , however , it has to be said that this is really something we should have done two or three years ago . Then we might really have been able to achieve an internationally guaranteed , far-reaching solution based on autonomy , just like the one we are calling for today .
For years we ignored Mr Rugova 's peaceful line by doing nothing , and now it makes sense that the Kosovo Albanians should be trying to escape with their bare lives .
And that is exactly what is happening .
We have quite simply acted too late .
However , I am pleased that the Austrian presidency seems to represent a turning point in this matter .
Mr Schüssel was the first President of the Council to give a clear and forwardlooking message on Kosovo .
For years we have been pressing for an EU office in Pristina .
We were always told it was not possible .
Within a few days Mr Schüssel had set up a representative office and I am pleased that the image of Europe we are presenting in Kosovo at the present time is Mr Schüssel 's image of Europe .
We have voted for the Greens ' first amendment , which means that the UN must give the go-ahead for possible military action to prevent the genocide of the Albanian inhabitants of Kosovo .
The proposed text of the resolution is unclear on this point , and it is possible to interpret it as NATO / the WEU being able to act without a UN mandate .
For us , a UN mandate is necessary in order for any military action to be able to take place .
However , the main approach to the Kosovo problem must be peaceful international pressure and mediation to bring about a political solution to the conflict in Kosovo .
The Danish Social Democrats have voted in favour of a resolution condemning the violation of basic human rights that is taking place in Kosovo , and the violent attacks that Serbian security forces , units from the Yugoslav army and paramilitary forces are carrying out against the population of Kosovo .
We do support one amendment emphasizing that a resolution by the UN Security Council would be needed prior to any military action .
Scarcely one month after the adoption of our last resolution on Kosovo , the European Parliament has voted a new resolution on this same subject .
Is it really necessary ?
The deterioration in the situation is of course very worrying but what real help can be provided by a redundant resolution which , to all intents and purposes , merely condemns yet again the crimes committed and their perpetrators ?
We must not confuse the issuing of moralising generalities with the adoption of a position or the actions of a foreign policy which has some real effect .
In addition we must be careful to avoid tripping up here .
We have heard very many irresponsible proposals in this place linking all progress towards peace with the recognition of independence of a so-called Kosovan nation .
To do this , to follow the direction initiated by the recognition of an independent Kosovo by the Tirana authorities , would be the best way to ensure that the present conflicts remain wholly inexpiable .
Let us not forget that , while Kosovo today comprises a population which is 90 % of Albanian origin , it is the historical and spiritual cradle of the Serbian nation , and that the first Albanian colonies were installed at the initiative of the Ottoman Empire .
The oppression of nations instigated by the communists must not be followed by a fury of dismembering and dismantling likely to result in the creation of artificial nations which would in the long run pose considerable problems .
This calls into question the statute of autonomy of Kosovo in 1989 , which was the first destabilising element in the Yugoslav territories .
The contact group is working very hard to help re-establish this statute in the midst of the greatest difficulties , be it the violence of the Milosevic government 's actions , or the anarchic state of the Kosovo Liberation Army , a group of resistance fighters who are not represented and are likely to be regarded as valid interlocutors .
The contact group , which brings together the active part of the European Union , is trying very hard to find the right mix of threats and positive incentives to avoid the conflict being stepped up and widened .
Alongside the contact group , and supporting its actions , the national diplomacies have an important role to play .
The OSCE , currently chaired by Poland , can also make an positive contribution and the proposals made by the Austrian Presidency , which follow the same line , can also be useful .
Fourçans report ( A4-0263 / 98 )
Madam President , the annual report of the European Monetary Institute , the last report by this institution before its transformation into the European Central Bank on 1 July , shows , as the rapporteur of our Assembly so nicely puts it , a certain bias towards generalization .
However , it does open , on the first page , with a photograph of the EMI Council in its entirety , which says more than the rest of it .
The photograph shows all the governors of the national central banks , nicely lined up , standing in the second row , whilst five people are comfortably seated in armchairs in the first row : the EMI President , who has become President of the ECB , Mr Duisenberg , as well as his Vice-President , which is quite normal , surrounded by the two female governors of the Central Bank , which is also understandable .
The fifth person is Mr Hans Tietmeyer , governor of the Bundesbank , who , to my knowledge , does not belong to either of the two preceding categories .
No doubt his presence is intended to illustrate Mr Duisenberg 's famous remark , which I quote : " The euro speaks German and we are especially happy about this ' .
We were expecting that , six months before the single currency enters into force , this EMI report would explain something about how we shall manage a unified monetary policy in an area which is economically , socially and politically heterogeneous .
For example , what criteria will be used to determine a single level of interest rates ?
How will we manage not to upset everyone at once , and above all , not to end up with economic results which are on the whole poorer than those which would have been achieved by policies finely tuned to each country 's individual circumstances ?
But the report remains totally mysterious on all these points , which are nevertheless vital , and very urgent at the stage that we have reached . However , this does not prevent it from proclaiming once more that it recognizes the need for the ESCB to ensure transparency of its objectives and the policies which it will pursue , so that the financial community and the public will understand and support its actions .
In contrast , the EMI report , either in the body of the text or in the foreword by its President , does not stint on the details concerning the policy to be conducted in this field , yes , the budgetary field .
Mr Duisenberg explains here , for purposes of simplification , that the reduction in public deficits must be accelerated if we do not wish to force the ECB to conduct a restrictive monetary policy .
Moreover , he did the same kind of thing at the time of the last Council meeting on the euro .
Of course , anything can happen but there are nevertheless limits to be respected , especially on the part of the man extraordinarily placed beyond any democratic control .
This report provides us with a necessary opportunity to think about the international monetary system .
As the rapporteur suggests , the EMI report is very vague .
At any rate , our international monetary system is fundamentally in trouble from the moment it is based on the dollar standard : this gives the United States the extraordinary privilege of issuing an international currency and thus of avoiding some of the monetary discipline imposed on other countries .
The introduction of the euro will not change anything in this inadequate system .
Moreover , the will to link the euro to the Deutschmark is likely to cause deflation in Europe and to endanger the level of employment in the less competitive European states .
In order to give each state control of its currency within the framework of a discipline which can be imposed on everyone , it is necessary to re-establish a gold standard or at least a gold exchange standard .
Thus , inflationary excesses could be combatted without conferring an unfair position of power on the United States as well as on a future European Central Bank .
The latter , as the rapporteur clearly recognizes in paragraph 13 of his report , will be indifferent to the situation of each Member State .
We are taking considerable risks by wishing to centralise currency issuing in a Europe which is in all other respects pluralistic and diverse in its economic characteristics .
In currency matters , it is often very dangerous to put our confidence in governments . But placing undue confidence in a central bank is also very dangerous .
An automatic system based on gold , as was the case in Europe before 1914 , would allow for greatly increased stability with a minimum of choice .
It is regrettable that this possibility was not seriously considered , because of the prejudice in favour of a supranational currency-issuing agency .
Once again , this ritual exercise shows its limitations , and I would like to support my colleague André Fourçans and the reservations expressed regarding certain aspects of the current relations between the Monetary Institute and the European Parliament .
It is , in fact , prejudicial that the tools and analyses supplied are not more detailed .
A more accurate control system for the European economy would enable everyone to have a proper view of this , and would help to back up our own discussions in a more constructive manner .
In this respect , it would be rather prejudicial for future relations between our Assembly and the European Central Bank to continue in the same way .
We have the right to expect more from such an institution .
I would add that , even quite recently , some of our colleagues expressed this same view during discussions on the ECB ; commitments appear to have been made .
I dare to hope that they will be kept .
Moreover , if it is right to express some reservations as to the substance , it is also permissible to wonder about the politicoeconomic orientation underlying the drafting of this report .
If the independence of the Central Bank should not be called into question , I feel I should point out that exchanges between the European Parliament and the Bank imply that each should listen to the other .
In these difficult and disturbed times , no one can pretend to be certain of anything ... I will mention only the Asian crisis or the " forecasts ' of our learned economists in their turn !
Yes , the politicians must take into account economists ' analyses , but it also seems necessary to me that the latter should take account of our remarks in their discussions .
In all cases , the only ones who will have to explain themselves to the citizens are their elected representatives .
The report on the 1997 annual report of the European Monetary Institute is actually about the introduction of the euro in 1999 .
From this perspective , and seen in the context of the Swedish debate on EMU , the report is quite ' revealing ' on the question of what EMU is going to involve .
Among other things , it says :
that the single monetary policy will underpin a change in the economic policies of those Member States which have adopted the euro ( recital A ) ; -that it is nevertheless necessary to develop a genuine economic policy at European Union level through the more effective coordination and surveillance of the Member States ' economic policies ( recital G ) ; -that gradual labour market reforms are needed ( paragraph 5 ) ; -that it is regretted that the EMI has declined to address the general issue of the coordination of fiscal and taxation policies in the European Union , which will nonetheless be one of the major foreseeable consequences of the process of Economic and Monetary Union ( paragraph 7 ) .These examples from the report show plainly that the European Parliament obviously thinks that , in connection with the start of EMU in 1999 , the EU will meddle in and begin to take over the economic policies of the Member States to a greater extent than today .
' Gradual labour market reforms ' sounds fine , but usually means worse employment rules and increased wage gaps , which we cannot support .
Sweden is going to be outside the euro zone from the start in 1999 .
We think that this decision is good because we think monetary policy should be conducted by the Member States and not by the EU .
However , there are , of course , a number of good demands in the report .
These include , amongst others , the demand for transparency in the current EMI and the subsequent ECB .
We do of course support these demands .
The Danish Social Democrats in the European Parliament have today voted in favour of the Fourçans report .
We agree with the rapporteur that the EMI has come a long way in preparing the instruments and procedures required for the implementation of the common monetary policy in the third stage .
We agree that there is a need for more public and private investment to stimulate internal demand , that the EMI 's explanation of EMS II is insufficient , and that there is a lack of perspective for the states of central and eastern Europe and their associated membership of EMS II in connection with the strategy of accession .
However , we do have reservations about the rapporteur 's view to the effect that it is necessary to put together actual monetary policy at Union level , but we are in favour of coordinating monetary policy between Member States , for example in promoting employment .
We do not fully agree with the view that it is regrettable that the annual report does not address the question of the integration of budgetary policy and policy on taxes and charges in the EU .
It is hardly the place of the EMI to demand integration of such policy in its annual report .
The annual report of the European Monetary Institute , the last one before its liquidation and the establishment of the European Central Bank , is shorter due to the elimination of a large chapter that until now had been the main part : the analysis of progress in convergence of the individual Member States .
This report , however , drafted at an important moment in the historic journey that has led to the euro , lacks a detailed analysis of the following points :
an in-depth study of progress in the process of harmonization of the individual European tax policies : the current distortions and differences in the individual national tax systems , if they are not identified and analysed by a group of independent experts , could thwart the efforts made to achieve Economic and Monetary Union , eliminating the advantages and potential opportunities that the single market can offer in terms of economic development and the gradual reduction of existing structural unemployment ; -there is also no specific examination of the candidate countries seeking membership to determine their efforts in the area of economic , monetary and financial policy and to assess the real progress made in these policy areas.Finally , I consider it only right to emphasize the structural weakness of Italy 's economy which , together with those of France and Germany , has been analysed in the report : this is an alarm bell that must be met with appropriate remedies in terms of horizontal European actions and the strategies of the individual national governments .
The problem of structural unemployment calls for rapid and targeted solutions : the Central Bank , although it has an important role to play in this area , may not , however , replace the international actions of renewal of individual job markets .
There therefore has to be an employment strategy that , taking into account the population trend in Europe , abandons rigid policies that create - perhaps in perfectly good faith - a sense of social protection that is only temporary and illusory , to adopt new forms of working relations , more flexible and in line with the needs of the market .
In spite of all these reasons and although I appreciate the rapporteur 's commitment , on behalf of the National Alliance , I cast a vote of abstention on the report in question .
Manzella report ( A4-0271 / 98 )
Madam President , Mr Manzella is bringing us good news : acceleration and simplification of the legislative procedures in our Parliament .
Will the democratic deficit which prevails so blatantly in our European institutions be made good for all that ?
It would appear that the answer is no .
Doing things more quickly and more briefly will not affect the basic problem .
It will not lighten the crushing weight of the two large dominant groups in our Parliament .
This Parliament will always run the risk of reliving a socialist Presidency which seems to suffer from some kind of ' right ' blindness , excluding almost systematically the nonattached Members of Parliament who are regarded as permanently out of the game .
It is most commendable to wish to increase contacts with national parliaments , but sometimes , as in Belgium , it is particularly so because we know that both the European and national elections in Belgium are ostensibly fixed , be it by subsidized media , taxpayers ' money or dirty money from political and financial skulduggery .
So much for our work upstream of Parliament , and downstream , what point is there in legislating when Belgium once again refuses to be subject to directives which it does not like , such as the right for citizens of the European Union to vote in local elections .
" Maastricht ' has extended our powers and our responsibilities .
The post- " Amsterdam ' period will reform current procedures , which are too cumbersome , in order to move towards greater simplicity .
Daily , we think and we act with a view to bringing the European Union and its citizens closer together .
Today the Manzella report provides us with another opportunity to demonstrate our efforts and above all to convert them into action .
Given the volume of texts which we study in Parliament 's committees and during the part-sessions , we have a double challenge : to simplify once and for all the legislative process and to balance the roles of the European Parliament , the European Commission and the Council .
It is now legally possible to simplify , rationalize and accelerate the preparation of our legislative work .
We must , within our various committees , encourage the chairmen to do this .
A new structured dialogue structure can be launched .
The majority of our home countries have a two-chamber system .
The efficiency of this system no longer needs to be proven . It can be transferred to the European level .
All that is needed , in the first instance , is to define new rules to govern the operation of the European Parliament and relations between our different institutions .
Informal exchanges of opinion , coherent and joint work between our Assembly , the European Commission and the Council will make it possible to reach many agreements on first reading without impeding the transparency of the mechanism and by exchanging more information .
I therefore approve the Manzella report which hopes to make qualitative improvements in our legal procedure at first reading , second reading and conciliation , and to achieve more comprehensive planning of the annual legislative programme , which would have the advantage of enabling us to concentrate more on our priority objectives .
The Manzella report which the European Parliament has just adopted proposes a certain number of technical reforms , which are intended to take an example from the new codecision procedure provided for in Article 251 of the EC Treaty , modified by the Treaty of Amsterdam .
Our Assembly has the right , admittedly , to begin to think about what will happen after Amsterdam , but all the same it goes a bit far when it cites this Treaty , in the adopted resolution , as if it had already entered into force and as if ratification were already complete .
This is not the case , particularly in France .
It is important that we do not , in this new Europe , think that the approval of the people is something that we obtain automatically .
We are all the less inclined to give credit to the European Parliament in this matter , since the codecision principle introduced by Maastricht and the extensions provided by the Amsterdam text seem to us to be far from satisfactory .
I also note that the French Constitutional Court , in its decision of 31 December 1997 , noted for the first time that codecision , applied to certain fields , could damage the essential conditions for the exercise of national sovereignty .
In fact , this procedure allows the European Parliament , where French Members only hold 13 % of votes , to have the last word on vital questions for our country , in particular as regards the international movement of persons .
One might even imagine cases where codecision would allow the European Parliament to oppose a decision wished for by all the governments , supported by all the national parliaments .
We have here a case of supranationality which is all the more dangerous because the European Parliament has the authority of a European people which does not exist , and depends on Eurocrats who , alas , exist only too much .
Now , the Amsterdam Treaty makes this situation even worse : on the pretext of simplifying the procedure , it strengthens the position of the European Parliament , which it turns into a co-legislator together with the Council , thus establishing a balanced situation in which the Manzella report discovers with satisfaction the characteristics of " a two-chamber legislative system ' .
At the same time , it increases the number of cases where this strengthened procedure can be applied to twenty-five new fields .
These developments taken together give the European Parliament greater power and this represents one of the great federalist advances in the Amsterdam Treaty .
Thus , before hurriedly moving on to the measures for applying the new procedure and having regard to the debate on ratification of Amsterdam which will take place in France , we would first of all like to ask a fundamental question : is it appropriate to reinforce codecision , is codecision itself appropriate ?
We would say no , because codecision gives the European Parliament an essential deciding role , whereas it should only have a secondary role .
It takes away people 's control of their destiny , whilst the European mechanisms do not offer a democratic quality or proximity equivalent to those of national parliaments .
In the future , it will be necessary to withdraw from codecision - for example , to start by rejecting the Amsterdam project - or to reintroduce balance by instituting the right of veto in national parliaments .
This report presented by our colleague Andrea Manzella is of great importance because the problem is to translate into reality the proposals of the Amsterdam Treaty .
I support the measures which are proposed here today , as I believe in the real and recognized power of the European Parliament .
This revision of the codecision procedure constitutes a really important step for our institution , as everyone here agrees .
However , it is still important to recall our unanimity as soon as we have to bring additional weight to bear on our work .
This situation is seen not only in our relations with the Commission , but also , and this is just as important , in our wish to enter into a fruitful dialogue with the European Central Bank .
In both cases , it would seem that our Assembly has realized that it must make people aware of our legislative role .
This aspiration is all the more legitimate since it is combined with a wish on the part of the large majority of our colleagues to bring the citizen closer to the process of building Europe .
Some worried souls , albeit they are increasingly rare , may argue that particular measures do not go far enough in a particular field .
However , we have to consider all these provisions which have to be taken as a whole in order to evaluate the path travelled .
Yes , I am firmly convinced that we must continue to progress along this path ; the time seems to have returned for political decision , and it is essential to give the legislative power of the European Parliament its full meaning .
I hope that the next few months will be fruitful as regards political debate , so that invective and demagogy are left to the xenophobes and racists .
This can only serve to strengthen our role and increase our credibility .
It often occurs to me to think that the euroscepticism which we deplore all too much on the part of our fellow citizens is fed and maintained by our own disappointments .
Thus , how many Members of the European Parliament have spent more time and devoted more words to deploring the weaknesses of the Amsterdam Treaty rather than emphasizing the progress it brings with it , some of which it essential ?
That is why I am grateful first of all to the rapporteur , Mr Manzella , for the positive and reasoned nature of his report on the changes made by the Amsterdam Treaty to the codecision procedure .
I would like to join him in saluting the fact that this Treaty will not only extend , but will also reform and simplify the mechanisms of the codecision procedure , so that the European Parliament will be a true co-legislator one day .
It seems to me also that he is perfectly right to insist on the major changes allowed by the Amsterdam Treaty from the socalled first reading stage .
In fact , the Treaty lays down that this first phase could also be the last - and therefore give birth to a law of the Union - if the Council approves a proposal of the Commission which has not been amended by Parliament , or if the Council adopts all the amendments approved by Parliament .
I fully share the opinion of the rapporteur who sees , in this possibility , substantial advantages in terms of acceleration , rationalization and simplification of the legislative work .
Finally , I think he is right to insist on the fact that Parliament must take advantage of this opportunity to make important changes in its attitude at first reading : improvement of the legal quality of the texts , concentration on the main priorities , establishing new inter-institutional reports .
Well done , Mr Manzella .
I approve your work ( almost ) without reservation .
The Danish Social Democrats have today voted in favour of the Manzella report .
We have done so based on the consideration that the report thoroughly examines the improved codecision procedure adopted in the Amsterdam Treaty .
We clearly support the enhanced influence of the European Parliament ; in many areas of policy , we now enjoy the same degree of influence as the Council .
However , the Danish Social Democrats are voting against the point concerned with providing written justification for all instances of the European Parliament adopting legislative amendments .
Our grounds for opposing this point in the report are that it would make the procedure extremely bureaucratic and slow , and that is surely not what is intended by a simplification of the codecision procedure .
I am abstaining from the vote on this report , since my fundamental outlook is that the European Parliament should have not have any codecision procedure with the Council .
I think that EU cooperation should be based on a cooperation between the parliaments of the Member States .
Political debate in the Member States is currently based on elections to the national parliaments .
For the sake of democracy , the power of the European Parliament should be reduced .
Frischenschlager report ( A4-0257 / 98 )
The discussion regarding cooperation and different speeds has been going on for a long time in the EU .
The rapporteur has made an ambitious attempt to shed light on this issue .
However , there are above all 3 paragraphs in the resolution that we cannot vote for , namely paragraphs 10 , 12 and 21 .
But we are also doubtful about paragraph 11 .
Cooperation is a requirement for all international work , and especially for the EU .
However , the objective which this cooperation aims to achieve can never be achieved by forcing other Member States into something they do not want .
Cooperation must be completely voluntary for it to be meaningful .
For this reason , we cannot vote for paragraphs 10 , 11 , 12 and 21 .
For reasons of democracy , we think that what was decided in the Amsterdam Treaty must apply until a new Intergovernmental Conference amends that Treaty .
This will also promote for the applicant countries the clarity of EU legislation and the opportunity for insight into it .
The Group of Independents of a Europe of Nations Group voted against the Frischenschlager report on the implementation of closer cooperation as provided for by the Amsterdam Treaty .
Our group has explained its position in a minority opinion which the Committee on Institutional Affairs has been good enough to append to the report .
In fact , whereas cooperation between states is completely free in Europe ( apart , of course , from matters which are codified by Community texts ) , the Amsterdam Treaty aims to incorporate everything into the Community mechanism by according a particular status within the Treaties to specific forms of cooperation .
Its ultimate aim is , therefore , to reduce the diversity of forms of cooperation in Europe , by forcing them into the mould of a single institutional framework , itself oriented towards the construction of a super-State .
This approach seems to us inappropriate : after the collapse of the Soviet regime Europeans can look forward to the possibility of a peaceful continent free of all forms of totalitarianism finally achieving its ideals of respect for individuals and peoples .
A super-State and the various forms of unification which accompany it are of no use in this context .
Worse still , by going against the very nature of Europe , they would weaken rather than strengthen it .
Furthermore , the forms of closer cooperation , which are also incorporated into the Community mechanism , as envisaged in the Amsterdam Treaty , are also open to criticism technically speaking , since they would be complex and ineffective .
Contrary to the declared intention , the various forms of cooperation incorporated in a single institutional framework entail great administrative complexity , as the new " Schengen ' cooperation shows .
Likewise the multiplicity of preconditions and the right of the European Union to examine individual agreements will undoubtedly discourage applicants and halt certain forms of cooperation which would otherwise have been beneficial .
The debates which took place yesterday evening in this Hemicycle showed , moreover , that even the federalists were getting lost and demonstrated huge uncertainty regarding the legitimacy of these new provisions .
Our colleague , Ole Krarup , rightly highlighted the fact that if our citizens became aware of such complex provisions , they would not know whether to laugh or cry .
The Group of Independents of a Europe of Nations thinks that the various forms of cooperation in Europe must be left very free , under the control of the national parliaments .
This method would be much simpler and more profitable .
The different forms of cooperation should come under a European Union framework only if this is shown to be more effective in every case , and a dynamic of cooperation in freedom must be created ..
European cooperation has played a fundamental role in the development of the Community as we know it .
Voluntarily shared sovereignty has made it possible to mark up some successes , but today it would appear that , rather than deepening and enlarging , the European Union should leave room for closer cooperation .
This closer cooperation between Member States is meant to overcome blockages dues to the sometimes divergent expectations of members of the European Union .
In very many cases it is due to the mechanism of unanimity voting .
Each , however , wishes to avoid having to implement closer cooperation mechanisms which would be perceived by the citizen as a declaration of failure .
Moreover , there is a form of competition between the expected institutional reforms in order to allow the enlargement and deepening of Europe , and closer cooperation , which is a means of pressure intended to force the construction of Europe in cases where , once again , intergovernmental procedures fail .
The institutional reforms must therefore be clearly preferred and all our efforts must be devoted to this .
It seems illusory today to expect that closer cooperation would be the appropriate framework for meeting the main challenges of the European Union .
Europe must choose the right gear in order to adapt .
However , we must be prepared for the worst and do everything possible so that the European Union does not fall apart .
A " Europe à la carte ' is unacceptable .
If closer cooperation became necessary , it would have to meet certain criteria :
1.The acquis communautaire and the proper functioning of the internal market must not be called into question ; 2 .
The single institutional framework must be retained ; 3 .
All closer cooperation must be compatible with the objectives of the European Union which are shared by all Member States ; 4 .
It must be used only as a last resort and provide for sufficient opportunities for non-participating Member States to join at a later stage ; 5 .
The Commission must play a central role in the application of criteria and procedures , particularly in Community matters.These conditions appear in the memorandum of Belgium , the Netherlands and Luxembourg of 8 March 1996 .
I welcome paragraph 7 of the motion for a resolution which underlines the exceptional and limited character of the area of closer cooperation , and paragraph 20 , which considers it illusory to wait for the closer cooperation which could constitute a suitable institutional framework .
I would like to borrow a conclusion from the reflection committee responsible for preparing for the Intergovernmental Conference .
Closer cooperation would perhaps be a step forward , but it could also result in calling previous achievements into question .
According to some , we must allow the most ambitious states to progress and , according to others , it is , on the contrary , a question of not having to participate in Community projects .
Thus we have to deal with two threats : on the one hand , explosion , and on the other , paralysis .
The excellent report by our colleague Friedhelm Frischenschlager is a tiny piece of intellectual bravura .
In fact , it treats with sensitivity and clarity one of the most controversial mechanisms introduced by the Treaty of Amsterdam , namely that of closer cooperation .
In the minds of those who invented it , one might think that closer cooperation - in broad terms , the possibility that a majority of Member States could go further forward towards integration without being held up by others who do not wish to or cannot follow the proposed speed - is intended to help to overcome the blockages within the Council .
If this is really the intention , ought there to have been a right of virtual veto for each Member State , provided that it cite " important reasons of national policy ' , thus obliging the European Council to act unanimously ?
If this was in fact the intention , ought there to have been provision made for the respect of an equal number of guarantees not only on substance - where they are totally justified - but also on procedure , where they are both cumbersome and ambiguous ( in particular , how should the notion of " last resort ' be defined ? ) .
In truth , as rapporteur , I cannot ignore the notion that closer cooperation would , above all , have some virtual effectiveness : it would hardly ever be used , but one hopes that the risk of its use would do away with one blockage or another .
If it only served this purpose , closer cooperation would already be very useful .
It is in this light that I approved Mr Frischenschlager 's report .
The Danish Social Democrats have today voted in favour of the Frischenschlager report .
We have done so based on the consideration that the report constitutes an excellent follow-up to the intent of the Amsterdam Treaty .
However , we voted against paragraphs 10 and 12 of the report , since we disagree with the rapporteur 's approach to the special option of using a veto .
Unlike the rapporteur , we believe it is sensible for there to be an emergency brake on collaboration .
It should be possible to resort to the right to veto if there are serious national grounds for so doing .
By this , we do not , of course , mean that this option should be exercised indiscriminately whenever there is disagreement ; nevertheless , we are convinced that the wording of the 1966 Luxembourg Compromise should be retained .
Thus , in cases where crucial interests are at stake for one or more Member States in connection with decisions that can be made by majority vote following a proposal by the Commission , we are in favour of the members of the Council seeking within a reasonable time to reach solutions that all the members of the Council can endorse , taking into consideration their respective interests as well as Community interests pursuant to Article 2 of the Treaty .
A ' closer cooperation ' between certain countries within a specific area will divide the EU into A and B teams .
The Amsterdam Treaty now provides such a possibility under strict conditions and with a guarantee that the veto will remain as a last resort for individual Member States to stop such proposals .
Parliament cannot and should not amend proposed Treaty texts , even if the Treaty has still not been ratified by all Member States .
Replacing the principle of unanimity with decisions based on the principle of qualified majority voting will have the same effect in reality as if the veto were abolished ; in other words , a country which wants to prevent a ' closer cooperation ' for other countries can no longer do so .
Unanimity and veto should be a matter of course in the cooperation between independent states .
I have therefore voted against this report .
The Amsterdam Treaty has evaded institutional reforms which have proved to be elusive in the context of the Union which is to be enlarged to include the countries of central and eastern Europe .
The extension of qualified majority voting within the Council is certainly the cornerstone of the institutional reforms to be undertaken if we wish to avoid institutional blockage within the European Union .
It soon became apparent that the Member States were not ready to move forward in this way .
A new political concept , " flexibility ' , had meanwhile seen the light of day .
Launched in the context of the reflection group , in advance of the Intergovernmental Conference , this concept seemed to constitute , in the first instance , the " miracle ' solution needed to get us out of the stagnation which threatens us .
Unfortunately , Amsterdam has shown us that this is not at all the case , and that " closer cooperation ' , as adopted in the new Treaty , is of the most limited kind ( being limited primarily to the third pillar ) and is probably inoperable .
The ELDR Group deplores the possibility offered by the Amsterdam Treaty to every Member State to oppose the implementation by qualified majority of provisions on closer cooperation for " important national policy reasons ' , which have not been defined anywhere .
The ELDR Group considers the possibility of a veto to be both contradictory , in that it aims to resolve some blockages in this way , and disproportionate in relation to the scope of the likely applications .
Moreover , we think that a Member State must never be able to cite such reasons and we obviously cannot support a report which proposes this possibility and which concludes by making " closer cooperation ' a provision which is wholly inoperable and pointless .
Those who vote for the report today should be aware of the following fact : if " closer cooperation ' as defined and adopted in the Amsterdam Treaty , had existed at the time EMU was launched , the euro would probably never have seen the light of day .
Even before the Amsterdam Treaty was ratified by our peoples or their representatives , the European Parliament made use of a provision of the Treaty opening the possibility for Member States who so wished to cooperate more closely than before in some fields .
The reaction of the European Parliament is consistent with the dominant ideology which prevails there : it only wishes to see in this new provision a threat to the construction of a federal Europe which it wants to promote , and would like to restrict its effects as much as possible .
Voluntary cooperation between states is , however , the European method which has produced the most positive results so far , from ARIANE to the Airbus .
The same is true in the field of international relations .
The European Parliament routinely deplores the inefficiency of the CFSP , without wanting to recognize that this stagnation is structural .
But if , instead of wishing to force at all costs all the external actions of the Union into the constraints of a single Community policy , Europe knew how to encourage and support the initiatives of some Member States which have greater expertise , and acknowledge their European dimension when it judges that they meet the interests of the whole of Europe , the Union 's foreign policy would be real , understandable and respected .
By deliberately ignoring the relevance and efficiency of national diplomacies , the Union is depriving itself of a major trump card .
By favouring an ideological vision of the CFSP , it is condemning itself to impotence .
Sticking to an archaic and monolithic vision of a single Europe with a single policies , Parliament is once again turning its back on a promising route to a Europe of voluntary cooperation between sovereign nations .
As usual , when discussing institutional matters , the European Parliament goes further than the position reached by the Intergovernmental Conference .
This is underlined very clearly in this report by paragraphs 10 , 12 and 21 .
I do not believe in the creation of a federal Europe and am therefore voting against paragraphs 10 , 12 and 21 .
Weiler report ( A4-0269 / 98 )
I have nothing against our colleague Barbara Weiler ; her text is of high quality and I subscribe without hesitation to its recommendations .
However , for some years now , I have regularly seen reports being passed which are more or less linked to this question .
Unfortunately , we must recognize that we are making only very slow progress in this field .
Those who wish to or have to work in a Member State other than their own are prey to administrative problems which are completely at odds with the current discourse favouring flexibility , mobility and so on .
We must admit that , strange as it may seem , it is pretty easy to shift several million Ecus around the world and yet there are all sorts of difficulties if you want to work 50 km from where you live , where this involves crossing a national frontier .
A truly bizarre paradox in the global village !
Yes , I am concerned by letters from European citizens explaining that they have a tax problem , a residence problem and many more . I am also concerned to realize the huge administrative effort which has to be made in order to achieve a result which is often quite unpredictable .
Yes , truly , the Europe of the citizen , the everyday Europe is still waiting to be created .
So I am astonished to see some of our colleagues objecting to simple common sense solutions in the name of I know not what fantasy .
Finally , these are the very same people who reject any form of European construction ... so what do we do ?
It is absolutely imperative that we move forward in these matters , because in addition to the individual problems to which they give rise , it is the construction of Europe which is at stake as far as our citizens are concerned .
We cannot let them down on the big political choices , we cannot allow ourselves to forget the everyday life of the people of Europe !
We are abstaining from the final vote on the Weiler report .
The report contains much that we sympathise with , and it is terribly important to solve the frontier worker problem .
However , we do not think that taxation , pension and social security systems should be harmonized .
We do not think that the mobility of labour is the anchor for growth and continued welfare .
The Weiler report deserves to be praised for not discriminating between people from EU countries and people who do not originally come from EU countries .
Despite the generally positive tone of the report , I cannot support it .
The desire to harmonize education systems , social security arrangements , fiscal regulations , etcetera , out of consideration for the free movement of the workforce is tantamount to taking a mallet to crack a peanut .
The problem is minimal .
For those who wish to work abroad , the rule of thumb should be that from day one , they should not be working under any worse conditions than the conditions the workforce of the country concerned work under .
It is the duty of the national authorities to check that this is the case .
As I said , the question of the free movement of the workforce across national boundaries is a very minor issue .
Only 0.2 % of the total workforce of the EU exercise this option .
Even if the EU were to reach the USA 's 0.5 % level , for example - and a large number of linguistic and cultural considerations would impede this - this would hardly reduce unemployment , which is at far too high a level , as Mr Weiler also mentioned .
Under no circumstances can I support the desire to " soften up ' directive 1408 / 71 .
I give my full support to the Council 's blocking this .
Thus , I challenge the Danish negotiators in the Council to stand firm .
The Danish trade union movement is bitterly opposed to the concept of an EU rule on European " apprentices ' .
The EU should not hold any sway over the content of vocational training or , for that matter , any form of training .
The field of education is strictly a national matter .
These are some of the reasons why I cannot support the Weiler report .
The Danish Social Democrats have voted in favour of improving the free movement of the workforce in the EU .
One of the underlying concepts behind European collaboration is to create the potential for the free movement of persons , not just of goods , capital and services .
Europe must not only be a business community .
It must be a Europe of the people .
Thus , we can support a call to eliminate the many obstacles to freedom of movement .
Only 0.2 % of EU citizens work in a Member State other than their own .
One of the reasons for this is that it is extremely difficult to move to a different country .
Thus , we must secure some clear and readily understandable regulations for arrangements concerning social welfare , health insurance and pensions .
People should not have to encounter so much bureaucracy when trying their hand in another Member State .
The rapporteur of the report deplores the Danish derogation in the legal field .
At this juncture , we would like to point out that the Danish derogation is a Danish matter that can only be changed by a referendum in Denmark .
We oppose , inter alia , the section on Schengen in the report , and the paragraphs on the abolition of the requirement for unanimity .
We have , nonetheless , voted in favour of the report in order to strengthen the rights of citizens of third countries .
Once again , the report submitted by the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs of the European Commission on the promotion of the freedom of movement of workers was used by the left-wing majority in the committee as an opportunity to overload it with ideological ballast on immigration policy and the rights of third country nationals .
This week we did not vote for the report for submission to the EU Commission for regulation of the admittance of thirdcountry nationals into the sovereign territory of the Member States because it had been peppered with demands from a majority from the same political camp which would have flooded our labour market , already numbering 18 million unemployed , with hundreds of thousands more job seekers , mainly cheap labour .
This report 's stance on family reunification for third-country nationals goes far beyond what is tolerable , and in any case beyond the rights which have until now been granted to applicant countries during the transition period and those we will be able to grant new Member States upon accession .
Extending the scope of those entitled to join migrant workers to include same sex partners , family members regardless of their nationality , family members not living in the migrant worker 's household and those who have more than one spouse or partner , would lead to a flood of immigration with which my small country , more than 37 % of whose population is made up of non-Luxembourg citizens , could simply not cope .
The report also contains hasty demands relating to the taxation of immigrant workers and the statement , somehow pulled out of thin air , that frontier workers would face the threat of a considerable drop in income as a result of the different rules in force in terms of taxation and social security .
This is certainly not the case for the almost 70 , 000 frontier workers employed in Luxembourg .
Similarly , I cannot agree with the demands to abolish the visa requirement for third-country nationals within the European Union .
Talleyrand once said that everything which is exaggerated is meaningless .
However , the exaggerations in this report , were they to be taken seriously , would be far from meaningless . Not to mention the fact that they are further grist to the mill of antiEuropean extremists .
For these reasons I was unable to vote for this report .
We must point out at the outset the considerable delay in the regulation of the free movement of persons , in contrast to the complete freedom of movement of goods , services and capital .
In this respect , especially , we underline the enormous problems faced by transient workers with regard to safeguarding their social security and labour rights .
Especially acute is the problem of free movement faced by third-country nationals who legally reside within the boundaries of a Member State , during their movement within the boundaries of the European Union .
However , we disagree categorically with any attempt to link the issues relating to the free movement of people with the Schengen Agreement . The basic element of this Treaty is not to facilitate the free movement of people within the European Union , but to hold electronic files on and , by means of networked centres , to carry out surveillance on , millions of citizens , and to gradually transform the European Union into an impregnable fortress for third-country nationals , as is clear from the most recent proposals concerning the rights of entry and residence .
Based on the assumption that transient workers are not second class workers , we call for equality of treatment for them in financial , social and fiscal terms .
In addition , there must be regulation of the gaps that exist in the exercise of the right of residence for all those seeking work and for pensioners who reside permanently in another Member State .
We think that the Council must go ahead and approve the proposals concerning the amendment of the regulation on the coordination of social security systems for transient workers and extend its field of operation to include social security systems for civil servants and third-country nationals who are covered by the social security system of a Member State .
In addition , there must be regulation to ensure equality of treatment for transient workers and the preservation of their rights if they are posted to another state in respect of their supplementary pension rights and career breaks .
We also wish to highlight the problems created by the varying definitions of " incapacity for work ' and the varying assessment of " degree of disability ' , as well as by the divergences in the systems used to calculate periods of insurance .
Hulthén report ( A4-0233 / 98 )
In our countries , there are very few people today who argue that economic development must , at all costs , take place within the context of respect for the environment so as not to mortgage the destiny of future generations .
Everyone is , in general , agreed that job creation must remain at the forefront of the minds of all political decision-makers .
All this is so obviously true that the Amsterdam Treaty put " economic and social progress ' , a " high level of employment ' , and " balanced and sustainable development ' as some of the fundamental aims of the Union .
One of the main concerns of the European institutions must be to integrate the environment into all policies of the Union and of Members States across the board .
This must also be the case for employment policy .
Far from acting as a brake on investments and growth , a carefully thought-out across-the-board policy for environmental protection will in fact make it possible to increase the competitiveness of our businesses , release new added-value and create many additional jobs , at all skill levels .
This is what makes the Commission communication which we are discussing today so interesting .
I can only support this strategy and the general principles set out by the Commission and hope that a number of dossiers - such as that on the proposal for a Commission directive introducing a tax on emissions of carbon dioxide and fuel - reach their conclusion as soon as possible .
With this in mind , I would like to support the resolution tabled here today .
The need to protect the environment introduces significant constraints into our societies but we do not sufficiently highlight the new prospects which it offers in terms of employment .
In Europe , the number of jobs linked to the environment has , today , reached just over 3.5 million ( source : Eurostat ) .
According to the OECD , annual growth in employment in the environment sector should reach 5.5 % in the next few years .
The creation , and subsequent generalization , of eco-taxes , shows that the sectors and firms which do not invest in processes which integrate environmental concerns into their production run the risk that their competitiveness will be weakened ineluctably , or even threatened with extinction .
In order to ensure growth which accommodates the problematic issue of the environment , it is necessary to confront both the problem of the scarcity of resources and that of the link between jobs and the environment .
This supposes that our economies are no longer characterised by the over-use of natural resources and the under-employment of human resources .
We must find the best possible compromise between the use of natural resources and jobs .
A reduction in taxation relieving the obligatory burden on employment taxes and transferring these at least in part to eco-taxes would help to promote such a development .
So we must speed up the transition of our economies to the new and clean technologies which will replace the old , polluting technologies and towards measures for reducing the amount of waste at the end of the production cycle .
However , because of the internationalization of our economies , the determining factor is that environmental parameters must be taken into account in international rules of trade .
It is within the WTO that this battle must be fought and won .
Such is the purpose of the amendments which the Group of Independents for a Europe of Nations has tabled , some of which have been adopted by our Assembly .
The gaps in current provisions are , in fact , especially significant .
It is fairly simple to impose ecotaxes on packaging waste on products imported from third countries but , in the context of existing international agreements , it is impossible to tax the effects of production processes on water and environmental pollution .
Finally , while it is essential to develop specific professional qualifications corresponding to new job profiles which are specific to the environment sectors , let us not forget that it will be necessary to include the environmental approach in all technical , economic and legal training .
( The sitting was suspended at 1.30 p.m. and resumed at 3.00 p.m. )

Mr President , thank you for giving me the opportunity to raise a point of order .
We are now beginning the topical and urgent subjects debate , and I must lodge a slight complaint , perhaps also on behalf of a number of the Members of this House .
Today 's agenda has the topical and urgent subjects debate scheduled from 3.00 p.m. to 6.00 p.m.
If we look at the agenda , we see subjects such as Nigeria , Belarus , human rights and so forth , followed by a number of figures , a sort of secret code from which absolutely no one can figure out who has submitted the resolutions or why these topical subjects are being discussed .
The topical and urgent subjects debate has already reached a low point .
We know that .
That is why there is currently talk about reorganizing it .
However , I believe that what is happening here is improper , namely that it is not indicated who , which group or which person , is dealing with Belarus or Nigeria and so forth .
On top of this , for a long time the press releases have given hardly any attention to the topical and urgent subjects debate , because the staff apparently has to catch the train home at 3.00 p.m.
Mr President , I am very disappointed .
You know , or perhaps you do not know , that for nine years I have been trying to make something of the topical and urgent subjects debate , not a half-hearted attempt , but with my full devotion .
Mr Bertens , I have noted your comment which we shall communicate to those concerned .
Topical and urgent debate
The next item is the debate on topical and urgent subjects of major importance .
The next item is the joint debate on the following seven motions for resolutions :
B4-0723 / 98 by Mr Bertens and others , on behalf of the ELDR Group , on the situation in Nigeria ; -B4-0739 / 98 by Mr Pasty and Mr Andrews , on behalf of the PSE Group , on the situation in Nigeria ; -B4-0741 / 98 on behalf of Mrs Maij-Weggen and others , on behalf of the PPE Group , on the situation in Nigeria ; -B4-0749 / 98 by Mr Hory and Mr Macartney , on behalf of the ARE Group , on the situation in Nigeria ; -B4-0752 / 98 by Mr Telkämper and others , on behalf of the Green Group , on the situation in Nigeria ; -B4-0767 / 98 by Mr Vecchi and Mrs Kinnock , on behalf of the PPE Group , on the situation in Nigeria ; -B4-0769 / 98 by Mr Marset Campos and others , on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group , on the situation in Nigeria .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the sudden and , for some , mysterious death of General Abacha has opened up a new chapter in the events of this tormented country , Nigeria .
The European Union cannot fail to take note of the fact that the temporary successor of General Abacha , General Abubakar , has released a few political prisoners but it must also see that not all have been freed and that there are no specific guarantees that a democratic process will be rapidly started in Nigeria .
It is therefore the duty of the European Parliament to ask the Council and the Commission to follow the political situation in this country closely and to encourage the president with resoluteness in this very unstable period of transition to clearly commit himself to a return of the democratic order in this country .
Mr President , in only a few weeks the political situation in Nigeria has changed dramatically .
Firstly , the unexpected death of General Abacha , then the naming of a new ruler , General Abubakar , and finally the equally unexpected death of the imprisoned opposition leader , the elected president Abiola .
Of these events it is especially the death of Moshood Abiola which has most shocked the world .
He may well have had a heart attack , but everyone knows how poorly political prisoners in Nigeria are treated .
It was generally known that Abiola , who had heart problems for a long time , was not receiving the proper treatment and medication in prison .
One could actually speak of death by neglect .
In the mean time , rioting has understandably broken out in Nigeria , and that has led to violent incidents between police , the military and demonstrators who are taking part on behalf of the opposition .
The result has been dozens of deaths .
This is a question of escalating events and increased de-stabilization in Nigeria .
Mr President , what is the European Union doing ? A great many refugees from Nigeria who reside in Europe want to help the democratic opposition .
Back in February we requested , by means of oral questions , that the Parliament pay attention during the debate to the worsening situation in Nigeria .
The British presidency at that time was sympathetic to our questions , but not a great deal has happened since then .
Now the situation has escalated further with a dramatic turn of events .
We , as the PPE Group , believe that the Union must exert greater pressure on Nigeria and on the new president Abubakar to immediately cease violation of human rights , release all political prisoners and restore democracy through democratic elections .
But the Union must also not hesitate to sharpen , if necessary , the actions against Nigeria in order to increase this pressure .
In resolutions I have already asked four times for economic sanctions , but the most important exhortation is this : as a European Union , draw a single line together , face the new Nigerian regime with determination and demand restoration of democracy and human rights .
Then the chance that something good could happen in Nigeria would be greater at this moment than ever before .
Therefore , Commission and Council , do something !
Mr President , I should like to start by paying tribute to the life of Chief Moshood Abiola .
It is an old African tradition that you wait until somebody has been buried and properly celebrated before you resume normal business .
Unfortunately Nigeria has not allowed us the luxury of doing so , but we should not let this moment pass without giving our tribute to that man who won the election four years ago , against all the odds , uniting north and south , Yoruba and Muslim .
His achievement was of course snatched away by the brutal actions of the late General Sani Abacha .
Nigeria - the great giant of Africa - is now paying the price for it .
My concern for this giant of Africa is for the people - it is not the governments of Nigeria that have made it the giant , it is the people .
In this resolution we have got it right by asking in paragraphs 1 and 2 for the speedy restoration of power to the people of Nigeria so that they can take their rightful place as a leader in Africa .
Mr President , it is normal that one never rejoices about the death of a human being .
In the case of certain dictators , however , I must honestly , say ladies and gentlemen , that I make an exception , and the death of the dictator , Abacha , has indeed led to the removal of some hindrances to political evolution in Nigeria .
On the part of his successor , Abubakar , there have been a few small signs that point in the right direction , but there remains a tremendous amount to be done .
It is especially painful that Chief Moshood Abiola has died at this specific moment , and , as said by others , certainly as a result of neglect and the lack of the right to adequate healthcare and so forth .
I therefore believe that the pressure must indeed now be increased on the Nigerian authorities to abolish all repressive measures , restore the constitutional state and release all 30 remaining political prisoners .
Only then can one eventually think about a possible perspective of renewing help to Lomé as soon as a civilian government is formed .
Mr President , there are really no longer any excuses to justify the continuation of the situation that unfortunately has characterized Nigeria for many years now .
Since 1993 , when the democratic process that was under way at the time was brutally interrupted by a military coup d 'etat , there has been in Nigeria every kind of abuse , every kind of violation , however elementary , of human rights and the consolidation of a regime , linked to the military and business clique in power , that has made widespread corruption and the worse kind of violence prevail .
Our Parliament has expressed itself repeatedly on the situation in Nigeria as has the ACP-EU Joint Assembly in a very significant way .
The disappearance of the dictator , General Abacha , which occurred last month , has rekindled some hope of a possible change .
The sudden death of the former president and opposition leader , Mr Abiola , which occurred on the eve of his release , has on the other dealt a great blow to a possible democratic process , because it has meant the disappearance from the scene of a key figure who enjoyed tremendous popular favour and support for the launch of a democratic transition .
The newly proclaimed president , General Abubakar , has freed a few political prisoners , but it is still not clear what his actual intentions are in terms of opening a new page in the history of Nigeria .
For these reasons , we call on the authorities in Lagos to immediately open a real democratic process , founded first of all on the opening of political dialogue with all the opposition parties , on the immediate release of all political prisoners , on an end to political and ethnic repression and on the launch of a process that leads to free elections .
We believe that for the international community and , particularly , for the Community institutions and the governments of the Union 's Member States , the time has come to coordinate political action and pressure on the regime in Nigeria , beginning with full compliance with the sanctions in effect , in order to demand the change that we have been hoping for now for too many years but have so far not obtained in any form whatsoever .
Mr President , the dictator Abacha has , in fact , died , but the dictatorship remains ; it remains with a new face visible in another soldier : Abubakar .
Some political prisoners have been freed , but the authoritarian structures are still in place there .
Many other political prisoners and prisoners of conscience are still in jail and , at the moment , the promises of democratization are only that : promises and words which have little substance .
I therefore believe that it is very important to ensure that , at this time , the European Union maintains a firm and demanding position with respect to the authorities in Lagos , and that in no way is any credibility given to the promises made , not even a minimum of credibility .
In this respect , a few of the insinuations made by Heads of State of the Member States of the European Union seem to me to be extremely worrying , such as those made by President Chirac , who appears to be determined to convince Europeans of the kindness of the promises of the new dictator Abubakar .
In this situation , it is evident that we must maintain the sanctions , we must strengthen them and we must try to ensure that the European Union , and not only the Union , implements a policy with those characteristics , aimed at establishing a civil government , a government based on the participation of the political opposition and the democratic powers in Nigeria , one which can prepare for free elections .
And , before that , we must achieve the release of all the political prisoners and the restoration of minimum fundamental freedoms .
Of course , we regret the fact that the president-elect , Abiola , has died - obviously due to a lack of medical care - and that he died in jail , days after Abacha .
Mr President , the death of Abacha , it has been said , has created , sadly enough but thankfully as well , new possibilities .
Despite all the conflicting reports , the new ruler , Abubakar , has become more willing to undertake democratization .
In addition , the death of Abiola has created a situation that has made the country extremely tense .
The Union must now project clarity and unity - and I realize that is like asking for snow in summer - but at any rate the Council and the Commission must join in the call for a rapid transfer of power to a civilian government .
This is the only way to allow democratic elections to take place .
The sanctions , however simple they may be , can only be removed when actual democracy is restored .
The Union must offer its assistance in terms of dialogue , and it must also strive to make the transition as successful as possible .
Attempts to exploit ethnic conflict must be dealt with .
The risk of ethnic conflict , however , must not be a reason to oppose democratization .
Democracy , Mr President , respect for human rights , building the constitutional state , these are still the best guarantees for stability and progress .
But let us , the Union , show the Nigerians that we are not only concerned with making gestures , but with truly working together with them in true cooperation .
Mr President , Nigeria has been the scene of a long-running saga of unrest and brutality , and the outlook for democracy and human rights remains highly uncertain .
The sudden death of General Abacha may just possibly clear the way for a more hopeful future , but that is by no means certain .
Our resolution calls on the Council and the Commission to renew pressure on the Nigerian authorities , but unfortunately not all Member States have been wholehearted in their support for previous sanctions .
It is to be hoped that some of them will resist the temptation to sidestep the issue for personal advantage .
I would be interested to know whether the Commission is attempting to monitor the sanctions situation .
Mr President , after a long period of deteriorating political and economic conditions and serious human rights violation in Nigeria , there now appears to be a window of opportunity - albeit a fragile one - for a more positive turn of events .
The new Head of State , General Abubakar , has released a number of political detainees and clearly stated his intention to steer the country towards civilian rule .
That development is welcome .
The political momentum now started should be encouraged and also used to press for further measures towards democracy and full respect for human rights .
I welcome the statements made in this debate urging us to do so .
I recall that the on 13 July the Council urged General Abubakar to release all the remaining detainees and to clarify his plans for future elections .
We are in favour of closer dialogue with the Nigerian authorities to promote and if possible assist the transition to democracy .
The European Union has already taken the first steps in such a dialogue through a recent visit by Minister Lloyd representing the EU presidency .
These efforts should continue and it is important that other international bodies such as the UN and the OAU work actively in the same direction .
The Commission of course deeply regrets the sudden and tragic death of Chief Abiola on 7 July .
The EU had repeatedly called for his release .
His death casts more uncertainty over the Nigerian political landscape and has led to an increased climate of mistrust and to unrest and violence .
This has highlighted the need for further confidence-building measures from those now in power , vis-à-vis Nigerian society as a whole .
I can assure Mr Moorhouse that the Commission will closely monitor events in Nigeria and in the months to come the European Union will keep its policy towards Nigeria under review , including the question of the sanctions .
The aim of our policy will be to support and demand the full restoration of democracy and full respect for human rights .
That requires a process of national reconciliation based on a credible plan for the transition to civilian rule and the release of all political prisoners .
I can assure the House that our efforts will be very much in that direction .
The joint debate is closed .
The vote will take place at 5.30 p.m.
The next item is the joint debate on the following six motions for resolutions :
B4-0728 / 98 by Mr Bertens , on behalf of the ELDR Group , on the situation in Belarus ; -B4-0732 / 98 by Mr Saint-Pierre , on behalf of the ARE Group , on the situation in Belarus ; -B4-0756 / 98 by Mrs Schroedter , on behalf of the Green Group , on the situation in Belarus ; -B4-0758 / 98 by Mrs Mann , Mrs Hoff and Mr Botz , on behalf of the PSE Group , on the situation in Belarus ; -B4-0770 / 98 by Mr Carnero González and others , on the situation in Belarus ; -B4-0784 / 98 by Mr Habsburg-Lothringen , Mr Ferri and Mrs Oomen-Ruijten , on behalf of the PPE Group , on the situation in Belarus .
Mr President , the liberals are delighted about the unified position taken in this case by the Council , Commission and Parliament and a large number of third countries regarding the regime in Minsk , Belarus .
The so-called embassy incident shows at the same time the delusions of grandeur and otherworldliness of President Lukashenko .
The ease with which he violates international conventions offers little hope for good cooperation .
The reaction of Lukashenko , the fact that he hopes that common sense and realism and not emotions will determine European policy , is a slap in the face for us .
His international policy is , however , but a shadow of his authoritarian domestic policy .
The era of , dare I say it , Stalinism appears to have returned .
A united international front must take a clear position against this .
The use of the OSCE to promote democracy deserves appreciation , as does the TACIS programme for democracy , at least if the Belarus Government does not block this .
The Union must be prepared for dialogue .
But first , Lukashenko must satisfy the preconditions .
He understands the democracy and human rights clauses of the agreement which the European Union has with third countries .
It is his fault that Belarus is the pariah of Europe .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I think that we have a double problem here : a psychiatric problem - and obviously there we can do very little - and a political problem .
Just the once will not hurt , I think , and we can congratulate the Council on the strong position which it has taken concerning Belarus .
However , we need to go a lot further .
Given that Russia has , thanks in part to the Union , been granted a loan of 20 billion dollars , we would have grounds for expecting that this country would do more to put an end not to a return , as Mr Martens said , but to the persistence , in the heart of Europe , of a communist , Stalinist glacis .
There are grounds for putting pressure on Russia .
Measures must also be taken at the level of the Council of Europe .
I think that the fifteen Member States should try to ensure that the participation of Belarus in the Council of Europe be suspended .
This is also true for the OSCE and other bodies .
I think that we have to be very firm and we must follow the Council 's lead .
Mr President , President Lukashenko is taking his self-inflicted isolation of Belarus to excess .
After the elected representatives of the dissolved parliament , the independent media and young people , it is now the western ambassadors which Lukashenko has singled out for bullying as his personal enemy .
The international community did not act until its own people were affected .
It was very slow in realizing that Lukashenko was not prepared to respect international rules in Europe and that the country 's only hope of returning to democracy is through support for the opposition , for the opposition is the only thing on which we can pin our hopes .
The visa ban has been the only significant step taken by the Council .
It was , however , also long overdue .
The effect has been amazing .
Just imagine , the population has now realised who is to blame for the situation in which it finds itself .
It is not the people , not the West , but those in power in the government .
A small instrument with an astounding effect !
Now comes the task of ensuring that this work is continued consistently , in other words that Lukashenko must be made to cooperate with the OSCE monitoring group .
He must be made to give the TACIS programme the green light so that finally there can be an end to the suffering of the civil population .
He must be made to accept that his mandate only runs until next year and that he must make preparations for free and fair elections .
In this context I as you , Mr Brittan : what is the Commission prepared to do , and what conditions do you intend to propose to the Council for the lifting of the visa ban ?
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Sir Leon Brittan , I am delighted that you are here .
We have reached a critical point in our relations with Belarus and I hope very much that this will be the last resolution we discuss and that we will now finally be able to move along a more positive route .
The latest decisions taken by the Belarus Government represent a serious breach of the Vienna Convention on Diplomatic Relations .
The Council 's decisions merit our full support .
It now appears that new negotiations are on the cards and a settlement to the conflict seems to be in sight .
The Belarus Government has signalled a serious interest in finding a positive solution .
Clearly this is something we welcome .
However , we should also see the conflict as an opportunity to consider just what dangerous ground we are on .
A change of direction in our relations is urgently needed .
Belarus is part of the European family .
Nobody wants it to be isolated .
It will soon be our immediate neighbour .
I therefore particularly support the wording proposed by the Council and would like to suggest that we include the following words under paragraph 1 . I would suggest that we take the English text , unfortunately I do not have the original here , just the German version which is more or less the same and states that it fully supports the Council 's desire , expressed in the Common Position of 13 July , to develop more constructive relations with Belarus .
But this must include clear positive signals from Belarus .
The European Parliament has shown right across the political board just how serious is its interest in improving relations .
But naturally this means respecting the democratic rules of the game .
We cannot , and of course we will not , overlook this point .
The delegation had an extremely positive meeting in Brussels .
Ambassador Wick illustrated clearly and pragmatically the steps he believes should be taken in order to bring about an improvement in relations .
We are planning another meeting in Belarus in November and I would hope that all of us here will have the opportunity to attend and to continue our work on improving relations .
Mr President , first of all I should also like to say how pleased I am that today we have heard certain signals from Belarus suggesting that the very tense situation of the last few days might perhaps be returning to normal to some extent .
Representatives from Belarus have often reproached us for applying double standards , particularly with regard to human rights .
On each occasion , my only response has been to say that it is only natural that we should regard countries which are our immediate neighbours , countries which we assume might one day wish to become part of our Community , countries which have many cultural similarities with ourselves - as is the case with Belarus - with a particularly critical eye .
We do not apply double standards , but perhaps we do look at some countries more closely than others , quite simply because we need and want to have a close relationship with these countries .
This is why we sometimes look very critically at Belarus and at what is happening there .
Then we are obliged to say that certain things happening there are quite simply unacceptable , as we have done in this case .
Of course , the quasi closure of the embassies is something we find wholly unacceptable , and our reaction to it is therefore , in my view , a very appropriate reaction .
Of course , we also consider the failure to allow various NGOs to enter and to work in the country to be inadmissible .
Here , too , some progress has been made and there has been a certain improvement , but not yet to an extent which we find acceptable .
Of course , the need for the OSCE to be able to operate there freely and to carry out its tasks , its mandate , is also very important to us .
We shall certainly judge this country on its actions and not only on the words we hear time and time again .
This is very important for us if we are to ensure that this European country reaches the standards expected of it both by us and by the Belorussian population , so that we can negotiate reasonably and can build sound foundations .
Mr President , the draft resolution on the situation in Belarus is a work of art , a magnificent piece of disinformation to be classed as one of the wonders of the world , alongside the media lies of Timisoara or the Gulf War , a war which was said to be a precision instrument and which ended up as a dreadful butchery .
The Belarus authorities have decided - what could be more normal - to repair water pipes which are more than half-a-century old , and we hear talk about the expulsion of ambassadors , of serious violations of the Vienna Convention and of human rights .
I know both the Belarus people and President Lukashenko very well .
The Belorussian people have suffered , and continue to suffer , as a result of the Chernobyl disaster , to the scandalous indifference of the west .
President Lukashenko , it must be recalled , was democratically elected by an enthusiastic population to whom he committed himself to fighting corruption , and that is what he is doing .
A politician who keeps this kind of electoral promise should serve as an example to our old corrupt parties , with which we are all too familiar in France , Belgium , Italy , our old parties caught up in scandals , stained by criminal settling of scores , whose perpetrators often enjoy total impunity .
Who are we to give Belarus lessons in democracy , when our own elections are rigged by a servile press and dirty money ?
Will our Parliament become a place where we just chat and lie ?
We have been told , here , that there was no free press in Belarus .
Well , I went there to see , and at every newsstand I found on sale two pro-government dailies and two opposition dailies .
We all know the parable of the mote and the beam .
We should think long and hard about that .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I have here , and I will show them to you , copies of two letters sent on 11 July to the presidency of the Council , one written by President Lukashenko himself , the other by the Belorussian Minister for Foreign Affairs .
They both undertake to satisfy the will and demands of the ambassadors accredited to Minsk . The German ambassador has already been appointed by the Council to go to Minsk in the next two to three days in order to sign the agreement .
I think that it would be regrettable for a European Parliament resolution to jeopardize negotiations which have started and which are already almost completed .
Mr President , Parliament 's resolution will not do any of the dangerous things just referred to - quite the reverse .
The Commission welcomes Parliament 's proposals for a resolution on Belarus .
For the most part , the debate has been an extremely balanced one , expressing proper criticisms of what has been going on in Belarus as well as a desire not to isolate Belarus , but to help it follow the proper path .
In response to the last speaker , the fact that a government has been democratically elected does not absolve it from the obligation to obey international norms and respect for human rights .
Alas , it is perfectly possible for a democratic government not to do so and when that happens it is right and , indeed , necessary for the international community to say so and take the appropriate action .
Therefore , the Commission welcomes Parliament 's proposals for a resolution because they demonstrate the deep concern of all European Union institutions about , for example , the repeated violations of the Vienna Convention on Consular Relations .
Furthermore , they show institutional solidarity with the European Union common position on Belarus , which has been regarded as quite a tough one .
Nonetheless , the Commission also hopes that the recent promises by Belarus to work towards a solution to the diplomatic crisis will soon materialise into constructive steps .
There would then be no need to take further action that would be undesirable both for Belarus , and obviously , for the European Union .
One of the speakers mentioned Russia .
On 24 June Foreign Minister Primakov said to the European Union Ministerial Troika that Russia shared the Union 's concern about Belarus and would try to use its good offices .
Whenever there is an official bilateral meeting , the Commission repeatedly urges Russia to intervene to bring Belarus back on the right track .
The Commission has taken considerable action already , quite apart from suspending the bulk of the TACIS programme .
It has not so far pursued further discussions on the TACIS civil society development programme with the national coordinator , but we hope that current difficulties in dealing with Belarus will not hamper the resumption of a constructive dialogue with Belarus and counterparts on this programme . The programme is supported by the OSCE mission in Minsk , since it fully complements the OSCE 's own objectives .
So I hope that the policy we can follow - with Parliament 's support , which we deeply appreciate - will continue to be a balanced one , seeking to be very firm and to take such tough action as may be necessary in the face of any violations of international norms by the Belarus Government .
At the same time , the policy must also seek to extend the hand of friendship and show readiness to cooperate with the Belarus Government if it gives effect to its stated promise to work towards a solution to the crisis and proceed in a way which will be acceptable to those who have expressed their concerns in this House and elsewhere about what has gone on in the past .
Mr President , I asked the Commissioner a question which he has not answered .
Would he please answer it now ?
Mr President , as I understand it the question is about what further action we will take .
The answer is that we are observing the situation and I do not think it is useful to issue a series of specific threats .
However , in answer to the debate I said that we want to avoid having to take further sanctions against Belarus , which implies that we fully reserve the right to do that if progress is not made .
Mr President , the question was : what are the conditions subject to which the visa ban might be lifted ?
I am not in a position to state specific conditions .
The common position speaks for itself and I do not think it is appropriate for me to attempt to add to it today .
The next item is the joint debate on the following 23 motions for resolutions :
Togo -B4-0725 / 98 by Mrs André-Léonard and others , on behalf of the ELDR Group , on the presidential election in Togo ; -B4-0744 / 98 by Mrs Günther and others , on behalf of the PPE Group , on the situation in Togo ; -B4-0754 / 98 by Mrs Aelvoet , Mr Telkämper and Mrs Schroedter , on behalf of the Green Group , on the presidential election in Togo ; -B4-0761 / 98 by Mr Vecchi , on behalf of the PSE Group , on the presidential elections in Togo ; -B4-0773 / 98 by Mr Wurtz and others , on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group , on the presidential elections in Togo ;
Guinea-Bissau -B4-0740 / 98 by Mr Pasty , Mr Girão Pereira and Mr Andrews , on behalf of the UPE Group , on the situation in GuineaBissau ; -B4-0743 / 98 by Mr De Melo and others , on behalf of the PPE Group , on the situation in Guinea-Bissau ; -B4-0748 / 98 by Mr Hory and others , on behalf of the ARE Group , on the situation in Guinea-Bissau ; -B4-0753 / 98 by Mrs Aelvoet and Mr Telkämper , on behalf of the Green Group , on the humanitarian situation in GuineaBissau ; -B4-0759 / 98 , on behalf of Mr Barros Moura and others , on behalf of the PSE Group , on the situation in Guinea-Bissau ; -B4-0772 / 98 by Mr Miranda and others , on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group , on the situation in Guinea-Bissau ;
Burma -B4-0731 / 98 by Mr Bertens , on behalf of the ELDR Group , on the situation in Myanmar ; -B4-0733 / 98 by Mr Dupuis , Mr Dell 'Alba and Mr Hory , on behalf of the ARE Group , on the situation of the Karen people and their persecution in Burma ; -B4-0742 / 98 by Mrs Maij-Weggen and others , on behalf of the PPE Group , on the situation in Myanmar ; -B4-0760 / 98 by Mr Harrison , Mrs Kinnock and Mrs Junker , on behalf of the PSE Group , on the situation in the Union of Myanmar ; -B4-0778 / 98 by Mr Telkämper , on behalf of the Green Group , on the situation in Myanmar ;
Sudan -B4-0724 / 98 by Mr Bertens and Mr Fassa , on behalf of the ELDR Group , on the situation in Sudan ; -B4-0745 / 98 by Mrs Maij-Weggen , on behalf of the PPE Group , on the situation in Sudan ;
Situation in Georgia and Abkhazia -B4-0729 / 98 by Mr La Malfa , on behalf of the ELDR Group , on the situation in Georgia ; -B4-0735 / 98 by Mr Dupuis and Mr Hory , on behalf of the ARE Group , and by Mrs Carrère d 'Encausse , on behalf of the UPE Group , on the situation in Georgia and Abkhazia ; -B4-0762 / 98 by Mrs Jöns , Mrs Hoff and Mr Needle , on behalf of the PSE Group , on the situation in Georgia ; -B4-0774 / 98 by Mr Alavanos , Mr Marset Campos and Mr Vinci , on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group , on the situation in Georgia ;
Vietnam -B4-0736 / 98 by Mr Dupuis , Mr Dell 'Alba and Mr Hory , on behalf of the ARE Group , on the situation in Vietnam and on the cases of Mr Doàn Viêt Hoat , Mr Nguyen Dan Que and Mr Thich Khong Tanh .
Togo
Mr President , last October , at the ACP-EU Joint Assembly in Togo , I denounced the human rights violations , arbitrary sanctions , the lack of respect for freedom of expression and freedom of the press .
I denounced the dictatorial power of President Eyadema who has been in power for thirty years .
This did not earn me the congratulations of the powers who tried so hard to show me how wrong I was .
I would remind you that the Union 's cooperation with Togo was suspended in 1992 and that its resumption was conditional upon respect of democratic principles and the organization of fair and open elections in June 1998 .
We have to recognize that the Togolese authorities have not respected the essential democratic principles which are necessary to ensure that the elections are valid .
The national electoral commission even resigned on 23 June this year .
The opposition has not been able to speak freely , the press has been muzzled , and President Eyadema 's victory was proclaimed even before all the votes had been counted .
In these circumstances , it is clear that the Union must maintain sanctions on Togo , and not resume cooperation , as long as issue of the electoral process has not been resolved .
Togo must know that democracy comes with a price tag and that impunity will no longer be accepted .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , Togo is a symbol of cooperation between Europe and Africa .
The Lomé Convention always has been and still is a milestone in this kind of cooperation .
This has made it all the more painful for us all that it was only with great difficulty that we were able to hold the last but one meeting of the ACPEU Joint Assembly in Togo and to accept Togo 's invitation .
A number of Members of this House had particular problems making the decision to travel to Togo .
There is a lesson to be drawn from what has happened in Togo and that is that we should not necessary believe empty promises . For the highly embarrassing personality cult manifested at the last meeting of the ACP-EU Joint Assembly showed all too well the direction in which things were developing .
Although those in power were prepared to hold elections , they had undoubtedly also started looking for the loopholes which , if the result went in a direction they did not like , they could use as a sort of emergency brake .
In our resolution - as Mrs André-Léonard has already mentioned - we have indicated that the media were also manipulated to a large extent .
May I , however , remind you all that we are not so very far away from such things in Europe . We just have to look at the sort of media manipulation which has been visited upon the electorate in the so-called election campaigns in Serbia and elsewhere .
I am pleased that cooperation with Togo has not yet been resumed .
I believe that recent events show that the resumption of this cooperation should not be hurried .
Several amendments to this text have been tabled .
I would simply like to explain that I think Amendments Nos 4 and 5 are acceptable , one because it refers back to Article 366a , the Mauritius resolution .
Amendment No 5 is actually superfluous since I believe it goes without saying that we will receive the relevant report .
Mr President , it really is a tragedy for Togo 's democratic development that the presidential election appears now to have got completely out of hand .
It is not because the population has shown no interest ; on the contrary , turnout was extremely high and it also took place very peacefully .
No , the reason is instead that the government and authorities have acted and totally undermined the credibility of the electoral process so that there can no longer be any guarantee of democratic control and insight or of those things associated with a democratic election .
Despite the promise given in connection with the meeting of the ACP-EU Joint Assembly in Lomé , despite the fact that Togo has received all the help that the country requested from the EU , despite the fact that NGOs and other human rights organisations have been very involved in the election , and despite the Togolese population 's feeling of responsibility , everyone has been let down and all assurances that democratic principles would be respected have been broken .
I must say that the Commission , the EU and the ACP-EU Joint Assembly really must be observant and keep an eye on continuing political developments in Togo .
Mr President , Togo is a country that we have had the opportunity to become acquainted with , perhaps more than other countries in Africa , also because , as other Members recalled , at the ACP-EU Joint Assembly in October we more or less negotiated or at any rate obtained assurances from the Togolese authorities and from the leaders of the opposition , insofar as they had the power to do so , regarding the electoral process that was being organized and regarding the possibility of guaranteeing elections that were truly free and correct .
Obviously , it was also on the basis of these assurances and these commitments that , rightly so , the European Commission undertook to support the electoral process , including from the financial point of view .
We were able to see how the first round of the presidential elections on 24 June did not at all meet these expectations and those assurances ; on a positive note , it should be stressed that there was widespread and correct participation in the vote by the citizens who therefore demonstrated that they had reached full maturity for democratic participation .
However , there were a number of irregularities in the organization of the elections and the counting of votes ; polling stations opened late in the capital Lomé , the counting of votes was blocked , although this did not prevent the results from being announced , and there were resignations from the electoral commission .

This obviously means that , at least for the moment , under no circumstances does General Eyadema want to give up his power , regardless of the opinion of his country 's citizens .
For this reason , the results of this first electoral round are not credible , and this was the judgement of the entire international community , demonstrating that pressure has to continue to be exerted on the Togolese authorities with great force .
Here , too , it is hoped that the Member States will be coherent in their attitude , something that has not always been the case in the past , so that the democratic process in this country can resume without any limitation ; I believe that all the conditions are present for this to occur .
Mr President , if Nigeria , which we have just debated , with the sudden tragic deaths of General Abacha and Chief Abiola , could have perhaps given rise to a tragedy written by a modern Sophocles , then the case of Togo could be worthy of a vaudeville .
And it could be described like that if it were not offensive to the people of Togo , who have participated with real enthusiasm and with a democratic will in this first round of presidential elections .
Mr President , the resolution prepared by some of our groups is , in my view , extremely moderate and reasonable and , of course , maintains the criterion of those of us who , even before going to the penultimate meeting of the Joint Assembly , had serious doubts regarding the suitability of holding that event in that country .
We can only hope now that General Eyadema , satisfied with more than 30 years in power , recognizes that he cannot continue to be a type of " Mobutu the Second ' and that he allows a democratic solution whereby the Togolese people can state their opinions with the freedom that they have lacked until now .
Until that time , there is no doubt that we must continue to give our firm and resolute support to the maintenance of the restrictive criteria regarding European aid .
This position is not one unanimously held by the liberal group , Mr President .
I believe , and I voted accordingly yesterday , that it would have been better to delay the resolution until we had the Commission 's report , so that we could debate the matter in full knowledge of all the facts and more calmly .
I think it is rare , Mr President , to echo the bold statement of the previous speaker , that a leader is democratically elected with the enthusiasm of all the people , and particularly rare in Africa .
I think that it would have been useful to consider the text of the resolutions more fully , all the more so since controversy seems to be centred on the problem of the transmission of just a few results .
In any event , we find ourselves in a situation in which it is impossible , for example , to have a debate on Angola , where President Dos Santos does not wish to proceed on to the second round of the presidential election which would legitimize him , and this shows that we have a policy for Togo which we do not apply to Angola .
Our Parliament applies the principle of two weights , two measures to Africa , and that does not strike me as being very healthy .
Mr President , several political groups in our Assembly have decided to ask questions about the presidential elections in Togo .
Naturally , not one of the good apostles who signed the resolution went there to see what happened .
I , for my part , was present , as I was sent as an observer by my group and I can confirm that the operation went very smoothly in Lomé , in most of the 617 polling stations , and I was able to visit a large number of these stations , including some in the Bé district .
I have Decision No E 05 / 98 of 8 July of the Constitutional Court of Togo , which confirms what I myself observed and explained as early as Monday , 22 June in a communiqué .
This decision says , and I quote , " there were some irregularities because the official opening and closing times for the polling stations were not observed ' .
In one polling station which closed at 11.00 p.m. , I myself insisted that counting should not start until the last person present had voted .
But officially the stations closed at 6.00 p.m.
The Constitutional Court also noted that , in three districts in Lomé , counting could not be carried out in the polling stations , and that it could only take place in the central polling station .
But in those polling stations , the outgoing president obtained less than 10 % of the vote .
So , if there had been any fraud , it certainly was not to the benefit of the president .
Finally , the Constitutional Court annexed to its decision all the documents , including the results of the vote counts .
This is why I have some serious questions to ask about the role played by ERIS and Reporters sans frontières and I would like to ask who chose them .
How has it been possible to spend ECU 2 million , while the final report is still not ready because of continuing disagreement between the observers who ostensibly speak on our behalf ?
I give far more credit to the Togolese Constitutional Court , to the African OAU observers , to delegates from the French-speaking world , to Americans from the Center for Contemporary Diplomacy and to the President of the Malian National Assembly , Mr Diello , than to the small team designated by DG VIII , and I hope that the Court of Auditors will be able to study how the money was spent , because I am really very fearful that the money has been wasted for ideological and partisan reasons .
Mr President , I was in Togo as a representative of the radical left party and I was part of a small group of parliamentarians who were there .
I was an observer for fifty polling stations , together with American and English lawyers .
I saw that the election took place without violence : of course there were some imperfections as regards voting cards and electoral lists , but overall , if one compares this election with others on the same continent , the voting took place in exemplary conditions .
In contrast , it was when the counting of results was centralised that a certain number of mistakes and problems appeared , the most important , of course , being the resignation of the electoral commission and the transfer of the counting of results to the Minister for the Interior .
May I be permitted to say that even if it is the rule of our Assembly and whereas by means of assistance from DG VIII , we have provided fairly unique and exceptional technical support for a presidential election in Africa , it is not normal for an election of this kind that our Parliament did not send a parliamentary team of observers to help with this election .
We would perhaps have had a totally different debate from the one we are holding now in favour of this resolution .
Nor is it acceptable for firms engaged by the European Union and by the Commission to organize technical support , to entrust students with the task , however excellent such students may be .
Mr President , I would like to specify that my Amendment No 6 is not intended to replace Article 4 , but in fact to complement it .
Why ?
Because it seems obvious to us to point out that , since the Commission has raised the matter with the Togolese authorities , we should wait for results from them .
In conclusion , Mr President , it is the Togolese people who are being penalised in this matter and not Mr Eyadema .
Mr President , when we are talking about elections in an African country , a country where voters have not been consulted for a long time , we certainly cannot expect elections to be as orderly and precise as they are in the West , in Europe or in countries where there has been democracy for many years .
It is certain , moreover , that the procedures used to conduct the presidential elections in Togo are extremely suspect in more than one way .
It is difficult to establish what really happened , but we cannot forget that , when we decided to hold the Joint Assembly in Lomé , our decision was based on the return of conditions of substantial democracy and not only formal democracy , and all the Community institutions must focus their attention on this aspect .
Guinea-Bissau
Mr President , Commissioner , according to the latest calculations the recent crisis in GuineaBissau has left several hundred people dead and about 400 thousand homeless .
In Bissau , the capital , alone the population has fallen from 300 thousand inhabitants to around 25 thousand .
The shortage of food and , especially , the lack of medical assistance are becoming acute .
The Commission 's action in providing rapid and plentiful humanitarian aid is to be applauded .
It must also be said that Portugal has made a notable effort in that respect .
But it is incomprehensible that Senegal has still not been persuaded to authorize humanitarian corridors from Dakar to provide aid to the people who have been displaced .
We support the restoration of constitutional order , but we know the root-cause of the crisis is internal political and social decay , and we must be aware that the presence of foreign troops , particularly Senegalese troops , is of special significance in the region and does nothing to restore institutional order . It is more likely to take the country into a new phase of guerrilla war , the duration and consequences of which are unforeseeable .
In this respect , too , the European Union can and must play an important role .
On the subject of the conflict in Guinea-Bissau , it might be appropriate to give some thought to the constant convulsions that are occurring on the west coast of Africa , particularly along the new oil and raw-materials corridors .
It is vital that the industrialized countries of Europe or other parts of the world should not march into Africa under the flag of economic-interest diplomacy , because this often causes tension , but rather help Africa to find its own way to development , democracy and respect for human rights .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , at this point I must mention Angola .
There are increasing quantities of oil in that country , but there are also increasing signs that the peace process is breaking down , young men are being recruited into the Army , troops and military equipment are being moved around , artificial war scenarios are being created , summary executions are held , while for some reason I cannot understand the United Nations have not yet appointed a mediator in succession to the late Maître Beye .
I believe the Commission and the international community can play an important part in preventing this deterioration of the peace process .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the situation which has existed in Guinea-Bissau for almost four and a half months is reaching alarming proportions , indeed tragic proportions where the future of the country is concerned , with the sacrifice of human lives and fundamental rights and the destruction of major physical and economic infrastructures .
In that respect I should like to emphasize three basic points , which in fact are in line with my group 's motion .
In the first place , it is absolutely deplorable that up to now all the efforts of various international organizations , including a Portuguese-Angolan mission , have not achieved a definitive cease-fire and a peaceful political solution to the problem , owing to lack of goodwill on the part of those involved in the conflict .
Equally deplorable are the obstacles that have been raised by neighbouring countries to prevent emergency aid from reaching the people affected by the war .
In the second place , I would like to say that the direct or indirect introduction of foreign troops into an internal conflict in a foreign country is absolutely deplorable and they must be withdrawn from Guinea-Bissau as an urgent and inevitable precondition for any peaceful solution .
In the third place , I would like to emphasize that it is vital to find a peaceful solution to the conflict by political means that respect the fundamental rights of citizens , preserve their collective future and respect democratically-elected institutions .
It is in this hope that I support our appeal to the United Nations Security Council , the OAU and the European Union that they actively endeavour to find a political solution to end this deplorable and fratricidal war .
Mr President , no effort should , of course , be spared by the international community with regard to getting conflicting parties to the negotiation table and trying to achieve a sustainable , long-term political solution which can create peace in the whole region , and which can also guarantee that Guinea-Bissau 's borders are respected and respect for human rights restored .
Unfortunately , the reports we have received are worrying .
Among other things , there are problems with obtaining humanitarian aid such as medicine , drinking water and food .
I really hope that the Commission will exercise pressure to bring about a corridor for humanitarian aid .
It is also worrying that people are being held in captivity and as hostages .
They are being treated very badly according to a report from Amnesty International .
In addition , among journalists and those working for human rights there are many who are afraid .
I therefore fully support paragraph 11 of this resolution , which proposes that a delegation from the ACP-EU Joint Assembly be sent to the country to find out both how aid can be provided quickly and how we can help to resolve the conflict .
Mr President , in order to make up for the accumulated delay , I will on this occasion make you very happy by being particularly brief .
Our group does not wish paragraph 9 , demanding the non-intervention and withdrawal of all foreign troops , to feature in the resolution , because we think that the presence of Senegalese troops is still needed in order to combat the rebels and stabilize the situation in the country .
Put simply , we would like paragraph 9 to be dropped from the resolution . That is the wish of the ARE Group .
Madam President , Commissioner , it was originally intended that my colleague Mr Barros Moura should speak at this point .
Mr Barros Moura has been prevented from attending at the last minute , but as one of the signatories to the resolution , I should like to underline one or two points on my own and Mr Barros Moura 's behalf .
Firstly , there can only be peace or mediation for peace if the warring forces , the belligerents , want it to happen .
Secondly , we consider it essential to emphasize the need to withdraw foreign troops and prevent this war from being gradually extended to other countries .
Thirdly , it is important in that respect to accept the possibility of UN or OAU troops intervening if the parties agree .
We are also concerned about the humanitarian situation of the people of Guinea-Bissau .
The obstacles to humanitarian aid , particularly the Senegalese forces themselves , will worsen the situation .
If we do not act quickly and effectively , the situation will deteriorate day by day in humanitarian terms .
In addition , this House has condemned the military coup , as we have done on previous occasions , and has supported the restoration of constitutional and institutional order , which means respect for institutions , especially the elected Parliament , but also respect for human rights ( on this point see in particular the petitions by the NGOs and Amnesty International itself ) .
Finally , there must be an immediate cease-fire , saving human lives and enabling the country to start functioning again while searching for a peaceful political solution that guarantees Guinea-Bissau 's territorial independence and integrity .
Madam President , Commissioner , we have followed the developments in the situation in Guinea-Bissau with great concern .
Being familiar with the country ( we were there not long ago ) , since the outbreak of the war which has been dragging on since 7 June , we are on the side of those who have unequivocally supported a political solution to end the war , and most of all to end the suffering of a people .
Despite several attempts at mediation , the armed conflicted has dragged on , with the continued direct involvement of foreign military forces which have done nothing to assist the negotiated political settlement we want to see , and this has resulted in the most appalling human consequences in terms of loss of life and material possessions and created hundreds of thousands of refugees .
This disastrous situation is being prolonged and it is vital that it should be ended .
It affects one of the world 's poorest countries , which makes it even more deplorable inasmuch as it threatens the future and the real independence of a country , the Republic of Guinea-Bissau , after a heroic struggle by the PAIGC and a man of the political and human stature of Amilcar Cabral .
Thus we demand that a political solution be sought , leading to and guaranteeing the maintenance of peace and respect for the cultural and territorial integrity of Guinea-Bissau , ending the involvement of other countries in the war , and encouraging foreign military forces to return to their own countries .
In the meantime , practical humanitarian aid must be supplied for the people as a matter of urgency , by opening up corridors by which aid can reach those who need it , and removing anything that might hinder it .
Our position as Members of the European Parliament and Portuguese citizens can only be to affirm and give practical expression to our active and disinterested solidarity in both political and humanitarian terms .
Madam President , 350 thousand homeless , 100 thousand of whom are in danger of starving to death , hundreds of civilians and soldiers dead , atrocities against women and children , fear among the intellectual sectors of the internal political opposition , lack of food , medicines and drinking water - these are the ingredients of this disaster .
The military forces must not be allowed to go on preventing humanitarian aid from reaching people at risk .
One mediation effort follows another without much success .
There is now talk of bringing in Mozambique or the whole of the Community of Portuguese Speaking Countries to assist in the Portuguese-Angolan mediation effort .
Or using an intervention force from the OAU or the Economic Community of West African States .
An immediate cease-fire is the key to resolving a conflict with a dangerous tendency to perpetuate itself and become generalized .
Constitutional order must be restored .
The government 's mandate ended on 4 June , and therefore Nino Vieira , as President-elect , has the legitimate power - but greater responsibility - to promote a cease-fire , dialogue and negotiation .
Only when all this has been done will the conditions be in place for reconciling the political process with a national government of reconstruction and the holding of legislative and presidential elections which will enable Guinea-Bissau to commence a new stage in its history in 1999 .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the situation of Guinea-Bissau is nothing more than a specific part of a larger picture in a region of Africa that , like other regions , is continually destabilized politically to the point that there is little real political authority or concrete guarantees for the population .
There is clearly not much the European Union can do , but there are at least two areas where it has to focus its immediate attention .
Its first objective must be to ensure that humanitarian aid , food and medicine rapidly reach the populations in this very problematic area .
The other objective , in the medium to long term , is to promote a peace process that , although certainly dangerous and difficult , is also the only condition for development of this area .
Burma
Madam President , the Liberal Group is pleased that there is a strong text about Burma .
I also hope that this resolution will open the eyes of the Dutch company IHC Caland to the hard , unacceptable reality in Burma .
Although there is not yet an official economic boycott , because France once again is protecting the trade interests of Total , it is a scandal that this Dutch company is going against the virtually complete consensus for disinvestment and against new investment .
I find it particularly regrettable to have to reprimand Commissioner Sir Leon Brittan , but nonetheless I must express my astonishment concerning his condemnation of the boycott policy of the state of Massachusetts .
We , the Liberals , believe that the European Union must support the appeal of President Clinton of May of this year .
His call for a ban on new investment should be an example for us , Commissioner .
The Union must be prepared to anticipate the UN sanctions .
Finally , Madam President , the Burmese authorities must be placed under heavy pressure and an end must come to the systematic annihilation of the minorities in that country .
Madam President , the situation in Burma is deteriorating rapidly at this time .
This applies both to the economic situation and to the political situation .
Economically , Burma is on the edge of the abyss . The military regime , after all , is surviving on the drugs trade and partly also on forced state labour , and for months has been unable to stop the downward spiral of the economy .
The population appears to be suffering more and more . Politically speaking , repression has also increased in recent months .
This applies both to the opposition and to minority groups .
The Karen people and the Shan are suffering , as are the Naga , the Mon , the Karenni and the Kachin peoples .
The systematic killings and ethnic cleansing are resulting in hordes of refugees in neighbouring countries , especially Thailand , India and Malaysia .
These numbers have recently increased dramatically .
Like the attacks on the refugee camps , killings and kidnappings have become common .
The opposition is also suffering .
Mrs Aung San Suu Kyi was arrested because she wanted to travel to the North , and she was again given severe house arrest with the threat of imprisonment .
Various members of the opposition are being threatened or are already imprisoned , and this in a country where there are already many political prisoners .
It is known that the military government fears that the situation will escalate even further around 8 August , because the remembrance will take place then of the student revolt of a number of years ago which cost so many lives .
Moreover the regime is afraid that the situation in Indonesia will spread to Burma .
Meanwhile the criticism of Burma within the ASEAN region is increasing , because Burma was admitted with the promise that it would do something positive regarding human rights and democracy .
This simply did not happen .
Madam President , we have previously made requests in this Parliament for a halt to European investment .
An economic boycott is needed .
Against this background it is incomprehensible - I say this to Sir Leon Brittan - that he has lectured Massachusetts because they have simply begun doing this .
Perhaps you are legally correct , but morally speaking , you are not correct .
What we want from the Commission and the Council is in fact to follow the United States and stop investment and put the regime in Burma under more pressure .
This must happen , Madam President , and this is something that the Commission is certainly capable of doing .
Madam President , first of all I would like to point out once again the absence of a colleague who is particularly dear to us - Mr Avgerinos .
As we all know , he is responsible for considering the reform of the topical and urgent debate .
As we have not seen him during the past few months , I think it is important to point out that he is not here today either .
Perhaps he finds it more valuable to gather the opinions of all and sundry in the corridors of Parliament , which would perhaps explain the first proposals which he has put to us .
As regards Burma , I do not think there is a great deal to add to what Mr Bertens and Mrs Maij-Weggen have said : the European Union must not lag behind the United States .
Pressure has already been exerted ; it has not achieved the results which we might have expected .
The abolition of preferential tariffs has not brought about any change whatsoever on the part of the Burmese authorities .
I think that we have to go a lot further and opt resolutely for a boycott .
Just as the Americans , for once , have a very clear position on this matter , the European Union could usefully join with the United States and try , once and for all , to put an end to this absurd regime .
Madam President , Burma is a mess and it is now becoming a nasty mess .
Fifty elected representatives have been gaoled whilst other MPs suffer the indignity of having to report twice daily to local police stations at the behest of the government .
Three hundred thousand internally displaced Karen people are on the run from the Burmese army .
Systematic destruction of Karen villages is combined with rape of women from all the Burmese minorities .
Destruction of food stores precedes massacres and ethnic cleansing of the Naga , Shan , Mon , Karen and Kachin peoples .
And now the growing numbers of Karen and Shan refugees in Thailand present new problems for the countries of ASEAN .
The European Union must make a stand .
Rightly , the EU-ASEAN Joint Committee has not met , since to meet would mean allowing Burma full representation .
We can do more .
We should encourage the UN Human Rights Commissioner , Mary Robinson , to install permanent observers in Burma to monitor human rights .
We call upon the Commission to implement full economic sanctions against Burma and to prohibit investment in Rangoon until human rights are properly respected .
The UN Security Council should also encourage global economic sanctions against the ruthless dictators of Burma .
The Thai Government , too , could help .
Better protection along the Thai-Burmese border can give confidence to refugees fleeing Burma 's undemocratic and despotic regime .
We call on the Burmese Government to permit the UN special rapporteur on Burma to visit the country freely , and to allow him to carry out his mandate by guaranteeing him full access to the regions inhabited by the Karen people .
Moreover we demand that foreign companies investing in Burma , such as Total and Premier Oil , should freeze their investments immediately .
We recognise and support ASEAN 's right to choose its own membership , but as the days and months pass it becomes increasingly clear that ASEAN has invited an unwelcome cuckoo into its nest of nations , spoiling its chances of developing modern democracies and respecting human rights whilst encouraging economic development to provide for its people .
Now is the time for the EU to stand up and be counted .
The UN special rapporteur on the human rights situation in Burma has expressed very deep concern about the recent reports that members of the NLD continue to be victims of arbitrary arrests and various forms of restriction .
The NLD has called for Parliament to be convened by 21 August and has also repeatedly called on the military rulers to engage in dialogue .
However , as Mr Harrison has just pointed out , the government has responded by ordering all the elected members not already in jail or exiled to report twice a day to local authorities , basically to stop them convening on their own .
It is high time that the EU took a moral stand on the situation in Burma .
The Commission and Council have to implement full economic sanctions against Burma and prohibit any investment until the situation as regards human rights violations has been settled .
As Mr Harrison said , the UN High Commissioner , Mary Robinson , should send a permanent observer to investigate the human rights situation and the atrocities committed by the Burmese authorities in the areas inhabited by oppressed minorities .
This has been going on for too long and we have to do something about it .
Sudan
Madam President , today the newspapers have made the happy announcement that the warring parties in southern and northern Sudan have agreed to a cease-fire .
I hope that several hundred thousand people in southern Sudan can now be saved from starvation .
But we have certainly learned our lesson in Sudan .
This development is indeed the first step in the framework of an active European policy , and hopefully on this basis preparations can begin for a referendum on the independence of southern Sudan .
Both parties have previously committed themselves to this , but now that must be proved .
International supervision will be essential if this referendum is to proceed in an honest fashion .
Both parties must also be involved with organizing the referendum .
In the meantime , the government in Khartoum must prove its credibility as a partner by making a priority of democracy and human rights , by releasing political prisoners and developing the constitutional state .
Madam President , I can endorse much of what Mr Bertens has said , for the situation in Sudan really is a sad and never-ending story .
This I know as a rapporteur in the ACP-EU Joint Assembly .
The problem has been the same for many years now .
We simply cannot get things moving .
The parties are not prepared to agree on a peaceful solution .
There is a danger that it will become a Thirty Years War .
I believe that the Council is right in supporting the IGAD and in endeavouring to engineer things so that we can send another ministerial mission to Khartoum and Nairobi and put a stop to the fighting .
As Mr Bertens rightly said , according to newspaper reports the SPLA has declared that it is ready to stop the fighting for three months .
I hope this happens as it is the only chance to help the people .
With the terrible drought it is already very late anyway .
Then we must work to secure peace as quickly as possible .
If we manage to achieve peace , then all the measures required to help the people there can be carried out calmly .
Even if peace is secured it will not be easy to solve the problems there , as it will not be possible to make good the damage which has been caused there and to restore the structures which have been destroyed over night .
I am afraid that even once the conditions are right there will still be an awful lot of work to do before the families which have been broken up can be reunited and everything else which needs to be done can be done .
Let us do everything we can to ensure that these conditions are created .
Then we can start to rebuild . That is the first step .
Madam President , unfortunately in the region of the Horn of Africa and neighbouring areas the situation continues to deteriorate and is very serious , and there is no doubt that what has been occurring in Sudan now for many years is today one of the most worrisome and destabilizing factors .
The dramatic pictures that we have received these past few weeks , like in the past , of famine and the consequences of war , particularly in the regions of southern Sudan , have again drawn our attention to the situation of this country .
We know that it has always been extremely difficult , even when famine has been at its worst , to get aid from the international community to the populations affected , especially because the warring factions , and the authorities in Khartoum in particular , have always blocked it .
We must now attempt to take political action with great firmness and also great intelligence to take advantage of every possible opportunity to help definitively change this situation .
Agreement on a cease-fire is something that we have always sought and wanted , and according to the information reaching us , it seems that a situation of this type could very well be developing , something that we obviously hope is true .
At the same time , however , there must be a political will to take concrete and extremely urgent action so that humanitarian aid - which must be substantial - reaches the populations suffering from famine , and there must also be coherent political action involving first and foremost the regional players and IGAD but also the European Union to arrive at a peaceful and possibly definitive solution to the conflicts in Sudan .
Madam President , to improve the humanitarian situation in Sudan this Parliament has adopted five resolutions with the same intent during the past ten months .
Yesterday , in my opinion , the Austrian President-in-Office answered the Members ' questions sufficiently .
I can add nothing to this .
Therefore , I think it wise to ask the Parliament to turn its attention towards a country where conflict is breaking out .
A country that in the year 2000 can provide one million barrels of oil and where 60 % of the population lives below the subsistence level .
A country where the government at this time is recruiting young people in the cities and mobilizing for battle . A country where the elite is corrupt , where generals turn into businessmen and where the fate of human rights activist Sahandu Neto is unclear .
Presidents Kabila , Dos Santos and Nujoma have agreed to allow the Angolan army - and this is the country I am speaking about - to carry out their operations on their territories .
The seriousness of the threat has been shown by the fact that the Portuguese have established an army group to evacuate their citizens from Angola .
I request that the Commissioner send a signal via our mission in Luanda that this conflict may not be allowed to break out , to call for the second round of elections and especially to say that the profits from oil must not be spent on arms , but on the Angolese .
Madam President , when the outcome of a civil war unites with repression , the infringement of human rights and drought , the result is what we have been seeing in the press in recent days : the threat of a terrible ravenous hunger affecting hundreds of thousands of people .
Therefore , the United Nations has called on the Commission and the Member States to provide as much humanitarian aid as possible .
And we must demand that the Sudanese authorities allow that aid to reach the displaced civil population because if it does not , the same thing will happen again as happens so many times due to the causes we are all aware of .
In any case , we must support the peace process .
And there would be no harm in taking a look at the United Nations Human Development Report , which states clearly that this country and others will not escape their absolute poverty if they do not manage to achieve a fairer distribution of wealth and greater respect for basic human rights : the right to eat , to live , to be educated and to enjoy good health .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , once more our Parliament is called upon to make a statement on the situation in the Sudan , without however being really convinced , either of the effectiveness of its previous interventions , or of the currency and exhaustiveness of its information .
Thus , the joint motion for a resolution submitted for our attention obviously ignores both the few improvements in access to areas hit by food shortages authorized by the Sudanese government as well as the cease-fire decreed by the southern movement , led by John Garang .
It does not highlight the relative progress that has been made towards the setting up of a democratic system , as represented by the adoption of the Sudanese constitution , or the developments in the negotiation progress between the main parties to the conflict .
In general , it does not appear to be based on a detailed analysis of the causes of the civil conflict in the Sudan , on sufficient understanding of the situation on the ground , or on the influence of external interventions , in a region where political instability is almost all-pervasive .
While we must of course approve of the interest shown by Europe in re-establishing peace and democracy in the Sudan , it would seem to us that the efforts designed to achieve these objectives require a new type of approach , a method based first of all on better information , in conjunction with arranging a mission on the ground or organizing hearings for representatives of parties to the conflict .
This method would , eventually , replace systematic and sometimes unbalanced condemnation , with the systematic encouragement of all parties to the conflict , to progress towards dialogue and work towards peace and the institution of democracy .
Situation in Georgia and Abkhazia
Madam President , the conflict in Abkhazia in the Caucasus has again flared up .
Many hundreds of people have already been killed , thousands are fleeing .
The cease-fire of 25 May did not last long .
Despite the efforts of the United Nations and the OSCE , the situation is still tense , to use an understatement .
Everything must be done to limit the destructive force of that conflict .
Both parties in the conflict must be convinced that violence is , of course , not the solution .
It is precisely now - when democratization in Georgia is on the right track , and with the help of our Union the reconstruction of the country has begun to make some progress - that we must make every effort to prevent this process from being derailed .
We must redouble our efforts to promote sustainable peace and development in the region .
I am therefore also pleased , Commissioner , that your colleague , Mr van den Broek , visited the region last month and , with the extra help that he promised , that the civilian society can make some progress .
Madam President , here again we are witnessing a nasty trick .
We are including a highly political issue under the heading of human rights because natural disasters have occurred in Georgia although they are no longer among our Parliament 's priorities .
Well , really !
The Georgian question is a political one - and there again we are averting our gaze , because we are preparing to approve a very reasonable resolution which does not add to the problem .
What is needed is to allow Georgia to join the European Union very quickly , to avoid what happened in Yugoslavia where , for years , the Commission and the Council have watched the situation deteriorate .
It is essential that we propose rapid accession to the EU to the Georgian authorities , who are only waiting for this .
Georgia is a strategic region for the European Union .
It represents access to central Asia , Marco Polo 's famous silk trail , the oil reserves in Azerbaijan where the English , French , Italians and other countries in the Union already have a strong presence .
The only way to ensure stability in the region is to allow Georgia to join the European Union quickly .
As Professor Gerenek said yesterday , one is not born a European , one becomes a European .
The Georgians have demonstrated this .
They have unilaterally undertaken to adapt their laws to those of the Union .
We must therefore encourage them , that is what they are waiting for .
The entry of Georgia into the Union would also help to make a constructive contribution to the problem of the Abkhazia who , as we know , and so long as there are no clear prospects for accession , will always be subject to the goodwill of the Russians , who have every interest in keeping some kind of influence in this area .
) Madam President , in the joint resolution we emphatically condemn the most recent acts of violence against the Georgian people .
The resolution also expresses our full support for the President of Georgia who has set in motion a process of political and economic reforms .
This process includes the strengthening of internal stability which has already made progress in the past . The peaceful solution of the crisis in Abkhazia is an important prerequisite for further consolidation and an important condition for the stabilization of the country .
We regret that fighting started in the region again in May , bringing with it deaths and hundreds of thousands of refugees .
In order to continue the policy of reform in Georgia , further peaceful , political solutions to the conflict in Abkhazia must be found .
We therefore urgently advise the parties to take an active role in the UN peace process , and have reiterated this in point 2 of the resolution in which we call for adherence to the 1994 Moscow Agreement on a cease-fire and separation of forces and the 1998 cease-fire protocol , as well as to the obligation to refrain from all use of force .
This plea goes out to both sides , and I very much hope that the resolution will be passed unanimously in this form .
Madam President , reading this resolution and comparing it with the events of the last 48 hours , I have to say that there appears to be some discrepancy .
For only the day before yesterday a Polish woman from the United Nations , Maria Magdalena Wewiorska , 31 years of age , was shot dead in Georgia , probably by Georgian criminals .
I would just like to say this for the record because it shows once again that certain neat explanations about countries we know little about actually mean very little , and that we should finally admit once and for all that conditions there are terrible .
We should not play this down . Most importantly , we should ask ourselves seriously whether there is really any sense in sending Europeans to support the Russian Army in Georgia now because it has been officially announced .
Madam President , the conflict in Abkhazia is one of those conflicts which always fill us with concern because , after the military debacle , hatred amongst the population is so deep that it splits it , and efforts to secure peace progress very slowly .
The return of families to Gali was based on the great hope that it would finally be possible to bring the conflict under control .
The fighting has now destroyed this hope .
But what is the EU doing to improve the possibilities of a return to peace ?
Sometimes it is necessary to proceed in small steps .
That is why the Council of Europe has endeavoured to implement a programme of confidence-building measures , such as the Ertoba Radio Company project .
To date not one single Member State has offered its support for this measure .
What is needed is a few small projects to restore understanding amongst the population .
For this reason we are calling upon the Council to finance measures designed to build confidence amongst the population and to devote considerably greater attention to this .
Vietnam
Madam President , there is not a lot to say about Vietnam , other than this is the first time that our Parliament is preparing to give its opinion on a matter which , sadly , is still taboo for many Members of our European Parliament .
I would like to thank the colleagues from the PPE and from the Liberal Group for having supported this resolution .
Unfortunately , the Socialist Group and the Confederal Group of the European United Left do not support it .
I could perhaps remind them that they adopted the same position on North Korea and on China , on Mongolia , and on Eastern Turkestan , and you will quickly see that there is a common denominator underlying this attitude of the Socialist and United Left Groups .
As soon as old comrades are involved , everything is permitted even if , as in Vietnam , we all know that nothing is changing .
Of course , there is no Pinochet there , but the human rights situation is not getting any better .
It is a dictatorship , a red dictatorship , and therefore a lot more tolerable , but it is a dictatorship nevertheless , and I think that it is important for our Parliament to remember this .
Madam President , Commissioner , this resolution contains everything it possibly can about human rights , and the European Parliament has always made its views on human rights very clear .
I believe that we should look at the issue of human rights in a country with some reference to the historical context of that country .
If we look at the whole history of Vietnam , we can see that there is one part of Vietnam where we have become accustomed to seeing human rights infringed and abused and another part where - in our version - this did not happen in the same form at least until the 1970s .
Since then and since the war in Vietnam , we have more or less blocked this country from our memories , banished it from our consciences and it is time that we shook these consciences awake again , faced up to what is really going on there and made it clear here in the European Parliament that we cannot remain silent if such things , if such crimes are really taking place there .
This is why this resolution is so important . It is good that it has come here to the Parliament , that it attempts to highlight the situation so that in the future a relationship between the European Union and Vietnam will be possible .
Madam President , with regard to Togo , the conditions under which the elections were held there on 21 June prompted the EU to adopt a statement on 26 June expressing our deep concern at the conduct of the election and doubts about the credibility of the result announced by the Minister for the Interior , namely a first-round victory for President Eyadema .
On a proposal from the Commission , the European Union has invited the Togolese Government to hold consultations in keeping with the procedure set out in Article 366a of the Lomé Convention .
The first phase of the consultations will give the Togolese Government the opportunity to explain the irregularities observed during the process and say what measures have been or are to be adopted to remedy them .
If this preliminary phase does not give satisfactory results for the two sides , our commitment on cooperation could be put into jeopardy .
The launch of this procedure shows the importance we attach to this electoral process .
Its purpose is to open a dialogue to help find a way to restore the rule of law and respect for democratic principles with a view to normalising relations , including the provision of EU-funded cooperation projects .
With regard to Guinea-Bissau , the Commission agrees with the comments in the proposed resolution submitted to Parliament for adoption .
We have kept a careful eye on developments in Guinea-Bissau and deplore the fact that internal military conflict has been continuing for the last month and , indeed , as in recent days , increased in violence and intensity .
We appeal for a peaceful solution which would guarantee peace .
We are aware of the difficulties currently facing the civilian population , in particular the lack of food , medicines and water .
That is why , through ECHO , the Commission has released ECU 1 million in humanitarian aid for the distribution of food , water and medicines to those who have been displaced to the interior of the country .
The Commission supports the mediation efforts of a number of regional leaders and Member States , including those of Angola and Portugal , and calls on all parties to the conflict to negotiate a definitive cease-fire .
With regard to Burma , the Commission deplores the widespread human rights abuses there , including executions , arbitrary detention of political prisoners and refugees , the forced relocation of Shan villagers , combined with the systematic destruction of Karen , Shan and Karenni villages , as well as their food supplies , by the Burmese military .
We use every opportunity to urge the government to engage in peace talks and enter into substantive dialogue with the opposition led by Aung San Suu Kyi and the ethnic minorities .
Since Burma is now a member of ASEAN , we are especially urging our ASEAN partners to use their influence on their newest member .
The Commission has explained to this House on many occasions that it does not have the power to impose sanctions or call on the private sector to refrain from investing .
This issue has to be determined by the various bodies of the Council , which so far have not opted for that route .
As far as America is concerned , whatever the position of the US Administration may be , it is not appropriate for an individual state - Massachusetts - to seek to coerce European Union businesses to take action of a particular kind .
That is not compatible with international law and we have rightly made a strong protest .
That in no way implies support for anything that is done in Burma , which we have criticised repeatedly and frequently .
But it is a great mistake , to put it mildly , for an individual state in a friendly country to seek to pursue a foreign policy of its own by exerting unacceptable pressure on businesses in the European Union .
We actively support the Burmese democracy movement through our human rights and democracy budget line . We are co-funding a project of the Friedrich-Ebert-Stiftung , which has set up a Euro-Burma Office in Brussels , aiming to build awareness and disseminate accurate information on the true situation in Burma .
The initiative is also providing training in good governance and democracy for Burmese opposition members and future leaders .
With regard to Sudan , the European Commission shares the general view that the only means of bringing about a peaceful solution to the conflict is a lasting negotiated settlement based on an all-inclusive political process undertaken by all parties .
Any expression of EU concern should therefore address both sides in the conflict .
We continue to support all attempts at mediation and efforts to seek peace , and particularly the efforts of the Intergovernmental Authority on Development .
We have encouraged and expressed our full support for its diplomatic efforts .
We have held frequent discussions with those leading the talks and have intervened on several occasions to make our views known .
The European Union has also repeatedly urged the parties in the conflict to achieve a negotiated solution in the IGAD peace talks .
We reaffirmed our commitment to support that at the last meeting of the Partners ' Forum Committee in The Hague last month .
In the light of the current serious humanitarian crisis , the IGAD partners decided to send a ministerial mission to Khartoum and Nairobi to explore the possibilities of securing a break in the fighting .
I very much hope that the recent news of a cease-fire proves to be true .
We are considering what form of truce or corridors of tranquillity would be of most help to the humanitarian efforts and agreeable to all concerned .
In the light of their contacts with the representatives of the Sudanese Government and the representatives of the SPLA , the IGAD partners also noted that the parties to the conflict are committed to holding the third round of peace negotiations in August 1998 .
In collaboration with other partners and institutions involved we are co-funding several preparatory initiatives on governance and constitutional practice and negotiating skills .
Meanwhile we will not change our declared position on the suspension of formal development cooperation , but continue to provide humanitarian assistance to the needy population in the south as well as in the north of the country .
With regard to Georgia and Abkhazia , the Commission fully supports the presidency 's declaration of 2 June and salutes the statesmanlike restraint shown by President Shevardnadze , which has prevented a further escalation of violence .
It calls on all parties to honour their commitments , including the cease-fire protocol signed on 25 May .
We share the sorrow and deplore very deeply the tragic death of a worker in recent days while assisting the people .
As Mr von Habsburg has rightly said , it is extremely difficult to ask people to go to a dangerous area if events of that kind take place .
Nonetheless , we have made available ECU 200 000 through ECHO .
The Commission decided last week to make a further contribution of ECU 1.5 million to supply clean drinking-water , sanitation and medical assistance .
In addition , some money is available from the counterpart funds established by the Commission in 1995 / 1996 for supplying essential equipment and drinking water .
ECHO is ready to intervene further if epidemics should break out or if the situation does not improve by the winter .
Finally , with regard to Vietnam , the Vietnamese Government has announced that a general amnesty will be held on 2 September this year .
There have been strong indications that a significant number of political prisoners could be released on that occasion .
That should be the most important amnesty in Vietnam in recent years .
We must maintain pressure on the Vietnamese leadership to improve respect for human rights , in particular freedom of religion .
We also have to encourage and support moves in the right direction such as the commitment to hold the general amnesty in September .
It is important not to discourage the Vietnamese leadership from releasing significant numbers of prisoners at the time of the amnesty , and we are looking to them to do so .
It is also essential that our efforts and those of other donors in promoting dialogue with Vietnam on good governance should continue and not be thrown into question by wider political developments .
A clear message was given to the Vietnamese Government by the Head of Delegation in Hanoi at the consultative group 's mid-term review in Hue on 15 and 16 June , when it was stated that the EU considers the good governance exercise with Vietnam to be an important element in giving a political dimension to relations between the two sides .
The Commission hopes that the European Parliament will use the present resolution to send a positive appeal to the present Vietnamese leadership to use the September amnesty as a unique opportunity to respond to the expectations of the international community , drawing particular attention to the individual cases about which the European Union has already expressed serious concern .
The forthcoming EC-Vietnam Joint Commission in October will provide the occasion to judge the scope of the September amnesty and in particular to see what consideration has been given to the individuals on the EU list of political detainees .
Mr President , may I return briefly to Burma , because the Commissioner has not responded to one of my previous points .
He stated that a ban on investment has not yet been implemented in the Council in response to the action of the United States , but my question is : has the Commission actually submitted such a proposal to the Council ?
The Parliament has asked for this a number of times but has the Commission actually submitted such a proposal , because before the Council can come to a decision , a proposal for a decision must first be tabled .
I believe that you cannot accuse Massachusetts of anything if we ourselves are too weak to follow the American Congress in this area , certainly when the entire Parliament is of the same opinion .
Mr President , you can blame Massachusetts .
It is not within the powers of Massachusetts and quite contrary to international law for an individual state of the United States to decide to conduct a foreign policy which seeks to coerce European Union companies .
We cannot possibly object to the Helms-Burton legislation or the Ilster legislation and then say what Massachusetts does is all right .
That is contrary to the rule of law and I have to emphasize that it is not acceptable .
As far as sanctions are concerned , there is no support for them and therefore no reason to put the question to the Council as Mrs Maij-Weggen , given her experience , knows very well .
It is not a question of just tabling a resolution .
Soundings have to be taken to establish whether there is support .
Madam President , I have asked the Commissioner if the EU mission in Luanda would send out a signal to prevent a new war in that country .
This is important .
This is urgent .
Please give me an indication .
Perhaps you cannot answer positively now , but would you discuss giving that signal with your colleagues ?
That is my question .
I will ensure that you have a response to that .
Many thanks , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place this afternoon at 5.30 p.m.
The next item is the joint debate on the following motions for resolutions :
Earthquake in the Azores -B4-0727 / 98 by Mr Miranda and others , on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group , on the earthquake on Faial Island ( Azores ) ; -B4-0746 / 98 by Mr Costa Neves and others , on behalf of the PPE Group , on the Azores ; -B4-0747 / 98 by Mr Rosado Fernandes and others , on behalf of the UPE Group , on the earthquake in the Azores ; -B4-0768 / 98 by Mr Marinho and others , on behalf of the PSE Group , on the earthquake in the Azores ;
Earthquake in Turkey -B4-0764 / 98 by Mr Papakyriazis and others , on behalf of the PSE Group , on the earthquake in Adana ( Turkey ) ; -B4-0777 / 98 by Mr Alavanos and others , on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group , on the earthquake in Adana , Turkey ; -B4-0782 / 98 by Mr McMillanScott and others , on behalf of the PPE Group , on the most recent earthquake in Turkey ;
Forest fires in Greece -B4-0776 / 98 by Mr Ephremidis and others , on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group , on the forest fires in Greece .
Madam President , I will be brief , since my colleague Mr Novo has already clearly identified the problem .
I would only like to say that , dramatically , only a few short months after one natural disaster in the Azores which caused several deaths through floods and landslides , there has now been another disaster .
On behalf of my group I would like to express full support for this motion , and also to affirm my confidence that the Commission will also help the Portuguese Government and the Regional Government of the Azores to find measures such as those already mentioned here , particularly the reinforcement of the REGIS programme and the Operational Programme for the Azores , to demonstrate our solidarity with this people who have been so severely afflicted , because I believe that unless that solidarity exists and is demonstrated , there will be no true spirit of European construction .
Madam President , there are three points I would like to mention , as one of the signatories .
Firstly , we know the Community budget includes a financial allocation for disasters , and we therefore ask for an increase in the allocation of Community funds to the Operational Programme for the Azores and the REGIS II initiative so that the Portuguese Government 's solidarity with the Azores is not undermined by a web of bureaucracy in Brussels .
Secondly , the fact that these phenomena have repeated themselves clearly proves that the ultra-peripheral regions have special problems and calls for the necessary initiatives to be taken by the Commission to give practical expression to the provisions of the Amsterdam Treaty .
Thirdly and lastly , urban renewal and re-housing - in times of natural disaster - make these measures eligible under the ERDF rules for housing investment subsidies .
The current reform of the Fund regulations is a good opportunity to open that particular door .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , Commissioner , the earthquake of 9 July , which principally affected the islands of Faial , Pico and São Jorge , has had devastating effects : there are over two thousand homeless people living in tents , and there is enormous damage to public buildings .
Owing to the scale of the disaster , families that have been victims of the disaster cannot rebuild a normal life for themselves on their own .
In any event , the Azores have no means to give them the kind of support they need in these circumstances .
We therefore have to rely on outside help .
No-one can remain indifferent to the plight of someone who loses the fruit of a lifetime 's work in the space of 20 seconds .
I have been with the homeless families .
They look to us with a mixture of weakness and determination , helplessness and expectation , hoping for help but fearing it will not come .
We cannot leave them to fend for themselves .
Especially at times like this , solidarity must be more than just a concept .
They will now see who they can rely on .
We shall do our part in the Azores , but special help in reconstruction from the country and the European Union is essential .
We must ensure that , regardless of our efforts to get closer to European Union development parameters , we shall have the necessary means to provide decent living conditions for the victims of this disaster without delay .
Time is short .
The European Union has the necessary means .
All that is needed is the decision which , in the circumstances , I am sure will be taken .
However , we must define our terms .
I am not only talking about emergency humanitarian aid . That is needed as well , but it is normally so meagre , and the incomprehensible dispute between Parliament and the Commission over the use of these funds is so fierce , that my essential hopes are not placed in that quarter .
What I do hope for , and I think it is reasonable to hope for , is an increase in the funds allocated to the Azores under the Community Support Framework , and those coming from the REGIS Community Initiative , bearing in mind that the calculation of the total damage to date stands at a minimum of ECUS 90 million ( 18 billion escudos ) .
This is the only way we can ensure that we shall proceed with the scheduled investments , which are vital and urgent , and also carry out the reconstruction work which is even more vital and urgent .
If we fail to do so , either we shall retard irremediably our progress towards reaching the average development parameters for our country and the European Union , or we shall not carry out any reconstruction work .
Neither of these possibilities is acceptable . The greater our need , the less ready we shall be to forgive those we rely on if they fail us ; and the greater our need , the more we shall value the solidarity of those who are willing to stand with us .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , 9 July 1998 will be just one more tragic date to add to the many others that for the saddest of reasons will remain in the memories of the people of the Azores .
The facts are that at dawn on 9 July the people of the Islands of Faial , Pico and São Jorge were woken by a violent earthquake which left eight people dead , around a hundred injured and over fifteen hundred homeless .
The material damage is estimated at around 20 billion escudos .
Once again - and in this House - we reaffirm the importance of the introduction of an article in the Treaty of Amsterdam providing for differentiated and specific treatment for the ultra-peripheral regions .
We have also previously stated in this House that in view of the repetition of these situations the REGIS initiative should in future contain an element enabling it to deal with natural disasters .
In these situations , apart from expressions of sympathy , votes of condolence and verbal assurances of solidarity , which are always welcome , we should take practical action in the form of immediate direct support for the Government and citizens affected , so that not only will the public utility infrastructures be rebuilt , but elderly families without financial resources will also have their homes rebuilt .
We are aware that the Community budget makes no provision for disaster relief funds .
That is why we are suggesting to the Council , in the context of the national solidarity which has already been expressed in the reinforcement of the specific development programme for the Autonomous Region of the Azores , that it should take action to reinforce the REGIS Community initiative with funds from other Community initiatives which are not expected to be used by 1999 .
This European solidarity will enable those citizens , who are Europeans like ourselves , to feel , despite all they have suffered , that it is worthwhile continuing to live and believe in the European ideal .
Earthquake in Turkey
Madam President , on that Sunday , 28 June , the whole world froze in horror at the tragedy that befell Adana in Turkey as a result of an earthquake of biblical proportions .
It was natural for all the countries of the European Union , including my own as a neighbouring country , to hasten to the aid of the suffering populations in that region of Turkey .
I believe that such disasters , with hundreds of dead and thousands of injured victims , and with incalculable economic and social repercussions , must make the European Union treat them seriously .
I would like the European Parliament - and I believe that is what we are doing now - to express its sympathy , support and condolences to the families of all the victims , as mentioned in the joint resolution .
I believe we must call on the European Union and the Commission to try to find ways to give financial support to tackle the havoc that has been wreaked on this country .
Finally , I would like to use the opportunity of this debate on acts of God and earthquakes to mention that the European Union must at last give substantial financial backing to international cooperation for research into systems and methods to forecast , predict and give advance warning of earthquakes .
Finally , I believe that in this matter Turkey must today have the full support of the European Union , regardless of the problems it has or does not have with the European Union .
Madam President , I share the emotion and the solidarity for the victims of the recent catastrophic earthquake in Adana and I naturally support any financial and technical aid that the European Union can offer .
This misfortune may , however , offer opportunities for positive action .
In the region that extends from Italy to Greece , Turkey and the rest of the Middle East earthquakes are observed to have typically many similarities and , unfortunately , similar effects .
It is also well known , and it was confirmed recently at Adana , that prevention , the antiseismic policy in building and the appropriate intervention following an earthquake , are just not good enough and need radical modernization .
And of course more general coordination at all these stages could help significantly to reduce the consequences of the disaster .
In this connection I think that the European Union may play a decisive role .
And I ask this . Could the Commission perhaps give us some initial thoughts on the matter ?
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the earthquake in Turkey really is a large-scale natural disaster - 150 dead , 1 500 seriously injured , thousands of buildings damaged - , and it is both good practice and vitally necessary that we express our solidarity not only in words , but also in deeds , in the form of aid .
For this earthquake occurred in the south of Turkey , in a region which is highly dependent on tourism .
The first reports only a few weeks after this devastating earthquake reveal that tourist bookings have dropped drastically .
Turkey has reported a drop of over 40 % in this heartland of European tourism which welcomes almost 5 million European tourists every year .
So it is a disaster which goes beyond personal damage , beyond family suffering .
It is a disaster which goes beyond the physical damage which has been caused on the ground .
It is a disaster which directly affects the livelihoods of several million Turks , and therefore we need to provide rapid assistance of a practical nature .
Above all the European Union needs not only to express its solidarity as we are doing here in Parliament - and I am delighted that the Greek members have also done this - but to finally fulfil its obligations under the customs cooperation agreement with Turkey .
It is we - not the European Parliament , but rather the European Union - who have blocked a considerable percentage of the payments due to Turkey to date .
We have failed to act in accordance with the agreement and I should like to take this opportunity , in addition to expressing my solidarity with the victims , to call upon the Commission , together with the Austrian presidency , to put an end once and for all to the blockade on financial aid to Turkey so that we really can provide some practical assistance .
In the same vein , we also need to make the necessary provisions , of course , and here I agree unreservedly with the two previous speakers who have seen this as their task .
Madam President , Turkey lies on a seismic fault running from east to west .
Therefore earthquakes are , unfortunately , fairly common in Turkey .
We cannot prevent earthquakes from happening , but we can , of course , alleviate the effects of them by building houses that are technically more stable and by establishing early warning systems .
This earthquake was fairly strong , 6.3 on the Richter scale .
In addition to the tragedy that people had to lose their lives , there was also considerable material damage , including damage to the electricity system and to the oil storage tanks in the town of Adana .
Turkey suffers from earthquakes .
It is therefore incomprehensible that the Turkish government is now planning to construct a nuclear power station , the first one in Turkey , only 100 km from this area .
I would like to ask the Commissioner what the Commission intends to do to appeal to Turkey and tell the country that it should not construct a nuclear power station in an area that is so vulnerable to earthquakes .
It is bad enough that a nuclear power station is being built , but we must prevent the catastrophe which could occur with a nuclear power station in this precise area .
Forest fires in Greece
Madam President , I would ask the Commissioner not to restrict himself to a litany of solidarity and support concerning the enormous damage caused by the fires during the last two months in Greece , but to make a solemn statement that there will be immediate aid to compensate for that damage .
Tens of thousands of hectares of cultivated land and a large number of cattle farms were completely burned .
Houses were burned down , infrastructure was burned , there were dead and injured as a result of the fires .
I would ask the Commissioner , therefore , to announce that this immediate aid will be provided .
In addition , I would ask him to exercise the influence that can be exercised , so that governments in Greece , including the current government , will at last create a forest registry and enforce more stringent legislation concerning the trade in land . Existing legislation is so lax that mafia groups avail themselves of arsonists in concert with commercial entrepreneurial construction interests and cause the fires in Greece , beyond what can normally be expected .
I would like to take this opportunity to point out that the Community has no effective pre-emptive policy for forestry protection .
It does not have a coordinating body or commensurate funds to exploit the modern methods made available by science and technology to prevent Europe from turning into a desert because of the fires , because fires do not occur only in Greece .
Madam President , Greece has the painful privilege of being the country where , with each of the many fires that occur , the extent of the damage is greater than anywhere else in Europe .
Of course Greece does not have a monopoly on these disastrous fires .
Because of their geophysical and climatological conditions , most regions in the countries of southern Europe are ravaged by fires .
At this moment , as we speak new fires are raging in the Peloponnese in southern Greece .
I believe that the European Parliament would like to express its support and solidarity for my compatriots .
There have been victims , human lives have been lost due to the many fires that have occurred in Greece over the last few days .
I believe that the European Commission must give immediate financial and technical assistance to these regions .
I in turn would like to stress that the European Union must deal with the matter in a systematic way , in collaboration with all national bodies , so that the appropriate initiatives can be taken for a system that will prevent and tackle such damage .
Finally , I wish to highlight in the most unambiguous way that the total prevention of these ravaged regions being turned into plots of land for building must be debated at all costs .
In other words we must encourage the regeneration and reforestation of these devastated regions .
Speaking on behalf of my European Socialist colleagues of PASOK , I wish to announce that we fully endorse the resolution that has been put forward .
Madam President , every year in Greece and in other Mediterranean countries of the Community enormous areas of forests are burned .
There is no doubt that some of the fires are the result of criminal activity , the aim of which is to gain financial benefit , while most of them are the result of special climatic conditions .
It is a fact , however , that the non-existence of administrative structures , the inadequacy of coordination and the inability to deal with these fires intensify their catastrophic effect .
Moreover , inadequate prevention and lack of proper surveillance are the result of the delay in the completion of the national land registry and the non-existence of national action plans within the framework of Community Regulation 308 / 97 for the protection of Community forests against fire .
I call on you , Commissioner , to inform us : firstly whether the action plans were handed over to you by the Greek government in 1997 and what sums of money were pledged for that purpose from the Community budget ; secondly , what is happening with the work of the national land registry which is being financed by the second Community Support Framework and for which the Greek government was requested to make cutbacks and to transfer money to other works .
Last year , on the occasion of the great fire of Thessaloniki , I had already called for overall strategic prevention and the setting up of the European Centre for Protection Against Fire for the systematic study and prevention of disasters and , indeed , relating to areas of high biodiversity , in connection with which the European Union had signed a special convention .
It is therefore essential that it protect these forests and precious regions .
Madam President , I will not describe the disasters .
My colleagues have done that very well .
I would just like to say two words .
Firstly , that there is an issue in Parliament , generally , relating to disasters funds . We ourselves abolished the budget line which corresponded to this issue .
What remains for us to do ?
With regard to the specific issue in hand , concerning the fires in Greece first of all , I would like to agree with my colleagues and to ask the Commission whether it plans to exert the necessary pressure , which it has the obligation to exert , on the Greek government concerning this famous land registry , which does not exist and which causes Greece to burn every year . I would also like to ask whether , given its powers , it plans to exert pressure on the Greek government to prevent the extensive fires that burn at the hands of landgrabbers .
In addition , I would like to emphasize that in fact there is a problem , that a way needs to be found to give help , as the extent of the disasters is extremely great , and that we ourselves must try to find this way and not abolish budget lines when we need them .
Madam President , clearly there are no possibilities for material help .
Nevertheless , the Commission , given its powers and responsibilities , has a very important role to play in the prevention of fires in the long term .
Beyond the whims of nature fires are caused by , or facilitated by , the lack of a land registry , because there is always the hope that the burned areas can be appropriated , and by arbitrary building and town planning that lacks infrastructure or suitable access and impedes the extinguishing of fires . Finally - and I wish to emphasize this in particular to the Commission - fires are caused by the thousands of illegal and uncontrolled rubbish dumps over which there is no guard , which do not have the most basic infrastructure , and which become the source of fires .
The Commission can help a great deal . Firstly , it can exert pressure to speed up the land registry which , moreover , the Commission itself is financing .
It can also refuse funding which , directly or indirectly , encourages or turns a blind eye to arbitrary building .
And , of course , it can exert greater pressure on authorities , especially local and regional authorities , to build modern , protected areas for rubbish .
To achieve this it can use the threat of recourse to the courts or the cutting off of other funds .
In this way the Commission will make a significant contribution to reducing the dangers from fires in Greece .
Madam President , beginning with the situation in the Azores and in Greece , may I say that the Commission obviously sympathises very much with the victims of the fires in Greece and the earthquake in the Azores .
First of all I want to present our sincere condolences to the families of those who have lost their lives .
I am not going to be able to answer every question that has been raised . I will , however , give you the information that I have .
With regard to aid for the victims of these catastrophes , the Community budget for 1998 does not contain appropriations for emergency aid inside the European Community , but the areas affected by these calamities are recipients of Structural Funds aid under Objective 1 .
Within the framework of the appropriations available , the public authorities can reorient their expenditure to take account of the new needs .
With regard more particularly to the earthquake in the Azores , the Commission has had initial contacts with the regional and national authorities to examine the possibilities , within the Community support framework for Portugal , of financing the necessary rebuilding work following the earthquake .
The Commission was informed that an official request from the regional authorities concerned might be submitted to the monitoring committee of the Community support framework , which is actually meeting today in Lisbon .
If that happens the Commission will , of course , consider this request in a spirit of openness .
With regard to Greece , there are operational programmes which could part-finance the restoration of the environment and forestry heritage under the Structural Funds .
Moreover , the specific programme for the prevention of forest fires can also contribute to improving prevention systems , and it should be noted that the appropriations under this programme were reduced from ECU 23 million in 1997 to ECU 17 million in 1998 .
Let me finally stress that the Commission is willing to examine quickly any concrete request emanating from the competent authorities of these two countries .
I have no information beyond what I have given as to whether such requests are being made .
I can also confirm that the Commission will take all the necessary formal decisions concerning possible amendments of the existing programmes to enable us to do what I have outlined .
With regard to Turkey , as has been said , a very serious earthquake occurred on 27 June leading to considerable numbers of people being killed and injured .
Again , I would like to express our sincere sympathy and condolences to the families and individuals affected in this tragic event .
The latest reports from the Federation of the Red Cross and Red Crescent say that there are approximately 300 000 people living in tents , but the assessment of the damage continues .
The Turkish Red Crescent , Kizie Ay , provided immediate relief assistance in the form of tents , blankets , food supplies and mobile kitchens and over 1000 units of blood were also supplied .
The International Federation of the Red Cross and Red Crescent issued a request for funds in order to purchase emergency relief items .
A UN assessment mission conducted on 1 and 2 July reported that the government and local authorities had the situation under control and did not need or request any international assistance .
The situation has not changed since then .
OCHA , the UN Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs , issued regular situation reports and acted as a channel for contributions .
All contributions received were intended for use in coordination with the relevant UN organisations .
ECHO has made a decision for the release of ECU 500 000 in response to the IFRC request for funding for emergency relief items .
That will cover items such as blankets , tents , mobile kitchens and electrical generators .
Many thanks , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place today at 5.30 p.m.
The next item is the joint debate on the following motions for resolutions :
B4-0763 / 98 by Mr Colajanni and Mr Augias , on behalf of the PSE Group , on the restitution of property of Holocaust victims ; -B4-0775 / 98 by Mr Puerta and others , on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group , on the restitution of property of Holocaust victims ; -B4-0780 / 98 by Mrs Roth and others , on behalf of the Green Group , on the restitution of property of Holocaust victims ; -B4-0781 / 98 by Mrs Muscardini and others , on behalf of the Non-attached Members , on the restitution of property of Holocaust victims ; -B4-783 / 98 by Mr Dimitrakopoulos and others , on behalf of the PPE Group , on the restitution of property of Holocaust victims .
Madam President , I believe it appropriate to illustrate very briefly the content of this resolution which calls on the Council and the Commission of the European Union , out of respect for the memory of millions of victims and elementary human rights , to bring every pressure to bear on the governments concerned to ensure that the assets and property stolen from the Jews and constituting spoils of war , part of which was deposited in particularly secret banks , are disclosed and returned to their original owners or those now entitled to them .
These are assets and property that have been and are today an enormous problem for public opinion .
This is the content of our resolution , a text that I would like to comment on very briefly and in very simple terms , recalling Europe 's responsibility in the Holocaust .
Europe is a synthesis of tolerance and violence : the Holocaust did not arrive from another world ; unfortunately the Holocaust arrived from within the history of Europe .
For this reason , there is something that deeply affects us , because it always imposes new responsibilities on us that are of a historical and cultural nature .
At this time I would like to challenge and take to task the revisionists who , with their edited version of history , are undoing the past and thus making it impossible to build the present and the future .
For this reason , it is obvious that European civilization must be based especially on the condemnation of the Holocaust but also on the condemnation of all forms of violence and on the need for a profound recognition of diversity .
That is the point !
Our request is very precise and concrete and concerns a tangible issue that has been raised by the whole of public opinion , causing dismay in American public opinion , in particular .
The request made to the Commission and the Council is precisely that which I indicated in the beginning .
Madam President , we are absolutely , categorically , for the resolution and for the acceptance of all requests , and we ask the Commission to carry out its duty in a responsible way because it would be unacceptable for it to play the Pontius Pilate in such matters .
I wish to take this opportunity to say that , although the extent and the consequences may not have been the same as those of the Holocaust we are debating today , there were other Holocausts in other countries and in my own country .
And even now the German authorities refuse to pay compensation - and it concerns damages of some billions of dollars - and refuse to return the contractual loan they had signed on the understanding that it would be returned after the war , no matter what the outcome .
They find various excuses that all the money was used up , especially after the reunification of the two German states .
I would therefore ask the Commissioner to speak not only about the consequences of the Holocaust for the European population but also about this unacceptable stance of a Member State of the Community which is portraying the monster of wealth and power .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , in light of the sensitivity of the subject we are dealing with , it was in my view a wise decision to leave open to the Council and the Commission the detail of the text of the resolution specifying the means by which they intend to exert pressure on the relevant institutions and governments to effect the restitution of property belonging to Holocaust victims to those persons who are legally entitled to it .
However , precisely because that is the case , because this openness was necessary , I should now like to draw attention to and underline what Mr De Giovanni has already said .
There is in this case both a moral and a legal imperative for action .
The moral imperative consists in the fact that the Holocaust has become a universal example of the flouting of human dignity and human rights .
Such behaviour must be condemned , and we must therefore act accordingly .
The legal obligation consists in the fact that every legal system makes provision for compensation for damage suffered by a victim or restitution of that of which he has been deprived .
However , I would like to conclude with a reference to a historical imperative for action by the European Union .
I hope that during the next legislative period , as a result of enlargement , Auschwitz will become part of the Union .
It is therefore important that the European Union is quite clear about exactly what this means for it .
Madam President , 50 years after the greatest tragedy of this century , the victims have still not received fair treatment , and their possessions and goods have still not been returned to them or their heirs .
Now that the facts have come out about the actual role of the Swiss banks in this tragedy , now is the time for Parliament to justifiably call on Switzerland to do justice to the victims of the Holocaust .
My group has nothing more to add to this , and we support this position completely .
Mr President , all of us in this House agree , I think , that , just as the Holocaust is to be condemned , the actions or oversights which are the consequences of the Holocaust are similarly to be condemned .
It is clear that it is unquestionably incumbent upon us to find the fairest possible way of addressing the issue of some of the assets of Holocaust victims .
It will add to the overall attempt to administer justice on behalf of the victims of this disastrous policy of the past .
Switzerland , the first country in connection with which the issue of assets of Holocaust victims arose , has made a move towards some kind of arrangement , following pressure brought to bear by the international community .
There is no doubt that other corrective action is necessary so that , at least as regards this country , there is an outcome of some substance .
However , other countries that were involved in this matter need to take the same corrective action . I believe that the European Parliament resolution that is before you today is one more push in this direction .
Mr President , today , 53 years after the military defeat of the Nazi regime , it is shameful that appeals still need to be made to governments and banks for assets stolen from Jewish people during the Holocaust to be returned to the survivors and their heirs .
Self-evidently , living survivors are predominantly elderly , and many are infirm or living their remaining years in poverty .
Relatives who are the heirs of the murdered victims have been denied compensation for the absurd reason that the Nazi barbarians did not issue death certificates and post them to those Jews who managed to escape the gas chambers and the pits of death which the Nazis planned as the fate for all the Jewish people .
Where there are definitely no living heirs , assets stolen from these victims of the Holocaust should be used to finance material support for the many now elderly and poverty-stricken survivors who came originally from a background of poverty .
I fully support the European Parliament resolution which demands restitution of stolen assets , and I trust that the Commission and the Council will do everything within their powers in that area .
However , the Shoah , the mass murder of 6 million Jewish children , women and men in Europe , can never be compensated for .
The memory of the 6 million Jewish martyrs , of their lives and emotions , of their culture and of their potential , needs to be preserved .
And very importantly , the vile racist and anti-Semitic ideas , media and actions of modern-day fascists and neoNazis in Europe need to be combated and suppressed by all necessary means .
Mr President , following on from others , Mr Newman has just said everything and the Liberal Group quite naturally shares the basic feelings and views which have just been expressed here .
However , we have not signed the joint text because we think that paragraph 1 has been drawn up in a very clumsy way and it is likely to downgrade the essential challenge of this text and turn the matter into a mediocre lobbying issue .
That is why , borrowing the very words which Mr Newman used in his speech , I would immediately like to table an oral amendment - to be reiterated later - which would replace " bring every pressure to bear on the governments concerned ' , with " do everything within their powers ' .
The meaning of the text would not be changed as a consequence and it would mean that the text would no longer be subject to mediocre and nauseating exploitation .
I would like this oral amendment , which I will repeat as necessary , to be accepted by all our colleagues .
( Loud applause )
Mr President , I agree wholeheartedly with the ideas expressed by Mr Newman here .
I believe he has highlighted the fact that we have to continue to fight fascism today .
This resolution mentions Jews in particular as those who suffered worst from the Nazi atrocities .
Nevertheless , I would like to remind everyone that many other groups , in addition to the Jewish people , were the victims of these horrors and general tyranny .
I would especially like to mention Romanies and homosexuals .
Their honour also must be restored .
Recently foundations have been set up in places such as Switzerland and Germany , where Jews , Romanies and sexual minorities that suffered cruelty under the Nazis may seek compensation .
The kind of compensation on offer is , unfortunately , mainly symbolic , but it is an indication that their former plight is being acknowledged today also .
I hope the Commission and Council will also consider the Romanies and homosexuals , in addition to the Jews , with regard to the restoration of property .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the National Alliance endorses the joint resolution of the European Parliament on the restitution of property belonging to Holocaust victims and is very pleased that a motion for a resolution which it originated and whose key signatories are Mr Muscardini and Mr Pasty as well as the President of the National Alliance , Mr Gianfranco Fini , has been included in the House 's debate .


The National Alliance delegation is particularly pleased that this was expressed by our House , considering it a natural conclusion of the passage through Parliament that it precisely sought with its two political initiatives on this topic : the written declaration of 14 January 1998 and the subsequent motion for a resolution of 20 May 1998 .
Both initiatives called for the restitution of property belonging to Holocaust victims .
It is therefore obvious that we are in total agreement on the contents and the requests of the joint resolution that we will be voting on shortly .
The supreme crime perpetrated by the Nazi criminals against those belonging to the Jewish religion , the infamous act that the allies of the Nazis sullied their hands with in various European countries , collaborating in the persecution , denouncement and searches , and not least the tragic racial legislation introduced by the Fascist regime in power in Italy make even more unjustifiable the shameful insult of the requisition of property and the concealment of assets belonging to the victims of such horrendous persecution .
This concealment we consider to be totally illegal appropriation and theft , because it is obvious that the banks and financial institutions concerned knew and know the identity of the holders of the accounts .
For this reason , the National Alliance is proposing that the assets and property belonging to the Holocaust victims , even when it is impossible to locate the holders or heirs of the holders of such assets , be paid into a single fund managed by the World Jewish Congress or by any other association or body that this Congress may want to indicate and officialise for the purposes deemed most appropriate .
Mr President , I do not think there can be any need for me to say how strongly I respect the feelings and views expressed in this debate by so many Members from all sides of the House .
Speaking personally , not only do I respect those feelings and views but I also have no difficulty in saying that I share most of the sentiments expressed .
On the other hand , I have to state the position of the Commission and , although I cannot believe that any of my colleagues would not hold the view I have just given voice to , it is a fact that the Nazi gold affair is not one that falls within the Commission 's competence .
All that the Commission can do in its contacts with the Swiss side is to express the view that it would seem to me to be very much in the Swiss interest to do the utmost to settle the issue in a satisfactory manner and , indeed , in a way that would satisfy those who have spoken in this House .
Although it is a fact that the Commission does not have competence here , I can say that I personally warmly welcome the fact that there has been this debate in this House and that the views that have been expressed have been expressed .
I have little doubt that , amongst the welter of activities on the part of individuals and organisations , representative and non-representative , the views expressed so strongly and universally by those in this House will not be the least influential , and , I hope , will have the effect that those who have spoken would wish for .
We shall now proceed to the vote .
On the resolution on restitution of property belonging to Holocaust victims .
Mr Nordmann , I have already recorded your request for an oral amendment .
During your speech I will refer to it myself .
Before proceeding to the vote , I would like to inform you of the request for two oral amendments .
One is being presented by the Liberal Group and aims to replace the first words in paragraph 1 , which are : ' calls on the Council and Commission , out of respect for the memory , ' by ' invites the Member States to endeavour with every means in order to respect the memory ... ' .
What follows remains unchanged .
Has this been referred to me correctly , Mr Nordmann ?
Mr President , we are not asking for the appeal to the Council and the Commission to be deleted , but we want to add " and on the Member States ' , and we would like to replace " bring every pressure to bear on the governments concerned ' , with " do everything within their powers ' , terms which Commissioner Brittan 's speech has , were it necessary , justified , and which I take from Mr Newman 's own proposals .

Mr Nordmann , there has certainly been a misunderstanding between the Liberal Group 's request and the text that has been presented to me , because indeed during your speech this wording was very clear .
Now , though , all the Members are able to judge .
I must obviously , however , turn to the House to check whether there are any objections to the request for an oral amendment .
Mr President , we believe that the existing text is better than the proposed oral amendment , and we therefore object to voting on the oral amendment .
As you know , the Rules of Procedure provide that it is not possible to proceed to the vote of an oral amendment if there is opposition from at least 12 Members in the House .
Unfortunately , your statement is not enough .
I ask the Members to please rise .
( Twelve Members stood up ) Mr Dimitrakopoulos asks that in paragraph 2 the words ' World Jewish Congress ' be replaced by ' the government of Israel , the Knesset and the organizations that represent Jewish people all over the world ' .
( Parliament adopted the resolution ) That concludes the vote on urgent subjects .
Votes
Mr President , I would like to comment on the previous vote .
I was very shocked , I have to say , at the way in which the oral amendment was separated from the vote , because the reason given is not satisfactory .
The procedure for rejecting the oral amendment has the very legitimate objective of protecting Members against the dangers of not understanding an amendment .
But what we were told here was that it was not put to the vote because , of two versions , the other one was preferred .
It was for Parliament to decide that .
You had no choice , Mr President .
You took the right action , but I think our colleagues abused this procedure , because this means that 12 people have imposed a text wanted by a minority on a House which was , by a very large majority , in favour of a different text .
Mr Bourlanges , it is a very delicate issue and we are all sensitive to it . As a result , I will allow you to make this comment .
Let us say that it is a kind of declaration of vote .
Naturally , it is possible to comment on Mrs Aelvoet 's explanatory statement , but I have had to abide by the Rules of Procedure and consequently I have obviously not emphasized Mrs Aelvoet 's statement , but I have only seen that there were twelve Members who rose .
The right of petition is one of the most ancient to which ordinary citizens are entitled .
It is , therefore , quite right that the citizens of the European Union should also have access to this right , which has been enshrined in law since the Maastricht Treaty entered into force .
It is , however , essential that petitioners , generally motivated by the fact that they believe that their legitimate rights have been abused by the public authorities , should not also feel that the European Parliament , to whom they have turned , fails to examine their request not just carefully , but promptly .
It is important , therefore , that the Committee on Petitions has access to the necessary resources , in terms of both staff and equipment , in order to deal with the many requests which it receives annually with great efficiency and diligence .
It is , moreover , regrettable that , unlike the Commission , which appears to collaborate gladly with the work of the Committee on Petitions , the Council would clearly appear to be far less willing in this respect .
Parliament has a right to expect that Council officials will also participate in the work of the Committee on Petitions .
The attitude of the Council and the paucity of means are all the more damaging since a close examination of the petitions is also an excellent way for the institutions to evaluate the extent of the application of and true respect for Community law in the various Member States .
By voting for this resolution which has been submitted to us , I would , therefore , like to stress , in particular , just how important it is for all our European citizens that all the institutions collaborate closely , including in the framework of the Committee on Petitions .
Newman report ( A4-0258 / 98 )
With the Committee on Petitions , the European Ombudsman is the other pillar of the right of petition through which the citizens and residents of Europe are able to participate personally and directly in the construction of a Union which respects its own principles and its own laws .
Like the rapporteur , we can really be very happy that the Ombudsman has followed the European Parliament 's recommendation and defined what is understood by ' maladministration ' .
Similarly , we must also be satisfied with the favourable reception which the Ombudsman has given to our proposal to draw up a common set of general administrative rules applicable to all the institutions and to all bodies of the European Union in the form of an code of good administrative behaviour .
The code , of course , will have to specify the sanctions applicable in the case of proven infringements .
This very positive evaluation cannot , however , disguise the fact that only 3 % of the 1 412 complaints regarding maladministration registered during the past year have resulted in a comment , a regulation or an amicable solution .
On this point , I cannot but share the scepticism which the rapporteur has expressed regarding the image of the truth behind these figures .
The purpose of a close study of the complaints sent to the Ombudsman is also , in fact , to contribute to an improvement in the running of the Community institutions and organs and to their credibility .
With this in mind , it would seem to be essential to extend and strengthen cooperation between the Ombudsman and the Committee on Petitions .
It is also desirable that the Commission should have adequate resources for monitoring the proper application of Community law in each Member State .
In a law-abiding state which respects itself , recourse to the Ombudsman can really only be an additional method of ensuring the good conduct of the institutions .
It cannot under any circumstances be the principal method .
It is in this spirit that I support the resolution which is before us .
Mr President , I am happy to support this report which deals with a new and important part of the EU 's institutions , the office of the Ombudsman .
The Ombudsman fills what had been a gap in our way of working , by allowing members of the public to submit a complaint when they suffer from maladministration by the EU 's institutions .
It is good news that , in more than half of the cases completed last year , there was found to be no maladministration .
However , the Ombudsman has still played a useful role for the public by asking the Commission to improve people 's rights in the run-up to judicial cases resulting from complaints , which the Commission has now done .
People could be forgiven for thinking that they are the David taking on the Brussels Goliath when they complain about the European Commission - but now people should know that , if they have a genuine complaint , then David will have a strong ally in the Ombudsman who will face Goliath with them !
Thors report ( A4-0265 / 98 )
The signatories of this explanation of vote fully support the initiatives of the European Ombudsman as regards access to documents and hence also Mrs Thors ' report .
It is high time the EU began to act on its fine words and statements of intent on transparency , which is also enshrined in the Treaty .
Openness and transparency are decisive prerequisites for a democratic system if decision-makers are to be held accountable for the decisions they make .
A lot more can be done to increase openness within the EU ; this is in fact the background to the European Ombudsman 's report .
In order to make it easier for citizens to seek access to documents and facilitate the processing of cases involving access to documents , the institutions and organs of the EU must have the same general , clear and readily-available administrative rules in this area .
The Ombudsman 's report and recommendations to EU institutions and organs regarding increased transparency are a step in the right direction .
We hope the institutions of the EU will follow up on his report and recommendations and work towards introducing improved rules on access to documents .
In our opinion , the right of access to documents should be the rule in the EU rather than the exception .
The first special report to Parliament by that institution 's Ombudsman is already in itself certain proof of the great importance of the institution of Ombudsman .
In building a people 's Europe and in developing a Union of closer ties for its citizens , we need a legal player to defend the ordinary citizen , the man in the street , from the grasp of bureaucratic machinery .
The Ombudsman is a vitally important institution and person from the point of view of the aims of Parliament .
The substance of the Ombudsman 's special report , the practical implementation of the principle of public access , is immensely important in bringing the Union closer to the people .
The study carried out on the Ombudsman 's own initiative has in itself already advanced the cause of public access to documents ; previous rules have begun to be implemented in a totally different way .
However , there is still a lot to be done on the basis of recommendations made .
Transparency has to become a leading principle , and restrictions or exceptions to it must be justified case by case .
In many cases it is a question of changing the entire administrative culture from a secretive one to an open one , and a real commitment to a comprehensive implementation of the principle of public access .
It is most definitely necessary , on this basis , to continue to develop common administrative rules for the Union 's institutions and boards .
Citizens have the right to information , advice and guidance in all matters connected with the work of the Community 's institutions and boards .
Petitions should be replied to as quickly as possible and on the so-called one-centre principle , in other words by referring the petitioner , if necessary , to the appropriate institution or organ .
Unless these principles are absorbed into practice , it will be futile to talk of closer ties for the citizens of the Union .
Regarding proper access to documents we must make greater headway with internal rules for the institutions .
Community laws must incorporate common rules on public access and transparency , which will strengthen commitment to the practical aspect of these principles .
Denied-boarding compensation system in scheduled air transport
The next item is the report by Mr González Triviño ( A4-0240 / 98 ) , on behalf of the Committee on Transport and Tourism , on the proposal for a Council Regulation ( EC ) amending Regulation ( EEC ) No 295 / 91 establishing common rules for a denied-boarding compensation in scheduled air transport .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the topic we are going to debate is of great importance for European citizens .
Due to the policy of liberalizing air transport in recent years , we have experienced both a considerable reduction in the costs of many flights and a significant rise in the number of passengers .
Nevertheless , at the same time , less desirable consequences have appeared , such as the increase in the number of times when some passengers , with a valid ticket , cannot board because more tickets have been sold than the number of seats available .
This phenomenon , already known by its English name , overbooking , represents a serious inconvenience for those affected .
The European Commission has taken the decision to review the legislation currently in force , which dates from 1991 , with the dual aim of guaranteeing that citizens are precisely aware of their rights and adapting the compensation for the material damage and inconvenience affecting the victims of overbooking .
The draft presented to this House for consideration is the result of broad consultations carried out with all the parties involved in the sector : users , consumers , unions , airline companies , etcetera .
The present proposal has the following main aims : to put an end to the distinction between scheduled flights and nonscheduled flights , which has remained obsolete in the liberalization of air transport and the birth of new companies ; to guarantee that passengers receive adequate information regarding their rights if they are denied boarding even though they are in possession of a valid ticket ; to adapt the monetary amounts for compensation in accordance with the current economic situation ; and to avoid a situation whereby passengers whose flights are cancelled for commercial reasons are defenceless and do not receive any compensation .
In line with the Commission , we propose that the rules concerning the right to compensation for overbooking should be laid out in plain and intelligible language and distributed by the Commission to the main consumer organizations in the European Union .
Similarly , it is our hope that passengers ' rights might be displayed for the public at the check-in counters in English or in the local language or languages in letters at least 1 cm high .
Another aspect which should be highlighted is that the tickets received by passengers as compensation for their loyalty to companies must be equally protected by this regulation , even if they were issued free of charge .
To conclude , I would like to state that all of the amendments tabled improve the Commission 's text .
All of the amendments are acceptable , but I would like to make a clarification as regards Amendment No 10 , which calls for the inclusion of the text in question on the ticket .
This has a disadvantage due , firstly , to the fact that the text on tickets is the result of a universal regulation and it would be invalid or would represent an excuse for the companies , and due , secondly , to the fact that there are already many companies which do not issue tickets , but which notify confirmation of the booking by fax .
Therefore , I would substitute " on the ticket ' with " with the ticket ' .
That would be a nuance which , I believe , would make it more practical to move forward with this process .
As regards Amendment No 23 by Mrs van Dijk , whom I would like to congratulate , I must say that I accept it in full .
With her addition , she is providing clarification and ensuring that the annual study to be carried out by the Commission identifies the airline companies with most shortcomings .
I therefore congratulate her once again .
I would also like to say that this improves the information provided for consumers and guarantees their rights , and that this regulation is binding on companies .
And I am sure you will allow me to take this opportunity , as a European citizen and a Member , to sincerely thank Mrs van Dijk for her dedication and work in this Parliament , and I hope she is going to have the same success in the new functions she is going to carry out , because she will continue with tenacity and vigour .
We are losing a great companion , a great worker and also a great woman .
Good luck and many thanks for your contribution to the European Union .
Mr President , the Socialist Group is going to support the complete and excellent report by Mr González Triviño which , after being debated in the Committee on Transport and Tourism , puts forward some sensible and enriching amendments which improve the interests of consumers .
I would like to congratulate the Commission because its proposal to modify this regulation represents a new advance in its policy on consumer protection - which is slow , at times , yet firm - and , in this case , it concerns a very specific and important sector for consumers , that is , the sector concerning passengers on commercial airlines .
Everything is based on a premise in which we believe or do not believe .
We do believe in it .
Whoever owns or manages an airline must know that he does not own just any kind of company - be it public or private - , a production facility with exclusively lucrative ends , but instead owns a company which provides services in the general interest and which , therefore , has two characteristics that other companies do not have .
Firstly , the protection of those who pay for these services in the general interest is more important , if that is possible , than that of any other customers paying for other less necessary services .
And , secondly , the profit motive and the profit and loss account of the company , legitimate though those concepts may be , are not the supreme interest , but they must coexist with an extraordinary degree of transparency , fairness and commercial security for the customer .
However , I must mention one fundamental objection , Mr President : in the Commission 's proposal and in the report , significant improvements are put forward to favour the customer , but overbooking is not questioned .
Enough years have passed to allow us to consider whether it is fair that the authorized figure for overbooking of seats continues .
I am not now questioning overbooking - which will also at some stage have to be reviewed - but I am questioning the authorized figure .
There is enough information to carry out a statistical study aimed at allowing us to lower the authorized figure and even bring it close to zero .
When this figure was authorized , it was possible to cancel all tickets , so the compensation was fair .
But today , many passengers - more than half of them - travel with tickets that cannot be cancelled , so this issue is more similar to any other commercial transaction .
But , in conclusion , the reform of this regulation is welcome because airline overbooking is today , due to its frequency and the harm it causes , the main breach of service to which travellers fall victim . This Parliament , on approving an own-initiative report only a few months ago , for which I had the honour of being responsible , considered that the following was necessary : improving the information provided to passengers , the information on their rights ; increasing the amount of compensation ; extending the system to include charter flights ; and regulating the opposite case to overbooking , that is , where companies cancel a flight due to the lack of passengers , camouflaging that cancellation with explanations which , if not false , are ambiguous .
To conclude , almost all of this is raised in the regulation proposed by the Commission , and improved in the report by Mr González Triviño from the Committee on Transport and Tourism ; we will approve this tomorrow , and it will receive , of course , the votes of the Socialist Group of this House .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , we shall meet again later as unfortunately is our lot .
I believe that we can be very happy with the Commission 's submission on denied-boarding compensation for scheduled air transport .
We in the PPE Group support most of the improvements proposed by the Committee on Transport and Tourism .
In particular , we think it is right that with effect from next year - I am assuming that it will come into effect next year - passengers who are unable to travel due to overbooking , despite the fact that they have valid and confirmed tickets , will receive increased compensation of ECU 185 on flights up to 3 500 km and ECU 379 on flights over 3 500 km .
I also believe that it is right that the distinction between charter and scheduled flights has now been removed , though it has not been removed entirely .
In the case of charter flights it applies only where a seat has been booked , not where a package holiday has been booked .
So the old regulation is still applicable for travellers who have booked a package holiday ; here nothing has changed .
However , where single tickets are sold for charter flights it is right that the same applies and compensation must be paid .
It is also important , I believe , that we should inform citizens of their rights .
There are very good airline companies - as most of them are , in fact - which , when they have overbooked , take the initiative to offer compensation themselves .
There are apparently other airline companies , however , who fail to inform their passengers that they have a right to compensation where flights are overbooked .
In this respect the new regulations which we are proposing together with the Commission , that is that appropriate notices should be displayed at departure desks , are right .
Here we as Christian Democrats , however , do not agree with some of the proposals from the committee .
We do not believe that the size of the letters on the information notices should be decided by Community law .
Firstly there is the principle of subsidiarity , and secondly there are simply differences .
Some countries have one language , others have several languages , and I think it is going to far to try to specify the size of the information notices - down to the last centimetre - for all the countries in Europe from Finland to Portugal .
Parliament should exercise a little restraint .
In any case , my group will ask that we vote against this proposal tomorrow .
We would also like to point out - and here my view differs a little from that of the rapporteur - that it is right that the information be printed on the tickets as well .
Certainly , international talks will be required in order to clear up all the details .
A passenger who gets his or her secretary to book a flight through a travel agency and receives confirmation that the flight has been booked does not need information about compensation payments .
The normal citizen , however , who books a flight himself should have information concerning his rights provided on the ticket .
We also reject the view held by the majority of the committee that this compensation regulation should also apply to flights from third countries .
We cannot have two laws , with EU companies having to pay compensation and companies in America and other competitors not having to pay compensation .
This has to be done on a global level for it is unacceptable that our European airlines should be disadvantaged in relation to American and other companies .
I believe this is a fair compromise between the interests of passengers and the airline companies and I therefore believe that we should all vote for the substance of this report .
Mr President , many users ' and consumers ' associations have echoed the dissatisfaction of passengers who have fallen victim to overbooking practices .
In terms of the total number of passengers transported in Europe , this problem obviously only affects a very small percentage , but it remains nevertheless true that these practices have tended to become more widespread and to become excessive .
Moreover , some airlines have not hesitated to make this an essential plank of their commercial operation .
Given these circumstances , it is becoming urgent to review the Community regulation on the denied-boarding compensation system , in order to increase the protection and rights of users and to dissuade companies from using such methods , guarding against the legalization of a commercial practice which is unacceptable and reprehensible for users .
I support the amendments contained in the report by our colleague , Mr González Triviño , which oblige companies to respect stricter rules thanks to a better compensation system for users and to fuller and more accessible information .
The overbooking phenomenon has been accentuated by the deregulation of the air sector and fierce competition between companies .
The increase in the number of flights and the race to fill aircraft have led some companies to abuse these practices .
This strengthens the need to assess all of the social and economic consequences of the liberalization of air transport and to learn from this . This is particularly important in order to reintroduce criteria and public service aims in air transport , based on greater participation of users with new control and intervention rights .
Mr President , I want to begin by congratulating Mr González Triviño with his report .
It is a good report and I would also like to thank him sincerely for his kind words , because this is indeed the final debate in which I will take part in this Parliament .
I would , however , still like to bring up a few substantive matters .
It is true that on behalf of my group I tabled an amendment in order to obtain greater insight , especially for the benefit of the consumer organizations , about which airlines are most guilty of overbooking and therefore of denying boarding to their passengers .
It is true that if this is made public , an airline will not like it , but it is an extraordinarily effective way to indicate to the public that it is perhaps better to look for another airline where overbooking is not such a common practice .
It is , of course , unacceptable to ultimately deny boarding to passengers after they have booked seats on an airline .
I would like to make yet another remark .
It is good that the Commissioner has made this proposal , and I agree with Mr González Triviño 's amendments .
But I think it would also be good if the other modes of travel were examined in terms of their protection of consumers .
If we travel through Europe by train , it quickly becomes apparent that the industry maintains terms of travel from the previous century which are totally obsolete .
I have never seen a proposal from the Commission to protect consumers who travel by train .
That would actually be an extraordinarily good idea , to ensure that we not only pamper air travellers but also travellers who choose more environmentally-friendly forms of transportation .
I believe this to be an extraordinarily good idea and I would ask the Commissioner to consider it .
I thank you , and in particular because it is the last time that you will be speaking in this House .
I thank you for the contribution that you have made , in particular for the way in which you chaired the Committee on Women 's Rights and which has been appreciated by all .
Mr President , according to the rapporteur , for every ten thousand travellers who arrive at the airports of the European Union , three to twelve people are not allowed to board an aeroplane .
Denying boarding to passengers therefore does not take place very frequently , at least in terms of percentage .
Due to the enormous number of flights , however , this still amounts to around ten thousand people per year .
The Commission and the majority of the Committee on Transport and Tourism are justified in wanting reasonable compensation .
This can take place by modifying Regulation No 295 / 91 .
It is of essential importance that information for the traveller be improved .
Because the traveller is now insufficiently aware of his legal position , he misses out on compensation .
The Commission 's proposal , strengthened by the amendments of the rapporteur , improves this situation .
A great deal has been said about the specification of the proposal .
Must decisions about the size of the letters in the text at the check-in counters take place at European level ?
We are in favour of strict application of the principle of subsidiarity : that which Member States can do for themselves , they must continue to do for themselves .
However , in this case we have no objection to the specification of the proposal .
It concerns a regulation that will come into force immediately in the Member States , so specification was not only unavoidable , it also guarantees a level playing field for the airlines in the Union .
The proposal will be significantly improved by adopting Amendment No 20 .
This would eliminate the committee proposed by the Commission which would have the task of adapting the amount of compensation to economic developments .
I agree with the rapporteur that yet another new committee carries with it an unnecessarily large bureaucracy .
Finally , I would like to thank the rapporteur for his clear report .
Mr President , in its original form the regulation under discussion here failed to gain the desired level of success in all quarters since some airline companies withheld the necessary information from the relevant parties .
However , a protective regulation makes sense only if the people to be protected are also aware of their rights .
A situation must be avoided in which airline companies are enabled to evade their obligations by intentionally failing to provide information or by disinformation .
For this reason , above all , the proposal to display a notice at the flight desk bearing details of how to obtain information on the relevant rules and regulations is to be welcomed .
However , I imagine that it would also make sense in the interests of comprehensive and customer-oriented information if passengers were also to be informed of the higher compensatory amount in the same way , as that would improve the information considerably .
Any amendment which obliges the airline companies to present each passenger on request with a copy of the relevant regulations would meet with my full support .
Mr President , we could reiterate today everything that we said yesterday , during Question Time to the Council , on this same subject . This is especially true as regards the obligation of airlines to publicize our rights concerning damages in the case of overbooking - putting an end to the current ignorance - and as regards the suitability of promoting a regulation aimed at covering the damages caused by missing connections with other flights .
The report by Mr González Triviño is , in general terms , to be supported .
And we congratulate him on it , particularly since the current regulation - which dates from 1991 - must be amended , and given the adaptation of the regulation to the evolution experienced by the transport industry , meeting the passengers ' demands for information and increasing the amount of compensation .
Similarly , an objective of extreme interest is that whereby the passenger , to have the right to compensation , must have arrived at the check-in desk at least 30 minutes before departure time , but only at the queue for check-in .
Do not forget that recent American experience demonstrates that the percentage of passengers who do not turn up at the check-in desk has fallen from 10 % to 8 % as a consequence of better information .
However , of less importance is the request to use the local language for the information or the size of the letters on the signs , as Mr Jarzembowski has explained very well .
But , in conclusion , we are going to support this report .
Mr President , first of all my congratulations go to the rapporteur .
What he has told us is very interesting .
We are in an age where globalization and technology tell us that taking the plane will cost about the same as taking the bus .
This means that consumers will be relatively less protected , even if prices are lower .
They will have less proof that they have a right to a seat and they may have fewer possibilities to claim compensation or to protest , especially if they are in another country and are obliged to do all this in another language .
I therefore think that , although the things the rapporteur proposes are very positive , we should reinforce them in some quarters . For example , in the case of third-country carriers , who will find it easier to provide air-transport services in Europe , intervention on the part of the European Union should be much harsher and , if the obligation to compensate is not included in the new structure , it must be possible to appeal against their permit .
In addition , Community carriers returning from third countries must be included .
In this connection there occur the greatest scandals we are aware of , and I have in mind some such scandals from my own country .
And , of course , as was quite rightly mentioned , compensation must be paid out on the spot and in cash , even if it is difficult for the carriers to do so at that precise moment .
The blacklist of carriers that continually overbook is an excellent idea and the Commission should possibly think of how to push it forward .
Mr President , the aim of the proposal that we are examining today is to amend current legislation on compensation for denied boarding , to improve the management of problems stemming from overbooking and to protect , in the final analysis , the citizen from any abuse that might be committed by the airline companies .
Indeed it can be a great inconvenience for the passenger to be denied boarding .
Although at first glance the figures may seem insignificant , if compared with the high volumes of traffic registered in Europe 's leading airports which each serve 5 million passengers a year , the statistics end up revealing numerous cases of denied boarding , about 5 000 to 10 000 cases a year .

Of course , there can be various reasons for this .
One of the most frequent is that are no seats left .
Overbooking is related to the fact that often passengers , although they have a confirmed reservation , do not check in because of the flexibility that they have when they pay the full fare .
In practice , with this fare they can cancel or change the reservation without paying any penalties , which is not the case , however , for those with restricted tickets .
In addition , the growth of the air transport sector , which has occurred with the liberalization of the sector and the admission of new operators onto the market , certainly points to an upsurge in the phenomenon .
The parliamentary committee has thus aligned itself with the new proposals presented by the Commission to provide maximum protection of the thousands of passengers who each year are refused a seat on board , even after having booked a long time in advance , and to protect others from the confusion created by the lack of clarity in the rules applicable to cases of reimbursement owed for the cancellation of a flight .
Lastly , we are pleased with the legislation because it provides for , finally , the protection of the rights of consumers in air transport services .
Mr President , let me say first and foremost that I do not believe that what we are discussing here is something which the EU or the European Parliament should be concerned with .
Now that we are working towards having a single market , I think we should be terribly cautious about regulating this in detail .
That said , my principal view is that the airlines can and should in fact deal with this themselves .
It must be possible for one airline to show that it is better than another .
Paying compensation in the event of overbooking is , in principle , a competitive tool just like all other competitive tools .
There is always someone who says that competition does not work where aviation is concerned .
I am conscious of the fact that there are shortcomings in several areas in this respect .
The best way to get the airlines to treat their passengers in the correct way is , however , to ensure that competition is improved on more routes than is currently the case .
Then people can choose another one if they are displeased .
That is how the system works in all other contexts .
This is assuming that the Commission will devote time and energy to essential matters instead , such as on producing a proposal on the allocation of slots .
It would be interesting to obtain an answer on this today from the Commissioner responsible .
I must admit that I think it feels extremely awkward when we as a European Parliament have to take a stand on a proposal from the Commission which states that the information at airports must be on a notice containing letters ' at least two centimetres high ' .
Unfortunately , it will be only marginally improved by the rapporteur saying that one centimetre is adequate .
Obviously , both the Commission and the rapporteur think that those outside this building cannot think for themselves how to inform their passengers .
If it is not the case that the Commissioner is having a little joke with us , the best way to treat this particular article is to consign it to the nearest wastepaper basket .
We have substantial , crucial matters to which to devote our time and energy , not least as far as the airlines and the transport sector are concerned .
Let us take the opportunity to concentrate on them !
Kinnock , Neil , Member of the Commission .
Mr President , fortunately there is no arrangement in this Parliament or any other for having to pay compensation for running over time .
Otherwise we would all be much the poorer .
Before I respond to the debate on Mr González Triviño 's report , I would just like to say , as others have done , how much I regret the fact that Mrs van Dijk is leaving this House .
I know it is by her choice and of course all politicians prefer to make departures only by choice and not because of the will of the electorate .
I hope she will be very happy in her new role .
I must say that in the three and a half years we have worked together , I have come to admire her as a very good parliamentarian and a very dependable and progressive colleague .
I hope she will be happy and fulfilled in the future .
I should also like to thank the Committee on Transport and Tourism and , specifically , the rapporteur , Mr González Triviño , for an excellent report on denied-boarding compensation .
I hear Mr Stenmarck saying he is embarrassed by it .
He would probably be a lot more embarrassed if he were not provided with accurate information about his consumer rights and , indeed , suffused with embarrassment if he were bumped from a flight and did not have a sufficiently dependable system of regulation to ensure that in these circumstances he could effectively exercise his rights as a consumer .
It is also a fact that minuscule though the detail appears to be relating to the actual size of a notice , if there were great disparities across the single market I am absolutely certain that there would be consumers who would be aggrieved at their treatment and be induced to undertake litigation which would be time-consuming , expensive and even then not guaranteed properly to defend their rights .
So , footling though it might appear to be to an enlightened and refined intellect like Mr Stenmarck , the rest of us are glad to have dependable rights on which we can rely .
The practicalities of airline operation mean that some overbooking is unfortunately unavoidable .
But it is our duty to ensure that those passengers who are denied seats , even though they hold a valid and confirmed ticket , or equivalent , are compensated for the inconvenience they suffer which can be extremely severe .
The rules laid down by the denied-boarding compensation regulation of 1991 have been useful in protecting passenger interests but new developments in the sector and failure properly to apply the regulation by too many airlines certainly justify a number of improvements .
This proposal , therefore , refines and updates the existing rules by providing better information to passengers , by increasing the compensation levels on the basis of economic trends since 1991 and by taking account of relatively recent developments in civil aviation like code-sharing , ticketless travel and the decreasing distinction between scheduled and non-scheduled flights .
All of that is important in order to demonstrate to passengers that the Community framework for aviation is bringing tangible benefits , not only through lower prices and improved choice on many routes but also quality of service and user protection .
Mr Stenmarck and the rest of this House can be absolutely certain that we will not let matters rest or concentrate only on fares .
The other matters that have been referred to in the course of the debate - like slots and adherence to schedules - are constantly matters of concern in which we , like many parliamentarians , are active .
We hope we will continue to see progress in these spheres too .
We are not in the least distracted from these important activities by pursuing the legislation which is before the House today .
I am glad to note that the Committee on Transport and Tourism shares the opinion put forward by the Commission since many of its amendments are largely supportive of our approach .
So I am pleased to say that the Commission can accept Amendments Nos 4 , 7 , 11 , 12 , 18 , 21 , 22 and 23 .
The Commission can also accept in principle , subject to some redrafting , Amendments Nos 3 and 8 , first paragraph , since they clarify the fact that capacity restrictions might be imposed for completely legitimate safety reasons .
Amendments Nos 5 and 19 which extend application of the regulation to Community carriers returning from third countries are also acceptable in principle , as is Amendment No 6 since it precisely defines the airline 's responsibility to identify passengers still in the queue at the time of closing the check-in .
Amendment No 13 is acceptable since it underlines the fact that even the handling agent would be considered as the air carrier for these purposes .
Amendments Nos 15 and 20 simplify the procedures by replacing a new committee with one that already exists .
We find that acceptable too , as is Amendment No 17 which provides the possibility for additional means of payment .
The Commission can also accept in part Amendment No 9 which establishes a better basis for improved customer information .
However , there are a few amendments that we cannot accept .
I will run through them very quickly giving our basic reasons .
We cannot accept Amendment No 1 .
We believe there is greater clarity and transparency in stipulating a minimum 30-minute check-in time in the regulation .
Amendment No 2 on providing the rules to passengers is not acceptable since this obligation already exists in the current regulation .
The third paragraph of Amendment No 8 is not acceptable because even though passengers may agree to accept a seat in a lower class , they are still being denied boarding in the class to which they are entitled according to their ticket .
The passenger therefore deserves proper compensation even in those circumstances .
Amendment No 10 , second and third paragraphs , adds unnecessary bureaucracy and would make the information notices difficult to read , especially for someone like myself who needs the support of glasses on every occasion .
In addition , it suggests a ticket notice which the Commission believes is not practicable .
Finally , I cannot accept Amendments Nos 14 and 16 since they would oblige airlines in some instances to pay higher compensation than the passenger has actually paid for the ticket - the so-called ' bingo ' arrangement .
Perhaps we should not legislate for that .
In conclusion , however , I am pleased to welcome most of the amendments which will enable the Commission to strengthen the proposed regulation and I should like again to thank Mr González Triviño and the Committee on Transport and Tourism for their constructive and enlightened work .
It will undoubtedly contribute positively to the discussions that lie ahead in the Transport Council .
The debate is closed .
The vote will be taken tomorrow at 9.00 a.m.
Structural Funds programmes to the end of 1999
The next item is the report ( A4-0214 / 98 ) by Mr Howitt , on behalf of the Committee on Regional Policy , on the Commission guidelines on priorities for the adjustment of Structural Fund programmes to the end of 1999 ( C4-0640 / 97 ) .
Mr President , my report on guidelines for the adjustment of Structural Funds programmes may , at first , appear to concern a dry and technical subject .
But in reality , tonight , we are debating how we can make European funding programmes intended to create jobs and prosperity effective in achieving these aims ; how and why they are different , as European programmes , from regional support , which has already been adopted in the Member States ; how there can be a genuine dialogue between local people in regions across Europe , which really does exchange best practice and which lifts quality for us all ; and perhaps most of all , how the wheels of decision-making can be oiled to make the whole system as easy as possible at every level .
As the report makes clear , this first attempt at operating Structural Fund guidelines is right in principle , is well intentioned , but is one from which lessons have to be learnt : it was published four years late in Merseyside and elsewhere after the changes which these guidelines had been intended to affect had already been made ; it was written in dense and obtuse text ; it identified 27 different areas as priorities - far too many for serious consideration ; and it was disseminated only via Member State governments and arguably , not even by them .
As a result , a survey that I conducted with 11 European-wide associations of local and regional interest showed that 40 % had never even heard of the guidelines and not one knew of any positive change which they had brought about .
In all seriousness , I have to say that this is the stuff which fuels Euro-scepticism and an area in which Europe has to improve .
Tonight we are bringing forward a series of practical proposals to do just this and on which I expect , Commissioner , we will have your agreement .
Now let me concentrate on three questions which will raise a more severe challenge .
First , the legal status of what the Commission proposes .
Local and regional authorities claim this has been a grey area in which the Commission itself has sought to exploit ambiguity .
We have commissioned this legal opinion from Parliament 's Legal Service which finds that the Commission , in Article 9 ( 4 ) of the Draft Structural Fund Regulation , is seeking to agree guidelines which constitute a binding act based on the May 1970 European Court ruling on essential rules and on other case-law .
Quite simply , the Commission is seeking a backdoor route to determine European Structural Fund regulations without obtaining proper agreement from Member State governments through the Council of Ministers and without the full scrutiny of the European Parliament .
Tonight we ask you to indicate that you are prepared to think again and that advice means advice , not additional rules which are not needed and which only cause difficulty on the ground .
Secondly , this debate gives us a chance to attack the culture of delay which has become endemic in the operation of these programmes : late agreement of the programme , late agreement of country-by-country single programming documents ; late calls for applications ; excessively short deadlines ; late notification of approvals ; and even later payment of the monies - too often , too late for the people who need the money , but never too early for us to act in response .
That is why tonight we call on the European Commission to publish its proposed new guidelines , nine months - and preferably a minimum of six months - prior to the submission date for programmes .
That means by 31 December 1998 at the latest , for the next Structural Fund programme .
If they do not do so , that programme cannot start on time .
It must .
I hope we will hear a clear commitment from the Commissioner on this point .
Third , how can we debate adjustments up to the time of the closure of programmes without recognising the shortcomings here ?
As we negotiate the next Structural Fund regime from 1999 onwards , there are still 51 programmes in the United Kingdom and 58 in France which are incomplete from the previous Structural Fund period up to 1993 .
In the United Kingdom today £ 120m ( ECU 150m ) is outstanding in payments to regions for European Regional Development Fund projects actually completed in the years 1994-1996 : money to meet claims is running out this very week in my own region , in the east ; projects in the Northeast receiving only 45 % of costs ; public sector projects are getting just one-third of their costs in the southwest ; and similar stories are being repeated across other European Union countries .
Tonight Parliament will reaffirm our commitment to end this stop-start approach to Europe 's regional aid , to ensure continuity where possible and smooth transition where it is not .
This can only be achieved by planning in advance .
We call on the Commission to ensure that the new guidelines do precisely that .
Mr President , firstly , I would like to say that I agree with the report by the rapporteur from the Committee on Regional Policy , Mr Howitt .
However , I would like , in particular , to emphasize that the Commission 's guidelines on priorities for the adjustment of Structural Fund programmes must be clear , concise and easily read .
They must also appear in one document , if possible , and be sufficiently widely distributed , because Mr Howitt has demonstrated in his report , based on consultations held in various regions of the European Union , that when the guidelines reach the regions themselves they are confused , late and at times do not have any effect on the projects under way .
I therefore believe that this issue is a priority .
I also agree with the emphasis he has put on three horizontal issues : employment , the environment and equal opportunities .
In the Amsterdam Treaty , those three topics were clearly linked to the other policies of the European Union .
The Committee on Employment and Social Affairs puts forward a series of proposals . It regrets , firstly , that since it does not have at its disposal the results of the mid-term review of the Funds , it know little about the real application of Objective 4 , and secondly , that there are no statistics on the effect of the Funds on equal opportunities or on the integration of people with disabilities , nor on the effect of the new " sources ' of employment .
Yesterday , in fact , we were debating the report by Mrs Hulthén and we saw that the environment is fundamental within the topic of employment .
Indeed , the OECD believes that , in the next few years , the number of jobs related to the environment will probably increase by 5.5 % .
If we take account of how slowly other sectors are growing or that they are even declining , it is clear that this issue is quintessential .
We also call for transparency and participation and we must always take account of equal opportunities as well as those projects related to the environment ; we desire a balance between job creation and the economic policies which tend to reduce it .
It is not the first time that regions such as my own - Asturias - receive Objective 1 funds , at times from other objectives and at times from certain Community initiatives ; and yet , it is a region in decline where decisions are taken on economic policies which lead to reductions in employment .
A balance must also be found between the budget for infrastructure - which usually creates temporary employment - and the aid for small and medium-sized enterprises , the new " sources ' of employment and the LDEIs ( local development and employment initiatives ) , etcetera , which create more permanent jobs .
The Funds must provide services for children and the elderly , in other words , consideration must be given to projects which might promote equal opportunities in terms of women 's access to jobs in comparison to that of men .
In conclusion , Mr President , we need to increase the budget in the field of the environment - Objective 2 only dedicates 5.2 % - and the participation of local and regional authorities in those projects concerning the environment , because it is essential that they ensure that environmental principles are not violated .
Mr President , Commissioner , the rapporteur had made a very valuable contribution to the discussion and - although of course technically he should not - also to the arguments for the reform of the Structural Funds .
If it is the case that these guidelines are intended to reflect the objectives and the European dimension of structural fund policy , and therefore if they really do specify programming priorities , then quite clearly they should not be too numerous .
Guidelines should not , after all , be a source of confusion .
Paragraph 7 of the motion for a resolution can give the impression that these guidelines are taken as very specific quantitative indicators , in other words , concrete figures and quotas .
I should like to warn against this , for I believe that it is possible to meet European guidelines even where specific targets may be missed by a short distance , .
Concealed behind this argument - as we are all aware - is the problem of this Commission proposal , the 10 % reserve .
The specific question we have to answer is how in the future - if we take the decision on this line next year , for example - the Commission will decide whether a Member State would have such a sum deducted and whether these funds would then be distributed to other regions .
This should only be the case , if at all , where a Member State has genuinely failed to meet guidelines , not simply failed to achieve a set of figures .
It must be a genuine case of failure to meet a small number of important European guidelines .
If - as is currently envisaged and as we in this House would also wish - in the future Member States really are to be given greater leeway in the national implementation of European programming , then these guidelines must neither be too detailed , nor too numerous .
Otherwise , although we would technically be giving the Member States and the regions greater leeway , we would not be doing so in detail .

Finally , and even though we are rather depleted in number , I should specifically like to thank Mr Howitt for what he has achieved .
Anyone reading this report in detail - something I would recommend to all my fellow MEPs - will see that he has not only given formal consideration to the issues , but that he really has spoken to everyone , from senior Commission officials to the project agencies in the various Member States , and recorded many suggestions . I would recommend anyone taking part in the forthcoming discussion to read it thoroughly .
Mr President , Commissioner , the Structural Funds have been a very important chapter of Community policy and have without doubt achieved substantial results for the recovery of certain regions suffering from depression due to historical and traditional factors .
We are now facing a year of transition , and there is the risk that if we adopt lines that are too rigid we may , so to speak , block the process instead of creating further momentum .
I , too , am convinced of the fact that Mr Howitt 's report contains some particularly relevant points and sets a course that is certainly useful to follow .
The problem I see , however , is that of the directions and guidelines that will have to be followed to conclude the programme at the end of 1999 , and that of tying them in with the guidelines for the new programme from 2000 to 2006 .
There are criteria that have to be laid down with extreme clarity from the start .
I believe that we must stick to a course of dialogue from the bottom up , precisely because of the role that both the regions and the states have had ; the idea of providing direction can certainly be useful in defining common guidelines within the European Union in order to achieve fixed common objectives , but we cannot underestimate the vitality of the regions , vitality that is precisely due to the capacity of each state to identify the problems that have to be tackled and the programmes that have to be elaborated .
The fundamental criterion of the Treaty , which concerns social issues , attributes this key role to the states and the regions . Besides , they are currently demonstrating their great vitality .
It is an aspect that must under no circumstances be forgotten and that must be borne in mind .
The report also raises other points that I believe are very important : the need for clarity , speed , the conveyance of information , conciseness and at the same time the ability to incorporate the many suggestions in extremely specific aspects .
The guidelines are undoubtedly positive but must also take into account these requirements .
Mr President , the Commission 's goal to promote a pan-European regional policy by means of common guidelines is obviously a very worthy one .
In the way of Mr Howitt 's excellent report , however , we have to ask what these guidelines are being used for and whether they are going to be able to realize the goals in the proposed manner .
It is a question , in a sense , of a common framework of reference for the adjustment of programmes .
I think it is very important that the guidelines are explored expressly for the improvement of the nature of regional policy .
At best they will comprise an advisory tool in the sharing of information on the best ways of going about things , thus improving programme efficiency .
However , this will in practice require improvements , especially from the point of view of regional players .
The present situation and the profusion of different guidelines is unquestionably very confusing .
The Commission must set down primary goals clearly in one document .
Similarly , we have to reject the Commission 's call for adjustments , which have been proposed at such a late stage that it will only lead to delays and frustration .
The guidelines must be published in good time if we want them to have a real effect on the planning of programmes .
Regarding the next term for new programmes , this will mean agreement by the end of this year .
In addition , publicity and training at regional level must be increased if we want to promote the effectiveness of the guidelines in question .
Just as the rapporteur has proposed , primary goals should include a strategy for continued support , transitional measures , or the termination of a programme in a given region .
A decent transitional strategy could prevent many problems , such as delays , lack of responsibility regarding income and waste of resources , all of which today constitute a lamentable realty .
Because circumstances in Member States and in the regions vary greatly , these common guidelines and goals must have incorporated within them a certain degree of flexibility .
Nevertheless , the most important priority areas , such as employment , the environment and equal opportunities , would certainly benefit from clear , common indicators .
Mr President , my thanks to Mr Howitt for this report .
There was really nothing more he could have made of it , given that the European Parliament was consulted at such a late stage .
I must say quite honestly that I am very disappointed that Mrs Wulf-Mathies is not here .
Could it be that she is avoiding this discussion ?
The point of contention is whether or not the guidelines are binding .
This point of contention is being carried forward into the new regulation .
Most revealing in this respect is the rapporteur 's question in the explanatory statement .
The guidelines are basically nothing more than a paper tiger .
They are ignored by the Member States .
The Commission is not pressing for them to be used as guidelines for adherence to European objectives or European cohesion policy .
This must be seen as particularly critical given that it is intended that in the future the guidelines should form the centrepiece of European structural policy and that they should then almost become the core of a Structural Fund regulation to ensure that it remains focussed on the issue of European cohesion policy .
In the new regulation the Commission has indeed reallocated certain tasks .
That was a very sensible move , but if it restricts itself to setting a framework and to monitoring , it needs the guidelines for support .
If these guidelines have no central significance , there will be no European cohesion policy .
This represents a very , very dangerous threat capable of undermining its very foundations .
We can only achieve sustainable development , equal opportunities and employment if they are a joint aim .
This joint aim also needs common paths , even if they are travelled differently in the various regions .
For this reason it is most important that we continue to discuss this matter intensively .
We know that many Member States do not want guidelines .
That is responsibility enough to make us develop them into a central instrument here .
Mr President , Commissioner , I would like to concentrate in my speech on one of the aspects of Mr Howitt 's excellent report and , in particular , on the Commission guidelines which could , it has been said , be of a somewhat restrictive character whereas the legal basis for this restrictive law does not appear very obvious .
First of all , I would like to point out that this Structural Funds system is an original and practical device and this is due to a number of reasons : its classification into objective areas which takes account of regional differences ; the sometimes exemplary way in which Structural Funds have served regional policies , because these Structural Funds have in fact structured ; the infrastructures which have made areas less isolated ; the aid and support for economic activities , particularly in rural areas , and primarily in the area of agricultural diversification ; and the aid to training and retraining which have very much supported employment .
The way it was conceived is interesting : the consultation procedure is based on regional development plans and the " docups ' , the single programming documents , the length and periodicity of which have now been established and are well broken in .
The principles which governed its preparation are all also very interesting : I would like to refer in particular to the principle of additionality which creates synergy between the actions of Member States , regional authorities and the European Union ; the principle of compatibility with texts , that is to say , Treaties , the regulations , but also with the great principles of the Union , for example the priorities in terms of the environment , jobs and equal opportunities for men and women ; and finally , the principle of subsidiarity in regional policy which illustrates admirably its necessity and effectiveness .
Let us now look at the instruments and I am thinking here of the Community support framework which ensures synthesis and coherence in the programme as well as in the operational programmes which specify the implementing rules .
It is clear that much progress remains to be done in terms of evaluation , not only as regards the preparation of Treaties , but also as regards delays in the publication of these evaluations , if they are to be useful .
It is altogether logical and even reassuring that the Commission is concerned , at this level of intervention , that the European Union should not lose its ability to influence the guidelines relating to regional policies and the use of Structural Funds .
This obviously raises the question of the legitimacy to which I referred earlier regarding the legal basis , but also the question of the participation and active contribution of the European Parliament - which is , incidentally , a political authority - and , therefore , its contribution to the establishment of these guidelines .
In any event , the most important thing is to find the right balance , which is undoubtedly delicate , between a principle , namely , the principle of subsidiarity which cannot be called into question , and an objective , that of cohesion , which naturally calls for coordinated intervention , perhaps even readjustments .
The task is important because we need to create a link and find some compatibility between the necessary coordination and the wish that economies have to escape from dependency .
Mr President , in welcoming the report , may I congratulate the rapporteur on his work and efforts to consult as widely as possible in order to ascertain in general terms how the structural fund guidelines operate ?
I trust the Commission will take careful account of Mr Howitt 's report from this House this evening , for he has not only identified problem areas , but offered constructive criticism as to how the problems can be addressed in order to make application of the guidelines more effective , thereby contributing to greater transparency and efficiency .
I have sympathy with the view that , because of the differing circumstances within Member States , some flexibility should be offered .
If there are too many guidelines , the problem should be addressed without obliging Member States to accept what might prove to be counter-productive uniformity .
Simplification must mean more than a neat and tidy system in Brussels which cannot be feasibly applied at Member State level .
The rapporteur assures you that current programmes need to be completed effectively and future programmes clarified in greater detail .
It is unacceptable that rules were issued without a proper legal basis and remained largely unread .
Of course the Commission might argue that it was entering uncharted waters and some allowance should be made for the experimental nature of the guidelines .
That is an inadequate answer to give to European citizens , to whom we are all ultimately accountable .
The Commission has vast experience and expertise in similar fields and so we should not allow it to bleat to us that there is a job to be done and we must get on with it .
I would ask the Commission to take that point into consideration .
Mr President , I wish to thank Parliament and , in particular , Mr Howitt for this important draft report and resolution .
Despite some critical comments in the report , mainly on the timing and format of the Commission 's guidelines , there is much within the draft resolution with which we can fully agree .
For example , it recalls the overall purpose of the guidelines , which was to provide a general policy and priority framework within which to make adjustments to current programmes .
It was never the intention to touch projects which were already under way and being satisfactorily implemented .
The resolution recognizes that , although the guidelines provide a means of setting out priorities for the Union as a whole , local circumstances also need to be taken into account in deciding on adjustments to programmes , and the guidelines confirm that view .
Similarly , we would fully endorse the resolution 's suggestion that the guidelines should be seen as a mechanism for the exchange of best practice between all partners at regional , national and European level , and that is an aspect that might be usefully reinforced in future Commission guidelines for the next programming period .
As regards the advisory nature of the guidelines , I want to reiterate that it was always intended that the guidelines should provide a general framework only .
As regards their legal status , the Commission has always stressed its view of the advisory nature of the guidelines , and the role of monitoring committees and other relevant authorities in adjusting programmes .
Indeed , the guidelines were a response to a request from the Member States themselves that the Commission should formulate policy orientations , in accordance with the principle of subsidiarity , to facilitate the adjustment exercise at the mid-point of the programmes .
Therefore , the guidelines do not have either the sinister intention or the sinister effect that some have feared or claimed .
Indeed , it was stressed in particular that any changes in the current Objective 1 and 6 programmes should aim to increase job creation .
It is clear that is what the guidelines have sought to do .
So , the Commission could not share the view that the social economy and new sources of employment are insufficiently emphasized in the guidelines .
A significant section of the document is devoted to the promotion of local potential by means of local development and employment initiatives .
The guidelines highlight , for example , the scope for businesses to gain economic benefit from the niche marketing of quality local products and services , and they also emphasize the potential of cooperatives , mutuals , associations and foundations .
Whilst actions in the field of equal opportunities may have been financed more often than not under the European Social Fund , the Commission agrees with the rapporteur that such horizontal aspects should be given consideration in all areas financed by the funds .
The same goes , for example , for the environment and sustainable development .
But this is more an issue for the Member States themselves to handle when putting their programmes together , since the guidelines were intended to be applicable to all the funds .
Many of the remaining points of the resolution refer not to the guidelines for adjusting the current programmes but to the Commission 's proposals for future guidelines under Article 9 ( 4 ) of its proposed general regulation for the Structural Funds after 1999 .
As the rapporteur stated in his report , it is not his intention in this exercise to pre-empt discussions of the reform taking place elsewhere .
But I am sure the Commission will be taking to heart the points made about the need for more timely and reader-friendly guidelines in the future , although I could not agree that the mid-term review had almost been completed by the time that the guidelines were issued in the present case .
The debate is closed .
The vote will be taken tomorrow at 9.00 a.m.
Security of electronic communications
The next item is the report ( A4-0189 / 98 ) , by Mr Ullmann , on behalf of the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights , on the Communication from the Commission to the Council , the European Parliament , the Economic and Social Committee and the Committee of the Regions on ensuring security and trust in electronic telecommunication - towards a European framework for digital signatures and encryption ( COM ( 97 ) 0503 - C4-0648 / 97 )
Mr President , the core issue of this report is equality of legal status between digital signatures and conventional signatures , and it should be around this issue that the Parliament 's answer to the Commission 's communication on electronic telecommunication and a European framework for digital signatures and encryption is framed .
On close study of this central theme , the possible consequences become apparent immediately .
It all comes down to rules , such as the legal reliability of digital certification - the legality of contracts , for example - , or the integrity of texts exchanged via electronic telecommunication .
They must be admissible as evidence in legal proceedings if they are to be recognized as being equivalent to the conventional written form in this regard , too .
The purpose of my presentation of this report here is not to go into individual details such as how the authentication of signatures , the integrity of text and the confidentiality of transmitted data can be guaranteed using digital techniques .
Rather , I wish to underline the fact that the Commission 's communication represents the preparations for and part of a whole series of legal initiatives , some of which it is in the process of preparing , others of which have already been drawn up , and all of which are directed towards the use of new technologies to develop the single market , in particular in the area of the free movement of goods , services and capital .
The report suggests that Parliament should encourage and support these initiatives energetically .
In terms of digital signatures and encryption , for example , we should back the Commission in following up at least two of the directions outlined in its communication .
In addition , when dealing with the certificates which are already widespread in electronic commerce , the principle of mutual recognition at EU level should be given precedence over any attempts to create a uniform certification process .
It is equally important for Parliament to follow the Commission 's line in allowing the protection of the private sphere to take precedence over tendencies in certain Member States to make state access to digital communications the rule on the grounds of security .
Digital postal services , too , must continue to maintain something akin to the privacy of correspondence in the traditional sense of the term .
I am pleased that the committees which have been involved in the consultation process are voting in the same way .
And although I cannot agree with one of the amendments put forward by the Economic and Social Committee , it is on a point of form rather than one of content .
It deals with the subject of liability which , as I said at the outset , goes beyond the scope of this report .
The Commission will address the subject of liability in the framework directive on electronic commerce .
I shall conclude with the hope that the draft directive on electronic signatures announced by the Commission will be dealt with and adopted as soon as possible in the same spirit of cooperation so that , together with the single currency , the new regulations on electronic commerce can lend extra impetus to the single market .
From the identification marks on imperial mediaeval documents to equal status in law for digital signatures !
In the current climate of globalization is that not a prospect that it is essential to strive for ?
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I too should like to thank the rapporteur very warmly for his report .
We are , I think , agreed that electronic means of communication are developing at such lightning speed that we too must act very quickly in setting up the legal framework for this new type of communication .
We should also welcome the Commission 's decision to set out a European policy for a common framework for digital signatures and encryption , not least because electronic commerce , like all the other possible uses of new technologies , is no longer restricted by national frontiers .
We in the European Union have the possibility of developing just such a joint legal framework .
Given the absolute urgency of the issue , we should welcome the fact that the concrete draft directive is already available as we discuss the preparatory document here today .
However , electronic commerce reaches far beyond the Union , in fact it is already boundless .
This is why we are calling upon the Commission and the Member States to press ahead energetically for agreements at international level .
As has already been mentioned , in dealing with the issue of security and trust in electronic communication there are two core areas for discussion : security and cryptography .
As far as the security of transmitted information is concerned , firstly we must be able to ascertain where a message is coming from , and secondly we must be able to ensure that a message reaches its recipient without having been modified en route .
These questions are of vital importance both for the consumer and in terms of guaranteeing public trust in this method of communication .
This development means an enormous adjustment and an enormous challenge for both the general public and the economy .
People will only use these facilities if the confidentiality of the data they are exchanging is guaranteed and above all , where payment is concerned , if adequate legal security for contracts concluded and money changing hands electronically are guaranteed .
On this point , I should like to make a call for the bodies of the European Union , including the Commission , to take on a pioneering role in the use of electronic signatures , both for internal communication and when exchanging data with third parties .
I believe this would represent an important step towards strengthening people 's trust in digital signatures in particular and in electronic communication in general .
Following on from the last consideration , I should also like to say that we need clear legislation in all Member States giving electronic signatures the same status as conventional signatures .
In any support for a joint policy and the development of electronic commerce in general , however , there will be certain problems which will have to be examined in detail and for which there are various possible solutions .
This is particularly true in the case of liability .
However , I believe that we will be able to solve this problem soon , thereby creating a great potential for new jobs in Europe and for support of the economy .
Mr President , Commissioner , the document presented by the European Commission is a good one , but it is still a document for debate and reflection .
The first observation I would like to make is the urgent need I see for the European Commission to provide momentum and take legislative action in this sector , considering that major legislative initiatives are being taken regarding digital signatures in the world and also in the Union 's Member States themselves .
As Mr van Velzen has already noted , it is in my view important to make a clear distinction between authentication services and confidentiality services .
The need for action is particularly urgent in the case of authentication services and digital signatures .
Common rules or a set of common rules , with legal value , are needed for digital signatures which are at the basis of building up consumer trust and are the foundation of electronic commerce and contracts .
The challenge is great , especially from a cultural point of view : there has to be reeducation of the public and private sectors and a review of certain aspects of administrative law and the law of contracts in order to give substance to the principle that conventional and digital signatures have the same status in law .
The benefit reaped will be a gain in productivity in terms of quantity and quality , especially in processes outside businesses .
This course is necessary to cope with the growing complexity of the wealth-creating process of our society and , if I may say so , to free us from a certain amount of inefficient bureaucracy .
Industry must be behind this process of updating the rules of commerce for the electronic dimension , but governments must also be involved and legislative and political bodies must provide impetus and legitimacy .
In my opinion , the transformation brought about by electronic commerce contains the germ of revolution , and I wonder whether we should not also move beyond the tradition of defining the law through rules and regulations and favour legislation comprising principles and procedures that are therefore more flexible , evolutive and acceptable at global level .
I believe that Commissioner Bangemann 's initiative for the globalization of the information society and international cooperation , sometimes defined as an initiative for a map of the Internet , moves in this direction .
I would like to add that it would be appropriate if we Members of the European Parliament were also to set up a working unit in the Parliament , transversal in relation to the parties and committees , taking advantage of the existing expertise and strengthening coordination with the parliaments of the Member States and , especially with the American and Japanese parliaments .
Today 's debate is without doubt just one chapter , one stage of this process .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , since he has been detained at a meeting , Professor Pompidou has asked me to speak on his behalf and asks you to accept his apologies .
The Ullmann report thrusts us into the centre of the information society and some of its setbacks which we , as Members of the European Parliament , must learn to master .
We have to ensure security and trust in electronic telecommunication , particularly for electronic commerce and economic information .
In both cases , use is made of so-called open networks whose authentication , integrity and confidentiality must be assured .
A report carried out by the STOA at the request of the Committee on Civil Liberties deals with the evaluation of political control techniques .
As regards electronic control , it is important to ensure the validity of contracts and the legal security of the citizen .
At a time when digital signatures now require biometrics , it is important to avoid all attacks on individual liberties , and , in particular , to avoid linking the behaviour of consumers with these physical or even psychological characteristics .
Biometrics makes it possible , in fact , to identity the user thanks to characteristics of the individual 's iris or by simple electronic registration of the user 's signature , and we know how interesting this is for graphologists .
Our aim is to protect civil liberties and to avoid aggressive marketing based on the study of the behaviour of individuals who suffer defamation by electronic means .
Cryptography , that is , the electronic coding of data , has advantages in terms of confidentiality , but it also offers a refuge for organized crime .
The global challenges for society mean that we must reject the all-too-easy recourse to the dissemination of information by means of cryptology .
If we have access to open information , then we must ensure there are no physical or mental constraints on citizens who are weakened and made vulnerable by their ignorance of the complex management systems of electronic information .
The same is true for the risks of unfair competition linked to electronic telecommunication between firms in the face of international competition .
Their electronic telecommunication can be easily handled , that is to say analysed , then synthesised by external observers .
This leads to three questions for the Commission .
Firstly , what role does the Commission give to open electronic information in the context of current world competition ?
Secondly , does it think that European industry suffers a disadvantage because of the existence of observations systems outside the European Union and , therefore , in the service of third countries ?
Thirdly , what steps does the Commission plan to recommend , in particular , as regards suppliers of identified services , in order to further provide security for the telecommunication of European firms , as well as for the electronic commerce for use by individuals ?
Mr President , each day every European citizen becomes more aware that electronic commerce is the commerce of the future .
Solving the associated problems in the field of legal security will be a determining factor in the acceptance of electronic communication by the citizens , but it will also be a precondition for the equality of legal status of digital and conventional signatures .
The rapporteur has given us a comprehensive account of these problems and pointed us in the right direction .
Solutions appear to be possible for both the problems of authentication and integrity .
In my view it is , in fact , the question of confidentiality which will prove difficult to resolve .
However , the speed of technical development in the field of electronics suggests that satisfactory methods will soon be available .
On one hand these will have to meet the requirements of day-to-day use and of data protection , on the other they must not hinder the fight against crime .
It is my view , however , that we should dispense with legal access rules .
Mr President , may I firstly thank the rapporteur for his admirable report and say how encouraging and supportive we find it .
The aim of the communication was to stress the importance of the free availability of cryptographic products and services for consumers and the European industry .
The general answer to Mr Giansily is that we regard it as an important contribution - only one contribution but an important one - to enable European industry to take full advantage internationally of the developments that are currently taking place .
Europe is not at the moment at a disadvantage but the situation is moving rapidly . It will therefore be at a disadvantage unless we take the kind of action that this requires , as well as other actions going beyond this as far as the information society is concerned , whether in international fora or through our own legislation .
If we do that we will not be at a disadvantage .
Indeed , there is need for action .
Other international organisations are very active .
I turn now to the specific field covered by this debate in the field of cryptography .
I agree with the report that because of the global character of the Internet , the international dialogue is of the highest importance .
Within the EU there are several Member States that have engaged in activities in this area and it is undoubtedly the case that if you had divergent legal and technical approaches , that could constitute a serious obstacle to the free circulation of goods and services within the internal market .
That is why a Community policy framework for cryptography is urgently needed .
The report goes along with the view that we have stated very strongly , namely the importance of making a distinction between authentication and integrity services on the one hand and confidentiality services on the other .
That is explicitly stated in our report .
With regard to authentication and integrity services , the first important step is the directive on electronic signatures .
The proposal was sent to Parliament on 1 July .
It is of course in the hands of the Council as well .
The aim is to create a harmonised and appropriate legal framework to facilitate the use of electronic signatures within the Community .
The proposal is in line with the requirements laid down in the report of the European Parliament .
It is an approach which stresses technology neutrality .
A variety of authentication mechanisms is expected to develop and the scope of the directive has to be broad enough to cover the whole spectrum of electronic signatures including digital signatures .
There is also stress on the importance of legal recognition .
The directive should contribute to a harmonised legal framework within the Community by ensuring that electronic signatures are legally recognised in the same way as hand-written signatures .
Importance is also attached to common requirements for certification service providers and certificates and also to the provision of mutual recognition , the introduction of liability rules and cross-border provisions .
In all these aspects the proposal is in line with what is suggested by the report of the European Parliament .
Turning to the question of confidentiality services , here we are talking about the amendment of the dual-use regulation , and that proposal for a Council regulation was adopted by the Commission on 15 May .
The main change was the proposal for notification instead of licensing procedures for intra-Community trade .
At the moment no regulatory activities are foreseen but the Commission will continue examining the proportionality of national restrictions with a view to seeing whether any of them have become obstacles to the proper working of the internal market .
I would like once again to thank Parliament for this supportive report .
I hope we will get the same support for the proposal for a directive and , given the importance of initiative in terms of its impact on growth and employment , I hope Parliament will quickly endorse the proposal .
The debate is closed .
The vote will be taken tomorrow at 9.00 a.m.
( The sitting was closed at 7.45 p.m. )
Approval of the Minutes
The Minutes of the last sitting have been distributed .
Are there any comments ?
Madam President , I notice from the Minutes that Mr Janssen van Raay has very kindly complimented me on my activities on behalf of the back-benchers in this Chamber .
I would like to thank him for his kind words but I would also like to stress that my difference of view with the Bureau was not on a legal point but on a democratic point . I believe that discipline is a matter for the political groups .
I do not believe it is the responsibility of Parliament as an institution .
I also believe that any changes to the allowances payable to Members of this House from the time they were elected in July 1994 be put to the House , rather than imposed by any Bureau of 15 to 16 people .
So my point was different .
I do not believe in pursuing these matters through legal channels .
It is a democratic course which I am intent upon .
But I would like to thank Mr Janssen van Raay for his kind comments yesterday .
Madam President , I should just like to point out that my name is not on yesterday 's attendance register , although I took part in all the votes .
I should be grateful if this could be rectified .
Madam President , my name is not on yesterday 's attendance register , although I was present , and took part in all of yesterday 's roll-call votes .
May I ask that this be rectified ?
Madam President , item 1 of yesterday 's Minutes states that I made clear that I had intended to vote against in most votes .
I should like to make it clear that I actually did vote in both of those votes and voted against . But this was not registered in the Minutes .
Madam President , I would also like to refer to the Minutes regarding what my friend , Mr Janssen van Raay , said about mandatory attendance at votes and the relevant sanctions .
It is very unpleasant when you arrive here on Monday and see several Members being rebuked at the Members ' cash office , embarrassed by the officials telling them that they will be penalized for several days of this part-session because they did not attend the vote .
I believe this is an erosion of individuality and of our integrity as Members of European Parliament .
Can you think of a means , as long as this measure still exists , where the punishment - and that is what it is - does not take place en plein public by officials at the Member 's cash office ?
That is my question to you .
Madam President , I have just one comment to make on the subject of punishing officials : the poor people in the cash office are not to blame .
If anyone should be punished it is those at the top , whose faces are never seen .
That is what we should be demanding .
And a number of other elected officials should be punished ; I do not mean you , but someone else .
Madam President , I would like to inform the House that another Commission official was mugged in Leopold Park , probably by the same group which mugged Mr Macartney .
I have taken note of that .
Today is the last part-session .
I hope that emotions will stop running quite so high , that there will be no more red faces and that we can now move to the vote .
( The Minutes were approved )
Votes
Madam President , a few minutes ago you reported that there were corrections to all languages .
I am a bit puzzled by that because , if the original language has been changed , at what stage in the procedure was it changed ?
We shall ask for that to be checked and you will receive a written answer .
I enthusiastically support this report .
For the last few years as a frequent traveller with Sabena , I and my fellow passengers have endured lost luggage , delayed flights , tremendously over-booked planes , rude staff - especially in Brussels - incompatible computer systems ( even within one company ) and a level of inconvenience which , if associated with a major retailer , would have produced consumer resistance and bankruptcy a long time ago .
It is therefore about time that consumers were able to exercise some control over the activities of such rogue companies .
This report , though not perfect , goes some way to achieving that and that is why I support it .
The question of compensation in the event of overbooking flights is not a matter for the EU or the European Parliament .
It is a matter that should be resolved by the airlines and the airline organizations .
I have therefore voted against the report .
I welcome this report , though I doubt if the airline that I fly with regularly , Sabena , does .
If overbooking was the only fault then I suppose the airline could improve . But when you add lost luggage , delayed flights and poor service , then there is a serious problem .
While this report goes some way to rectifying one problem , there has to be action to tackle the others .
Howitt report ( A4-0214 / 98 )
I should like to declare my wholehearted support for a report which aims to step up the fight against organized crime in all its forms .
Europe needs common rules and increased cooperation in the areas of law and the police , but , above all , Europe needs shared convictions .
Of course , we need to protect individual freedom and increase legal protection , but it is also necessary to ensure that criminals do not have better protection than their victims .
There is already awareness of this in Europe .
But the Council still has a long way to go .
Practical legislative and technical measures must be adopted and , in order to do so , we need a more political Europe , a citizens ' Europe , in order to prevent crime which is often camouflaged behind companies and by financial and economic channels .
The Orlando report is taking us in the right direction , and I support it .
We must now go further , and do more , more quickly !
The Council has proposed a joint action with regard to the methods of cooperation between Member States in the fight against organized crime .
We are delighted that this type of cooperation is being established at intergovernmental level , as it cannot fail to have a positive effect on the fight against international crime and will increase the efficiency of the police and the law in Member States .
On the other hand , the treatment of the Council 's proposals by this Parliament 's Committee on Civil Liberties and Internal Affairs is extremely worrying .
The committee has disfigured the Council 's proposal , by systematically amending the provisions which ensure respect for national legislation and , therefore , the sovereignty of Member States .
It is certainly not the business of this Parliament to give an opinion on this type of issue , nor is it Parliament 's business to recognize the competency of the European Court of Justice by means of Amendment No 13 to Article 4 .
The Court of Justice cannot be considered competent on this subject in any capacity . The Council 's proposal adopts the principle of an intergovernmental procedure , which implies that Member States themselves are competent , by means of their respective legal systems , with regard to the interpretation of the joint action and the settlement of any disputes concerning its implementation .
It is impossible to envisage that , due to this joint action , persons under the Member States ' jurisdiction with whom they are understandably unlikely to agree , should be able to bring the Member States before the Court of Justice !
We are , therefore , totally opposed to the proposals of the Orlando report on principle and for practical reasons .
Elchlepp report ( A4-0227 / 98 )
Exchanges and joint projects in the area of vocational training are especially important during the period of difficult economic adjustment .
As we have said , cooperation programmes must be organized in a balanced way in both directions .
For educational exchanges with the Czech Republic , this means not only encouraging mobility from the Czech Republic , but motivating and supporting teachers , pupils and students wishing to experience the Czech Republic at first hand .
It goes without saying that central and eastern European countries can secure places on these exchanges by making their own financial contribution .
However , we must take care here , as we did with the long-term SME programme , to ensure that the Community can provide additional finance from PHARE programme funds .
And even if we ensure in general terms that partner countries are able to make their own contributions , we must react efficiently in exceptional circumstances .
I can still see the floods in the Czech Republic in my mind 's eye a year later .
The economic effects were devastating .
In this respect , I fully and wholeheartedly welcome the present proposal to use additional PHARE funds to guarantee further cooperation .
It is an active step in the direction of the Europeanization of the EU .
Macartney report ( A4-0249 / 98 )
The Group of Independents for a Europe of Nations supports the fisheries agreement between the European Union and the Islamic Federal Republic of the Comoros .
France is directly involved in this agreement as it relates to 21 French tuna seiners .
However , we wish to point out that we are opposed to Amendment No 5 because it asks the Commission to submit a comprehensive report on the state of fish stocks , on the application and conditions of implementation of the agreement , and on its impact on vocational training .
However , in reality , the fisheries agreement confers a right for a given number of boats to fish for a specific tonnage .
The measures accompanying the fisheries agreement are political and technical guidelines and European institutions should not unilaterally assume the right to regulate measures which fall exclusively within the national competency of the Islamic Federal Republic of the Comoros .
To conclude , the fisheries agreement should , therefore , not undermine the national sovereignty of one of the European Union 's partners .
Amendment No 6 states that the Council authorizes the Commission to start negotiations with a view to the adoption of protocols implementing the agreement .
We are of course in favour of the Commission being authorized to negotiate the agreement , but we are against the extension of its mandate to cover implementing protocols .
The Council must remain in charge .
Once against , the federalist majority of the European Parliament is trying to strip the Council of its powers and transfer them to the Commission , a bureaucratic body , which is not democratically controlled .
Finally , this fisheries agreement highlights the problem of the supply of tuna to the European Union , since it focuses on a reference tonnage of 45 000 tonnes per annum for our domestic market only .
I should therefore like to reiterate that I am totally opposed to the decision to prohibit the use of drift gillnets inasmuch as they are mainly used to fish tuna in Atlantic , where fish stocks are healthy .
The arguments relating to the protection of marine mammals are groundless because the drift gillnet is a selective type of fishing gear , as has been demonstrated by scientific studies , based on recognized reliable methodologies .
Fight against crime
The next item is the report ( A4-0222 / 98 ) by Mr Orlando , on behalf of the Committee on Civil Liberties and Internal Affairs , on the draft Joint Action adopted by the Council on the basis of Article K.3 of the Treaty on European Union concerning arrangements for cooperation between Member States in respect of the identification , tracing , freezing or seizing and confiscation of instrumentalities and the proceeds from crime ( 6490 / 98 -C4-0184 / 98-98 / 0909 ( CNS ) ) .
Madam President , this draft joint action aims to strengthen cooperation in the identification , tracing , freezing , seizing and confiscation of instrumentalities and the proceeds from crime .
It is another step forward along the road traced in Dublin in 1996 and continued at the Amsterdam Summit in 1997 .
The European institutions are becoming more and more aware of organized crime and the need for coordination to fight it .
I consider it only right to mention the contributions from the general report by Mrs Cederschiöld and the report by Mr Schulz and Mr Bontempi .
I also feel obliged to recall the previous joint action programmes for which I had the opportunity to be rapporteur .
First , I must mention the mechanism to evaluate the application and implementation at national level of international undertakings in the fight against organized crime , a joint action programme already approved by the Council of Ministers on 4 November 1997 .
I also believe it right and proper to recall the Falcone programme , which provides for the updating and sharing of experiences and information between judges , law enforcement officials , the institutions and Member States as well as the candidate states seeking membership .
This programme was approved by the Council of Ministers on 19 March 1998 .
This is a joint action programme that provides the first definition , accepted internationally , of a mafia association and participation in it , approved by the Council on 28 May 1998 .
This programme , which is being examined today by the European Parliament , provides for forms of cooperation between Member States and the extension of legislation that has had positive results in certain European countries , including Italy .
It develops the suggestion by the Amsterdam Council that recalled how important it was for each Member State to have well-developed and wide-ranging legislation on the confiscation of the proceeds from crime and related money laundering .
The proposed text , with the related amendments , aims to deal with criminal organizations by getting hold of their assets .
The fight against organized crime certainly involves the use of weapons and the participation of institutions , but it also and especially has to be dealt with from a financial approach .
The mafia , like all forms of organized crime , enter the legal sphere through financial channels .
The draft provides for the seizing , freezing and subsequent legal confiscation of both material and immaterial , movable and immovable assets obtained through illegal activities .
For this reason , the action plan ends by explaining its precautionary and purely repressive effects , and it concerns not only immovable assets but also and especially movable assets , current bank accounts , stocks and bonds , stakes in companies and financial transactions .
The aim is to disrupt criminal organizations by getting at their assets , because striking a blow to their assets certainly means developing an effective strategy in the fight against organized crime .
Indeed , it has already been fully demonstrated that a godfather or mafia boss in prison but with access to his assets was far more dangerous than one who was out of prison but who could not continue his illegal activities through lack of a solid economic and financial basis .
In other words , the strong arm of criminal organizations can be effectively weakened by merely cutting off the financial arm that , precisely because it is usually the most hidden , is in general dangerously underestimated and in any case not known to investigators .
In this joint action programme , a series of rational measures are proposed to speed up and facilitate actions of collaboration between the legal authorities and police forces of the various countries , taking into account the need to reduce the amount of time between legal practices and the transfer of illegal assets .
Such action is particularly topical in view of monetary integration ; with the euro , Europe has a great opportunity before it .
Like with all great actions , this one has its risks : in this case , the risk is that Europe will become a great washing machine to launder money .
This situation can be avoided through serious international cooperation and can certainly be overcome through cooperation and the creation of a common judicial and legal area .
The illusion that money has no smell vanishes when the origin is crime and violence , meaning illegal funds , and when illegal money clearly disrupts a market economy and prevents financial markets and banks from operating in an orderly fashion .
Illegal money costs too much and at the same time too little ; too much in ethical and criminal terms and too little in economic terms , thus contrasting sharply with the principle of competition .
I conclude by expressing my appreciation for the constructive contribution offered to the Committee on Civil Liberties and Internal Affairs in relation to the text originally proposed .
Madam President , in the action plan on organized crime , it was decided that the search for and seizure of proceeds from criminal operations should be strengthened .
The European Parliament supported the proposal , and the same trend is found in other parts of the world .
The net is now being pulled tighter around drug dealers and international organized crime .
A series of legislative acts will contribute to this .
The piece of legislation in this case is not particularly detailed , but the committee has attempted to clarify and strengthen it with the good help of the rapporteur , and not least with Palacio Vallelersundi 's well-known legal expertise .
There may still be reason for the Council to return to the issue , namely , to the question of how the seized money should be handled .
Here the Council is proposing measures relating to handling , procedure and possibilities of emergency measures , as well as a network of contact points to prevent the disappearance of the assets of serious organized crime , such as drug dealing .
There will be investment in training .
However , we must have understanding for the fact that the Council is hastening slowly in this area , as there are fundamental integrity aspects that must be respected and human rights to be considered .
The balance must be maintained between the protection of integrity and the effectiveness of the fight against crime .
It is also important for the citizens of each country to have a sense of legal certainty , that is , that they know their law is respected .
This requires the protection of the individual .
Irrespective of the political objectives , confusion in the principles of law and order can never be justified by political objectives .
When my report on organized crime concerning the action plan was debated , Parliament voted almost unanimously for the victims of crime funds proposed there in the case of assets that could not be returned to their rightful owner , or when so many countries have been involved in the action and seizure that it is impossible to divide the proceeds in a reasonable manner .
The Council has still not given its opinion on this proposal .
There is reason to come back to this , and the victims of crime should be involved in this context .
In this matter , there are good examples within the Union on which to base the construction of a network .
Some specification of what should happen to the assets must be initiated in any case .
Because the Council has waited for the Parliamentary reading to reach a decision on this matter , it will also have a more complete basis on which to make a decision , as Parliament has developed its reasoning .
In the same way , it could be advantageous to issue a slim piece of legislation which functioned as a political barometer , picking up important ideas in the area of victims of crime which might be worth using .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , this report has a political significance which transcends the actual content .
Why ?
Because the rapporteur has understood exactly how to highlight where the difficulties lie .
He points out how uncommonly difficult the Member States and the Council find it to take a truly political stance on questions of judicial cooperation , especially in the criminal sector .
This is a central point which the rapporteur makes clear in his critique and for that we are grateful to him .
I really have trouble believing that the draft actually states and I quote , " no concrete proposals for improving legal provisions in this area ' and that it does nothing to further the action plan .
It is a declaration of political bankruptcy by the Council and the Member States in an uncommonly sensitive political area because , as we all know , cooperation and integration are not needed just for the internal market and it is perfectly clear that the criminals are several jumps ahead of the political institutions when it comes to making decisions and solving problems .
This is the background against which the Council has submitted this ridiculous proposal to us .
This needs to be said , because it is the Council which is the legislator , not us .
Judicial questions and criminal law are normally the bread and butter of parliamentarianism and yet we only make a moderate consultative contribution .
I would , therefore , like to thank the rapporteur for his extremely critical comments in the report on the involvement of Parliament , especially in the explanatory statement .
It is extremely important in this context , I feel , for the committee and the rapporteur and , I hope , the full House , to respond to this uncommonly meagre Council proposal with proper legislative , substantive work .
I think it is important for the European Parliament to get things moving on the content side .
It is most welcome that the rapporteur and the committee have made up their minds to do so .
I think we should take this opportunity to stress how strikingly inadequate the powers of the European Parliament are under the third pillar and how they need to be strengthened .
This is clear from this example and we must ensure that political decisions are taken and institutional conclusions are drawn in this area in line with social developments .
The report proves this and the rapporteur has my wholehearted thanks .
Madam President , firstly may I add my congratulations for the rapporteur , Mr Leoluca Orlando , because he has produced a very good piece of work - as everyone acknowledges - and has highlighted - as has also previously been mentioned - the need to go ahead with a form of European construction that covers all necessary dimensions , that is to say , one which places emphasis not only on the economic side but also , and more particularly , on the social and legal side and the financial aspects , which are also important .
Mr Orlando has tried to correct that imbalance and for that reason our group will vote in favour of all his amendments to this proposal .
We are concerned because , to be precise , we perceive a kind of difference between the treatment of certain acts of minor significance and that of major problems such as organized crime and its disastrous consequences for society , culture , young people , etcetera .
That difference in treatment shows that the Council has not risen to the occasion .
And it is important to act against these organized groups of criminals , characterized , among other things , by their financial strength and also by the fact that they have firms of legal advisers who are highly skilled in exploiting the byways , cracks and loopholes that exist in national and international law .
For that reason , the European Union needs to be more precise and more forceful where these groups are concerned .
We also find some of the practical amendments - Amendments Nos 6 , 7 , 10 , 15 and 16 , which seem to us to be aimed at the central issue - very positive .
In that respect , Amendment No 6 - on free and direct access by Member States to information held by another state - seems important to us because it will speed up the work of prosecuting this type of crime .
The same is true for Amendment No 7 , on the court decisions that shall be required during the process of identifying illegal assets , in order to be able to infringe the protected rights of persons or institutions that have committed this type of crime , and for Amendment No 10 , on the preparation of a catalogue of data which legal requests for confiscating instrumentalities and freezing the proceeds from crime must contain .
Another important amendment is Amendment No 16 , on the need for states to take the necessary measures to be able to act in coordination with one another .
We do not , however , agree with Amendments Nos 20 , 21 and 22 , because we feel Mr Orlando 's text is more precise .
For that reason , as we have said , we fully agree with the rapporteur , and we congratulate him .
Madam President , I shall be brief . We , the Greens , have always criticized the concept of organized crime as a hotch-potch of mafia structures , terrorism and whatnot on to which government authorities project their particular form of government , whereas in reality it is an irregular variation on the capitalistic enrichment process .
The question of civil liberties must carry more weight than the question of property rights .
We therefore take the opposite approach to that of the present regulation , which is why we have already refused once in the past to endorse an Orlando report which we felt went too far on this point .
On this question , that is , the question of infringing property rights in connection with irregular capitalistic enrichment processes , we are of the firm opinion that Mr Orlando has simply expressed the common sense view and we support the report on all points .
We also find the proposals of the Group of the European People 's Party sensible and worthy of support .
In the final analysis , a " godfather ' who is in prison but is managing his criminal assets from prison is far more dangerous than a godfather running around free but with no assets .
That is the decisive factor and in this respect the proper start has been made .
It is amazing just how hesitant the Commission is on the whole question , which is why we again have the wrong emphasis in the regulation .
We need to regulate a fair exchange on the extended internal market because that is the only way of preventing the growth of the criminal cancer produced by the normal capitalist enrichment process .
Madam President , the Orlando report deals with a joint action of the Council in the framework of the detailed action plan to fight organized crime as adopted in June 1997 by the European Council .
The Orlando report was quite negative about this proposal concerning the cooperation of Member States in the area of identification , tracing , freezing or seizing and confiscation of the instrumentalities and proceeds from crime .
According to this report , the Council has not satisfied a single demand of the detailed action plan : the requirement from Policy Guideline 11 - including the improvement of the legal regulations of Member States and the implementation of special procedures - and Recommendation 26 ( c ) - confiscation regardless of the physical presence of the violator - are not incorporated in this action .
I believe these allegations are too strong .
The action is based on Article K.3 of the Treaty of European Union , intended to implement the action plan , specifically concerning Recommendation 26 ( b ) .
Briefly summarized , this states that a study must be carried out to speed up the tracing and seizure of illegal assets and the implementation of decisions concerning confiscation .
In fact , the joint action provides a sizable impulse for this .
Expectations that a European system would be immediately established go much too far and would not even be compatible with the political objectives of the action plan .
They would perhaps be compatible with the political objectives of Parliament , but in that case we could not base our argument on the action plan to show that the Council is wrong .
Cooperation in the area of the administration of justice does not proceed very easily at European level ; that is true .
But this also concerns the heart of the national Member States .
With such measures , one strikes very close to the sovereignty of the states .
The action is based on Article K.3 of the Treaty on European Union .
Parliament has therefore advisory authority .
It is unclear to me why the proposal is being handled as if Parliament had approval authority .
In terms of their content , I can agree with many of the amendments , but in view of the intention of this action of the Council , the amendments to Article 4 actually go much too far and are too detailed .
I have real difficulty with Amendment No 13 , which provides for the European Court of Justice to be given the competence , among other things , to interpret this action and the disputes surrounding its application .
This concerns an action in the framework of the third pillar .
The Court has no jurisdiction here unless the Member States themselves come to an agreement and approve this limitation of their freedom of policy .
Although I do not disapprove of the content of many of the amendments , I still cannot support this report , because I believe it does not belong here .
However , I fully endorse the proposal for a joint action from the Council .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , there is no doubt that with this report we are moving in the direction of cooperation between Member States in the fight against crime and , fortunately , we have a certain consensus on this subject .
We must not forget that crime has increased significantly in Europe over the last 50 years .
In France , for example , the number of crimes and offences has increased from 500 000 in 1950 to over 4.5 million at the present time .
This is an increase which is out of all proportion with the demographic development of the country .
I have used this example because it is one I know well , but I am sure that in most European countries , there has been a similar increase .
This is extremely worrying .
Quite obviously , the aim of most crimes is to take possession of property illegally . We therefore need to fight against crime by hitting out against it economically , against the proceeds of crime and the assets of criminals .
That is therefore the aim of this report .
European cooperation in the fight against the crime , in this particular area , is thus very important .
One of the defects of our crime prevention procedures is their slowness , and the aim of several articles and amendments included in this report is , specifically , to accelerate the procedures relating to the identification , tracing , freezing or seizing and confiscation of the proceeds from crime .
All these measures have our full support .
However , we believe that the initial text of Article 4 should be maintained , because European cooperation should , of course , comply with national legislation , and also with the principle of subsidiarity enshrined in the Treaty on European Union .
Some amendments , such as Amendment No 4 , make some very useful specific changes to a legislative proposal which nevertheless remains extremely general in scope .
With this report , we are therefore moving in the right direction . We shall vote in favour of it , but without a doubt , the action taken by Member States is still very ineffective due to the sheer scale of economic activities linked with crime .
European policy mirrors the policies of the Member States or of most Member States , and at the moment , it is hopelessly adequate .
Mr President , I congratulate Mr Orlando on his courage and his report .
It is a timely one .
European criminals , like European industry , have cottoned on to the advantages of the free movement of goods , services , capital and people .
Drugs , prostitution , dirty money and those smuggling illegal immigrants all benefit from the single market .
The forces of law and order must cooperate as do Europe 's criminals and harmonise their procedures .
Mr Orlando 's report helps us to start this process .
We can only hope that the Council of Ministers pays some attention .
I should also like to suggest a couple of other very simple practical steps we could take to deal with organized crime .
Mr Oostlander and I recently attended an international police conference in Holland .
The issue raised there with the two of us was the idea of using the transition to the euro as an opportunity for detecting and intercepting dirty money coming from organized crime .
Those with their ill-gotten gains in francs , Deutschmarks or pesetas in safe deposit boxes - or even under the bed ! - will have at some time during the transition to the euro to change this money and that is when we will have our opportunity to identify it .
The police at the conference suggested the establishment of a European-wide special unit to detect such transactions - maybe based on Europol which is responsible now for dealing with the trans-European problems of drugs and terrorism .
Along with this , the requirement to report to the authorities the conversion of large amounts of cash from one currency to another needs to be harmonised .
At the moment in many countries only suspicious transactions have to be reported , and it may be sensible to harmonise this procedure and make it tougher .
The people of Europe would welcome such a step and we should seize this opportunity .
Not to do so would be a mistake .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I consider it fundamental to support with determination the fight against mafia organizations and fully agree with the draft joint action adopted by the Council .
But I am personally against the approach taken in the Orlando legislative proposal , in that this proposal is extremely prejudicial to the liberty and institutional guarantees of any citizen under investigation and is a step backward in time and history .
I am very concerned about this .
To promote this position would have one immediate effect : citizens would only need to be accused of involvement in mafia activities to have their assets and property confiscated and be ruined economically before any sentence of condemnation .
I remind you that we are talking about precautionary measures here .
And Italy has already been censured on several occasions by the Court of Justice for the extreme length of its trials .
The definition of a few basic principles aimed to improve international cooperation - but which also has major consequences at judicial level - must be in keeping with the preventive opinion of our Parliament 's Committee on Legal Affairs , even if the amendments tabled by Mrs Palacio seek to deal with this shortcoming .
To approve this proposal , ladies and gentlemen , means returning to the Middle Ages and the Inquisition , wiping out once and for all the social gains concerning freedom and the guarantee of defence of accused citizens who , for all the courts of civil states , are presumed innocent until a final sentence of condemnation .
I therefore appeal to your wisdom , ladies and gentlemen , and propose that the text be referred back to the Committee on Legal Affairs , which was unable to express its own opinion , so that guarantees for European citizens can be incorporated into the proposal .
Madam President , Commissioner , the fight against crime comes high up , sometimes at the top , of most opinion polls about what people think the EU should , among other things , concern itself with .
This is a report of the kind which discusses how crime and criminal activity should be prevented through effective cooperation between the Member States .
Firstly , I would like to say that it relates to intergovernmental cooperation .
It is about tracing and seizing financial assets arising from such crime .
It also relates to getting Member States to ratify conventions and the resolution on the laundering of drugs money , etcetera .
Some keywords I see in this include access to information between the Member States , high priority in the form of rapid processing of applications for the seizure , rapid action , personal contacts between investigators , judges , etcetera and simple procedures whilst upholding legal certainty .
This is an issue which is extremely sensitive for many Member States .
Issues of crime , punishment , police and prosecutors are the foundation of the legislation of many nation states .
It is , therefore , important to do nothing that is viewed as an infringement of national sovereignty .
In my opinion , this includes Amendment No 13 , which proposes that Member States should recognize the Court of Justice as the competent authority on the interpretation of Article 4 .
Article 4 concerns questions regarding appeals , damages and suchlike that are often purely matters for the civil court , particularly questions of damages .
There is no reason to involve the Court of Justice in this cooperation .
This is therefore something that I am against .
Aside from this , the report is excellent .
We in the ELDR Group support it , on my part with the exception of Amendment No 13 .
Mr President , in my view , organized crime stems first and foremost from the unaccountable free market , the so-called free , and henceforth , global economy .
This form of crime flourishes , organizes itself , expands and takes on giant proportions in direct proportion to the increasing unaccountability of the free market and in direct proportion to the extent to which the free market spreads and gains in stature .
They are two parallel phenomena and one affects the other .
Despite that , we are not radically opposed to the measures recommended by the Council and in Mr Orlando 's report .
We feel that they represent a step ; we consider that this form of coordination and cooperation between Member States is needed if we are to deal with what is , subjectively and objectively , a united front on the part of a form of organized crime which acts with the means at its disposal and is based on huge quantities of dirty money .
So these measures are all well and good and are improved by Mr Orlando 's amendments and the amendments tabled by a number of other Members .
However , we consider , first , that a great deal of care is needed .
One Member said earlier , and I agree with her , that these procedural , criminal and other administrative measures may have the opposite of the intended effect and could strangle civil liberties and the rights of the individual .
We must be careful not to go too far .
And we would vote for them if the vote , if the council resolution could provide an absolute , categorical guarantee that there no mistakes will be made to the detriment of civil liberties .
Lastly , I would like to say , Mr President , that we are fighting a form of organized crime which acts , as I said , within the framework of the free market and which has allies in the banking system , in the police and in the courts .
It has penetrated and corrupted all these institutions .
So if we want to fight it , we have to stop treating the symptoms . We have to deal with the underlying causes .
We have to cauterize the points at which dirty money feeds and where the process is initiated .
We cannot fight organized crime while the sources of corruption , I repeat , from the top of the political leadership of parties sometimes , the courts , the police , the administrative authorities are involved in organized crime .
Mr President , I consider Mr Orlando 's report excellent , and the direction that he gave it is a very positive framework with which to move forward in the effective fight against organized crime .
I see absolutely no threats to individual liberties , I only see the request for effective collaboration that must be pursued with adequate instruments .
These suggestions exist in the amendments and in the direction given by Mr Orlando .
I would not like a kind of obsessive focus on the problems of personal liberty to cover up and protect certain distinct positions that should instead be pursued with great determination .
In conclusion , I fully support the report and the amendments by Mr Orlando .
Mr President , it is clear that this draft joint action is good .
The report which has been produced is good .
However , I believe the moment of truth will come fairly soon when we look at the implementation of the action plan to combat organized crime , etcetera .
The Internal Affairs Council adopts joint action after joint action without this necessarily involving a great deal .
If we look at the situation regarding the application of conventions in the same area , we see that the situation is pitiful .
Conventions have been approved , but very few of them have come into force .
What is the situation with these joint actions which are almost rhetorical ?
I believe we are approaching a situation where there is a very large difference between the words that are uttered about cooperation and what actually takes place .
That is what I mean by the moment of truth in these important areas : legal cooperation and the fight against organized crime .
We repeat situations where Member States do not in fact comply with what has been said in the convention areas which already exist .
How is it with this then ?
I do , however , believe in the power of example , and hope that people will in fact succeed in cooperating .
Furthermore , I would like to say that I , unlike my colleague Mr Lindqvist , support the proposal that the Court of Justice should have authority in this area .
Without wishing to refer the matter back to committee , I do , however , regret that the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights was not consulted on this area , that we have not had the opportunity to express ourselves .
However , it is now too late , and I am not demanding that it be referred back .
Mr President , first I would like to thank the rapporteur for his consistent action in the fight against crime .
The adversary , however , is " organized crime ' and should not be underestimated . It is an adversary which a priori has the upper hand due to a lack of legal constraints and against which the Union must arm itself with the best legal weapons .
That is why we must join the rapporteur in ruing the lack of concrete proposals in the measure submitted for improving legal provisions in the Member States .
Given the rising crime rates , I find the reservations shown difficult to understand .
Even in Austria , where the matter is regulated more or less along the lines advocated by the rapporteur , I have for this very reason criticized provisions which I felt went too far in dispensing with what we refer to as levies on enrichment and forfeiture , as counter-productive and mafiafriendly , precisely because it is swift action against the financial proceeds of criminal organizations which is effective .
That is why we welcome the proposed improvements .
Mr President , continuing training for officials is important .
Permanent training and continuing training are at the root of efficient action .
We urgently need to improve infrastructures , especially that of the investigation authorities .
But research into investigation methods and information on groups of persons and organizations are equally important .
However , are we a good example in our own field ?
What is our track record on fighting crime in and around our Parliament .
People are constantly being mugged , our offices are broken into and things are stolen from our desks .
I think we need to review the ECU 16.7 million spent on security for Parliament .
What is our track record on cooperation with the French , Belgian and Luxembourg authorities as far as our own security is concerned ?
Mr President , we in the Commission welcome today 's debate on the means of seizing and confiscating the proceeds of crime .
We are grateful to the rapporteur , Mr Orlando , for the work that he has done and particularly his suggestions for improving the draft joint action which is still being considered by the Council .
When the Council considers the matter , it might do well to bear clearly in mind that , according to the opinion polls , there are huge majorities of people in every single Member State who support maximum coordination , legal action and cooperation against international crime .
In this respect at least , the public demonstrates that it is rather ahead of politicians ' thinking on the issue , though sadly not quite as far ahead as the criminals .
The Commission very much agrees with the general thrust of Mr Orlando 's report , which aims to strengthen the commitments to combat money laundering and confiscate the proceeds of crime .
Clearly , to fight organized crime effectively , it is important to have international instruments that are not merely based on ' best endeavour ' undertakings but are authentic and welldefined legal obligations that can protect society and deter or , indeed , punish the villains .
I particularly agree with Mr Orlando when he stresses that Member States which have not already done so should ratify the Council of Europe 's 1990 Convention on laundering , search , seizure and confiscation of the proceeds of crime .
In fact Member States should endeavour to ratify all the conventions to which they have agreed , within the promised deadlines .
The conventions and protocols on the fight against fraud and corruption have , for instance , been awaiting ratification for more than two years .
My Commission colleagues and I hope that governments will now live up to their commitments and national parliaments will press for ratification .
In their own interests , Member States should also comply fully with the requirements of the Community directive on combating money laundering and implement the recommendations produced by the task-force on money laundering in 1996 .
The Commission also endorses the amendments which improve the way in which direct cooperation in legal assistance is offered .
We also support the introduction of deadlines in the procedures and a better definition of the requirements to be fulfilled in order to offer judicial assistance between the Member States .
The Commission is aware of the need to balance effective measures against money laundering with protection of individuals ' genuine rights .
We therefore welcome Mr Orlando 's proposals to ensure that those who wrongly suffer loss as a result of such measures will be entitled to claim compensation .
Criminals would not observe individual civil rights so scrupulously , but , as democrats , we naturally have to demonstrate superiority in this respect .
We are also sympathetic to the idea of including a review clause with a date for checking whether the joint action could be further strengthened .
We suggest the end of 1999 or perhaps the end of the year 2000 so that there is a specific date , rather than a relatively vague open-ended commitment .
As the House will know , the issue of efforts to combat organized crime was carefully considered at the open debate of the Council of Justice and Home Affairs Ministers last May , and the Cardiff Summit also made a clear statement on the subject .
Mindful of these activities and of our own strong feelings , the Commission will do its utmost to include forceful references to the matter in the action plan on freedom , security and justice which has to be submitted to the European Council in Vienna next December .
Naturally , we continue to count on the support of this Parliament in shaping further progress in this important area now covered by the Treaty of Amsterdam .
Thank you , Mr Kinnock .
The debate is closed .
We shall now proceed to vote .
Before the vote on Amendment No 13
Mr President , may I ask the rapporteur a question on this point ?
Mr Blokland maintains that this would be overstepping the contractual mark .
If you look closely at the amendment , it contains a proposal to the effect that the Member States agree between themselves to cooperate in this way .
Perhaps the rapporteur could give an opinion on this ?
Mr Wolf , if the rapporteur had asked to speak as rapporteur , I would immediately have allowed him to speak .
There is no doubt about that .
But it is my view that Mr Orlando is not obliged to give an opinion at the request of another Member if he does not wish to do so .
And , since he does not wish to do so , we shall continue with the vote .
( Parliament adopted the legislative resolution )
Mr President , I truly welcome the fact that we have been giving the subject of money laundering increasing attention over recent months , but I feel that we should include this matter more intensively in the accession strategy , in the structured dialogue and in accession negotiations .
There has been a return to a proper rule of law in the countries of central and eastern Europe following decades of socialist enrichment , but this process is being massively abused by powers in the EU and by the old and new structures in the countries of central and eastern Europe in order to launder money .
We need to tackle this matter , which is why I welcome the fact that the Austrian President-in-Office of the Council will be coming to Brussels next week with his Minister for Justice , Mr Michalek , and his Minister for Foreign Affairs , Mr Schlögl .
We can only hope that they do not walk through Leopold Park ; but otherwise we welcome the fact that we will be able to refocus on the matter .
Participation of the Czech Republic in Community programmes ( training , youth and education )
The next item is the report ( A4-0227 / 98 ) by Mr Elchlepp , on behalf of the Committee on Culture , Youth , Education and the Media , on the proposal for a Council Decision concerning the Community position within the Association Council on the participation of the Czech Republic in Community programmes in the fields of training , youth and education ( COM ( 98 ) 0093 - C4-0161 / 98-98 / 0067 ( CNS ) ) .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , it truly is wonderful that young people from the countries of central and eastern Europe can now take part in European exchange and training programmes even before their countries become full members .
I personally witnessed the huge expectations of and commitment to the programmes in the Czech Republic during recent talks with members of parliament and the government in Prague .
I really must stress here that educational exchanges with central and eastern European countries will not be a one-way street and exchanges will work in both directions .
Young people from Prague , Budapest and Warsaw are prevented by the division of Europe from taking advantage of training possibilities in London , Paris , Bologna and elsewhere , while young people from the EU are deterred from spending a year in Poland , Romania or the Czech Republic .
This should become a matter of course and we should motivate young people to do it .
I hope that even more study courses will be set up which offer this as an integral part of the course .
I would also like to stress that the inclusion of these countries in the training programme is , first and foremost , an important component in supporting the enlargement process .
Enlargement towards the east is not merely an economic process ; it is a gigantic learning curve for us all .
It involves building trust and breaking down the prejudices which have failed to disappear now that the borders are open and which are , unfortunately , harboured by forces both here and in these countries which are basically opposed to European integration .
Nor should the significance of the transfer of know-how be underestimated .
Personal exchanges of experience in teaching , science , vocational training and teacher training are an excellent driving force during the difficult adjustment process on the path towards full membership and are usually more important than investing in material assets .
For the rest , they also help to prepare young people for the mobility needed on a larger European job market .
We must make sure as a matter of priority that participation in the programmes increases steadily over coming years .
There is another point which I would like to stress . During our talks in Prague , it was suggested that representatives of the central and eastern European countries should be offered the opportunity to attend the EU training programme accompanying committees .
I would like expressly to support this move and to ask the Commission to support it , because personal cooperation in committees represents an important step towards integration and offers our partners in these countries an excellent opportunity to become acquainted with the complex EU administration and programme structures at a specialist level .
The financial resources available to candidate countries are limited .
As I have said , we must ensure that the numbers of people involved in exchanges increase still further over coming years .
More the pity that , now of all times , the Council of Finance Ministers has tabled a proposal to reduce the funds for Leonardo by two-thirds from ECU 140 million to ECU 40 million next year .
It is downright scandalous .
This is especially true given all the full-blown announcements at the Cardiff Summit as to how we want to pursue an active employment policy , focus on European qualifications , facilitate mobility on the European job market and push on with the integration of central and eastern European countries .
As we heard from the President-in-Office of the Council in this House just two days ago , all this is to become reality .
This reduction applies yet again to training policy to be exact , to vocational training more precisely , money is being refused to the weakest on the job market but not to industry-related media programmes .
Surely the public must get the impression that this is a dishonest policy .
I am outraged and ashamed when I think of the multitude of good , cross-border projects set up by companies , training institutes and technical colleges which will now have to be cancelled and of the dashed hopes of young people who , perhaps for the first time in their lives , might have been able to finish part of their vocational training in another country .
Given the imminent enlargement of the EU towards the East and the increase in the number of candidates , the question of funding for EU programmes is already becoming even more urgent .
Now there is a risk that de facto training projects and candidates from central and eastern European countries will have to compete with projects and candidates from the EU for even less funding .
It does not create a very good impression .
I therefore urge the Council to renounce this short-sighted and antisocial policy and to increase rather than reduce the funds .
This is also a piece of European credibility .
( Applause )
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , we can all still picture the catastrophic floods which struck the Czech Republic exactly one year ago .
Huge misfortune swept over man , beast and countryside and the horror of the people of central Europe was all the greater because they lived in a region which had suffered hardly any natural disasters .
My country and Poland were also affected by the misfortune . However , the seriousness of the situation was matched only by the solidarity shown to the victims in the form of active and financial assistance .
It is estimated that the floods in the east of the Czech Republic cost 3.5 % of the gross domestic product .
If we approve the proposal to help the Czech Republic with the cost of youth programmes from EU funds then this is , in my opinion , a continuation of the solidarity which was the silver lining in the horrendous events last year .
Besides , and I have no intention of hiding the fact , this solidarity is not completely altruistic .
After all , it is vitally important to the community of states of the European Union that the youth and training programmes continue to attract our Czech neighbours , who are instrumental in the process of enlargement towards the East .
The participation of Czech citizens in the training programmes calls for partnerships , mobility , exchanges and the preparation of information in which the EU Member States and our associates have an equal interest .
This indivisible link in this instance between the interests of the European Union and those of the Czech Republic is yet again positive proof of the fact that the process of fusion with the countries of central and eastern Europe has already begun .
We should remember this .
That is why I would like to thank Mr Elchlepp for his excellent report and subscribe to his conviction that we must intervene jointly to ensure that funds are maintained and increased , as we shall otherwise be unable to help these young people . This is something which we shall tackle together .
Mr President , I also wish to congratulate Mr Elchlepp on his report .
As a member of the Committee on Culture , Youth , Education and the Media , I know his work in the committee , and he is one of the most knowledgeable members in this area , having worked in it before he became an MEP .
It is quite rare to find rapporteurs who know more than the officials about the programmes concerned .
On the face of it , this is a technical measure to readjust funding .
But it raises a very symbolic and important financial point - which Mr Elchlepp made very well - that if we are serious about taking the applicant countries from central and eastern Europe into the European Union , and we in the Green Group certainly are , then we really have to talk about funding the process properly .
We had a long battle in the Culture Committee and in Parliament overall over the funding of Socrates , and we made it very clear that we will not vote in favour of any more members joining on an associate basis unless the Council provides the funding .
I am glad to say that , after a battle , we got an increase in funding .
I have to note , with Mr Kinnock here to respond , that the British government was initially opposed to that increase in funding .
But we got it .
The message which we have to underline here this morning is that to make these programmes work they need funding and , as Mr Elchlepp said , they are vitally important in terms of training , educational and youth exchanges to bind the people of the central and eastern European countries to the people of the Union .
Therefore , that is why we should emphasize this .
The exchange programmes which have already begun have started to build a basis for this growth in the Community .
No European Union worthy of its name can be complete unless we take these countries in , and these programmes are a very good way to go forward .
Finally , since Commissioner Kinnock is here , I just wish to say that it is nice to see what a splendid job he is doing this morning .
I might have had some criticisms of him in the past as Labour leader but , after the recent visit of the current leader , I have to say : all is forgiven and please come back , Neil ; if not as leader of the Labour Party then I hope as President of the Commission next time .
Though having said that , this will probably finish him off if it gets back to Tony .
Thank you , Mr Kerr .
I have to inform you that we have not yet amended the Rules of Procedure in accordance with the Amsterdam Treaty and , therefore , Parliament cannot put proposals to the Council regarding Presidents of the Commission .
Mr President , like the other Members , I , too , congratulate the rapporteur , Mr Elchlepp , on the excellent work he did .
The European Community 's enlargement towards central and eastern Europe certainly has to take into account aspects like the exchange of experiences and cultural projects , particularly those for young people .
Only if there is constructive dialogue between students and teachers can an important result be obtained in innovative teaching and training projects ; for this reason it is fundamental that we accelerate the process of structural adjustment of these countries which will join the European Union .
It is important to ensure that programmes are open to all young people , including those from socially disadvantaged families , that they succeed , therefore , in working towards a joint project which enables these young people to learn about their own history , their own values , their own identity .
The Czech Republic needs our support , particularly for the three education , training and youth programmes , completing the action of integration with specific agreements .
It is worth recalling that , following the disastrous floods in July 1997 - as Mr Elchlepp clearly indicated - the country 's finances have been in a difficult state ; therefore , so that the Czech Republic can participate in the Socrates , Leonardo and ' Youth for Europe ' programmes as soon as possible , a solution has to be found to this technical problem of funding , also because in this region of the world , lasting cooperation between young people becomes fundamental , given the difficult historical relationship .
Teacher , pupil and student mobility from the European Union to the Czech Republic must be encouraged but guaranteed in a balanced way and with a genuine exchange of cultures and languages .
European cultural integration , which is at the basis of the Treaty on European Union , is only possible if we devote special attention to these countries that are socially and culturally close to us .
Mr President , as a member of the Czech-German coordination council set up in Pilsen a fortnight ago and as rapporteur on the additional protocol to the association agreement on which the Elchlepp report is based , I would like to congratulate Mr Elchlepp most warmly on his report and give him my full support .
I think , in fact , that you can only make political headway by changing the way people think and people will only change the way they think by coming together . This only works from the bottom up , not from the top down , from officials and politicians .
It is precisely here that young people are a special and important factor , which is why I believe that we must promote projects such as the Ronsperg youth clubs in Westböhmen or the student exchange programme between Bavaria and the Czech Republic set up by the Prague journalist Milan Kubes as well as numerous other projects , because it is only though such concrete action that we can mutually prepare for enlargement .

I think that this is the crux of the matter : mutually preparing for enlargement , which is why I welcomed the fact that Mr Elchlepp stressed that we should make it possible for large numbers of people from the EU to go to the Czech Republic , so that we can learn their language and culture .
I truly believe that these exchanges should not be a one-way street and that we have just as much to learn as people in the applicant countries of central and eastern Europe .
That is why the Elchlepp report is particularly welcome , because it removes the paternalistic biased attitude which often reigns and advocates genuine cooperation between partners .
Mr President , the Pope recently visited Vienna and said that we should be talking of Europeanization rather than enlargement towards the East .
I think that these cross-border training exchanges could be used as a model .
Cooperation in training is extremely important , because people in the profession , teachers , pupils and students , have the opportunity to get to know each other and to learn from each other .
I , too , asked the Council for an increase in Leonardo funds on Wednesday during the presidency debate .
As Mr Elchlepp rightly pointed out , we have no sympathy with reductions because funds within the European Union are already so stretched .
We need a 100 % increase in these funds if we are to be able to do justice to these tasks .
For me this has been an interesting debate , not least because of one of a contribution from a Green Member - he was kind enough to offer me an invitation to return .
It is one that I sincerely decline .
Although he offered me that invitation to come back because all is forgiven , I regret to say that I cannot reciprocate .
I am grateful to Mr Elchlepp for his report on a proposal for a decision by the European Union-Czech Association Council which would allow the Czech Republic to use PHARE funds to pay part of its financial contribution to three education related Community programmes - Leonardo , Socrates , and Youth for Europe .
As the House will recall , the participation of candidate countries in Community programmes fulfils an objective that was recognised by the 1993 Copenhagen Council and has been confirmed at subsequent European Councils .
I share the hope expressed in the course of this debate that those declarations of intent and good purpose will be assiduously copied by finance ministers in their approach to various Community programmes .
This whole approach is a significant element of the pre-accession strategy since participation in such programmes contributes to the implementation of the economic and cultural cooperation provisions of the Europe Agreement .
It also enables candidate countries to familiarize themselves with an important part of the cooperation practices of the European Union and with the procedures and methods used in Community programmes .
Clearly , it also contributes to helping those countries to respond to internal policy needs and to find solutions to common problems .
It is no accident that the first programmes opened for candidate countries ' participation were Leonardo , Socrates and Youth for Europe .
Education and training are obviously essential for bringing countries closer together .
The creation of a learning society is at least as important to the efforts to promote growth , competitiveness and employment in the candidate countries as it is in the Member States .
The Czech Republic , Hungary and Romania were the first countries to participate in Community programmes in October 1997 .
In the months since , it has been obvious that those nations pursued the programmes with great enthusiasm after the lengthy and thorough preparations undertaken with the technical and financial assistance of the Community .
The successful information campaign and the expectations raised during the period preceding the entry into force of the decision have led to a large number of applications , with the Czech participants being particularly active and successful in their applications .
Early last year the Czech Republic announced that it would bear the full cost of participation in the education-related programmes from its own budget in 1997 , 1998 and 1999 , rather than using PHARE support .
However , as we have been reminded in the course of the debate , at the end of last year the Czechs advised us that the massive financial burdens resulting from the devastating floods of July 1997 have made it impossible to fulfil that original ambition .
The Republic now wants to make full use of possible Community support through the PHARE programme .
As the House will know , such support was reaffirmed by the Member States at the Luxembourg Council last December .
I hope that Parliament will follow the recommendations in Mr Elchlepp 's very good report , and respond positively to the Czech request to use PHARE funds for this purpose , as in the case of other applicant countries such as Hungary , Romania , Poland and the Slovak Republic .
Thank you , Mr Kinnock .
The debate is closed .
We shall now proceed to vote .
( Parliament adopted the legislative resolution )
Fishing off the Comoros
The next item is the report ( A4-0249 / 98 ) by Mr Macartney , on behalf of the Committee on Fisheries , on the proposal for a Council Regulation ( EC ) relating to the conclusion of the Protocol setting out the fishing opportunities and financial contribution provided for in the Agreement between the European Economic Community and the Islamic Federal Republic of the Comoros on fishing off the Comoros for the period from 28 February 1998 to 27 February 2001 ( COM ( 98 ) 0264 - C4-0344 / 98-98 / 0144 ( CNS ) ) .
The rapporteur , Mr Macartney , will speak first for five minutes .
Mr President , this is not a controversial report but it is an extremely important agreement for one of the most impoverished countries in the world , namely the Comoro islands .
Not only have they had many problems with their economy but of course they have had problems with rebellion and they have been a war-torn zone for quite a long time .
However , the needs of the fishermen of the Comoros and of the Comoran government , are all still present and it is very important that the EU has this agreement with the Comoro islands .
One question to ask for the future , and perhaps the Commission will not want to respond immediately , but if it wishes to do so I am delighted , is how the Comoros fisheries agreement will in future fit in with the Indian Ocean as a whole .
I know from the Seychelles that they are much more interested in an Indian Ocean-wide series of agreements , rather than individual agreements .
Perhaps we should be told whether the agreement is likely to continue for the Comoros in this way or whether it will be subsumed in a larger series of negotiations .
Nevertheless , the issue is very important for the people of the Comoros .
Perhaps this agreement is again typical of the way in which agreements between the EU and third countries have evolved , in that the development component has steadily increased .
Instead of just a lump sum going to the government of the country concerned , there is increasing concern for scientific and technical measures .
On page 9 of my report we see a series of six headings , including support for the ministry of fisheries , study grants , practical training courses , financing of scientific and technical programmes and even participation in international meetings .
One of the problems of the Comorans is that they cannot afford the fares to go to some of the meetings they should be represented at .
This is a good model of the way in which these agreements are continuing .
However , at one point it looks slightly more generous than it really is in several language versions .
I have to report one slight mistake , which I am grateful to Mr McCartin for pointing out with his eagle eye : at one point when it talks about 45 000 tonnes this is actually 4 500 tonnes , so we were not getting quite the bargain we thought in the purchase of tuna !
So I regret to inform the language services that this applies to eight language versions , but not to the Dutch , French or Swedish versions - the Dutch , French and Swedes need not worry but the others should , perhaps , be concerned .
That is just for the record .
The final point I should like to make is that the European Parliament , and its Committee on Fisheries , have increasingly requested reports from the Commission at the end of the agreements with the country concerned , so that we can make an informed judgment about the future of these agreements .
I would emphasize that this is important and is the reason for the amendments which were tabled in the Fisheries Committee .
I look for the support of the House for those amendments .
Mr President , on behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists , I should like to thank and congratulate Mr Macartney on his very useful report on the fishing agreement with Comoros .
The amendments agreed unanimously in committee strengthen the commitment of this Parliament to ensure that European fishing agreements such as the one we are discussing today contain a strong element of development assistance and that this will be reviewed regularly .
It is important that such agreements are not just a means by which rich countries exploit one of the few natural resources of an extremely poor country like the Comoros .
The PSE therefore welcomes the fact that , on top of the payment of ECU 540 000 to the government of Comoros for fishing rights , there is a commitment of an additional ECU 540 000 for direct support for the Comoros ' own fishing industry to support the programmes mentioned already by Mr Macartney .
We hope that when this agreement is again reviewed , the Commission will consider still more assistance to contribute to the development of added value projects , such as processing and canning , which will make a real contribution to the local economy and local living standards .
Mr President , I want to thank Mr Macartney for his report which is well done and represents the views and concerns of the Committee on Fisheries .
I have one or two concerns that perhaps represent my own views rather than those of my political group .
First of all we should remember that we are dealing with an extremely poor part of the world : half a million people with a GDP per capita of something like ECU 600 annually or 3 % of the European Union average .
These are very poor people .
Theirs is an unsettled political situation as well .
That raises the question , for me , of how we can expect these people to have any idea of what is happening in their coastal areas or waters .
We cannot expect a country like the Comoros to know what fish has been taken out .
I would not trust any information that I get from an area with such meagre resources about what is happening in their waters .
Secondly , we did a deal on the basis of 6 000 tonnes of tuna .
We only caught , apparently , an average of 3 000 tonnes , and yet we are increasing the number of vessels being sent there .
The revised figure that Mr Macartney gives us is 4 500 .
But there are 44 seine vessels and 16 longliners .
I have to ask why all these ships are going such a great distance to catch 3 000 tonnes of tunafish .
I would like to see some kind of balance sheet presented to us .
How many days did all this tonnage of vessels fish in these waters , what did they catch and where did they land it ?
Who tells us what amount of fish is involved ?
Some kind of balance sheet that would bring this into some sort of reasonable focus is needed .
I do not begrudge the fishermen of Spain and France the subsidies we are giving them but I think we should give them in a different way .
We should not mix up development aid with an economic policy that the Community is pursuing in relation to fishing .
I have serious doubts about this .
Mr President , the Islamic Federal Republic of the Comoros is one of the world 's poorest economies .
That is why it is very important that funds in the fishing agreement between the EU and this region are in future targeted mainly at the development of the fishing sector in the Comoros and the monitoring of fishing .
That is the best way of enhancing sustainable development in the region from the point of view of both the environment and society .
The working methods of the Commission and the Council in extending the fishing agreement leaves a lot to be desired , however .
How , for example , has the decision on the provisionary application of the protocol on fishing , which will have effects on funding and budgets , been taken once again without reference to the other budgetary authority , that is to say , the European Parliament ?
In addition , the Commission has pledged to pay a part of the compensation in the absence of a Parliamentary opinion .
In my opinion , this can no longer be due to a shortage of time .
Can the negotiators of new fishing agreements not start work well before the former contract has expired so that the Union 's ponderous regulations for procedure , such as they are , might be observed ?
I thus agree with the rapporteur that the flow of information between Parliament , the Council and the Commission must be improved upon .
In this connection , the assessment reports requested by Parliament on the implementation of the agreement hitherto must be submitted before negotiations on the new agreement start .
Thank you , Mr President , I shall continue in German .
It is well worth dealing with these so-called smaller reports on a Friday , because a great deal is said which we never get to hear with the larger reports .
I would like to refer to one point in particular .
If you read the report , especially its explanatory statement , you will see the scandalous manner in which the powers that be here in Parliament and , more importantly , in the European Union , run roughshod over Parliament 's rights .
Times are manipulated in order to score points over us and this report on the Comoros is being used for precisely this purpose .
I want this on the record because it will be of even greater importance in the future .
Every effort is being made on a systematic basis to dismiss Parliament 's rights because they always say nobody reads anything at the end of a sitting .
Do the top officials and their acolytes think that we have not noticed what they are up to ?
Mr President , if this report on the Comoros is important , then it is important not only because it illustrates the shenanigans at the top , but also because it teaches us something , in other words , how important fishing is to us .
A few days ago , I was again asked why I keep reverting to fishing matters , despite the fact that my constituency has nothing to do with the sea .
But , may I say in passing , we do have large quantities of the best trout in the world .
They are far better than the farmed variety .
In any case , Mr Frischenschlager , the water comes from Austria .
( Laughter ) This is a matter of crucial importance to mankind .
You simply have to compare menus in the restaurants of 20 years ago with those of today .
Twenty years ago , fish was the cheapest dish on the menu .
Today , fish is the most expensive .
We are beginning to apply to fish what was generally applied solely to bait fish in the past because there is not enough , which is why we need to keep the focus on this matter .
Our seas everywhere are being destroyed and , as we destroy them , we are ruining the poorest among us who still have to make a living from fishing , such as the inhabitants of the Comoros .
It is the huge fish factories in America , Russian and Japan which are destroying what needs to be maintained for future generations and we should take a decidedly more serious approach to this than is nowadays often the case .
( Applause )
Danke schön , Herr von Habsburg , and I will now switch to Spanish ...
Ladies and gentlemen , Mr von Habsburg 's speech completes the list of contributions by Members of the House .
I therefore call on the Commissioner , Mr Kinnock , to speak .
Mr Kinnock , you have the floor .
Mr President , I enjoyed this debate , as I enjoyed reading Mr Macartney 's report , but , certainly , attendance here was worthwhile to hear the appeal made by Mr von Habsburg and the response of the House .
It demonstrates that Friday mornings in the European Parliament are truly worthwhile .
Well , you get la crème de la crème , do you not on Friday morning !
I wish to thank Mr Macartney for his excellent report on the new terms and conditions for fishing by the Community fleet in the waters off the Comoros .
I would respond to the question he put by saying that , obviously , currently we are still dealing with bilateral agreements but these could evolve over the years into regional agreements if that were the expressed desire of the third countries .
To a great extent , the initiative lies with them .
But I am certain that Mr Macartney will continue to follow this issue to see whether that evolution takes place .
So far as Mr McCartin 's question is concerned , we provide annual reports in the form of the report on the budget outturn and also a report on the outlook for agreements .
But I understand that what he wanted was rather more comprehensive than that .
So I invite him to put down a written question listing the issues , that he very fairly raised , and I am certain that my colleagues in the Commission will happily respond in detail .
As the House will know , the Commission considers that these new terms are likely to ensure more effective implementation of the agreement in a way that is consistent with the basic principles of the conservation of resources - the importance of which was brought to our attention again in the course of this debate .
We also believe that this new protocol with the Comoros contains major innovations to promote sustainable fishing that are compatible with development policy .
The details of the agreement and protocol are obviously very familiar to the House so , rather than repeat them , I shall come directly to our response to the amendments by the Committee on Fisheries .
The Commission cannot accept Amendment No 1 , because we consider that the expenditure relating to the agreement is compulsory .
We accept the spirit of Amendments Nos 2 , 3 , 4 and 5 , but we stress that we already give regular information to Parliament , as I mentioned earlier , on the use made of fisheries agreements in the statements and reports that are made to the Fisheries Committee .
The Commission does not entirely agree with the objectives of Amendment No 6 and , in particular , the reference to small local fishing enterprises , since these fisheries agreements , which are , obviously , commercial in nature , seek to provide fishing opportunities for Community s