Resumption of the session
I declare resumed the session of the European Parliament adjourned on Thursday , 11 February 2010 .
Statements by the President
Let me welcome the President of the European Council , Mr Herman Van Rompuy , to the plenary session of the European Parliament for the first time .
We welcome you and congratulate you once again , Mr President .
( Applause )
I would also like to welcome President Barroso .
Over the last five years , it has been quite usual for you to sit here ; it is not the first time for you at all !
Welcome
Now I would like to extend a warm welcome to two guests who are with us today from Belarus : Mrs Borys , President of the Union of Poles in Belarus , and Mr Milinkevich , winner of our own Sakharov Prize in 2006 and leader of the democratic opposition in Belarus .
( Sustained applause )
Unfortunately , Belarus has again found itself in the headlines over the persecution of non-governmental organisations .
The European Parliament upholds and will uphold universal values as something which we value and in which we believe .
We will condemn authoritarian regimes which use force and persecute democratic organisations just because those organisations do not share the regime 's views .
Approval of the minutes of the previous sitting : see Minutes
Transportation of horses for slaughter in the European Union ( written declaration )
I would like to inform you that Written Declaration 0054 / 2009 by Mrs Lynne , Mrs Jędrzejewska and Mr Schlyter on the transportation of horses for slaughter in the European Union was signed today , 24 February 2010 , by a majority of Parliament 's component Members .
Therefore , in accordance with Rule 124 ( 4 ) of the Rules of Procedure , it will be forwarded to its addressees and published with the names of its signatories in the Texts Adopted of the sitting of 25 February 2010 .
We would like to thank the authors for submitting this declaration .
author . - Mr President , it is great news that we have achieved the right number of signatures .
Thank you everyone for signing this written declaration .
I would like to inform you that I did not have the possibility of signing this declaration , and I am ready to do it immediately .
Composition of Parliament : see Minutes
Implementing measures ( Rule 88 ) : see Minutes
Decisions concerning certain documents : see Minutes
Documents received : see Minutes
Written declarations ( submission ) : see Minutes
Lapsed written declarations : see Minutes
Order of business
The final draft agenda drawn up on Wednesday , 10 February 2010 by the Conference of Presidents pursuant to Rule 137 of the Rules of Procedure has been distributed .
By agreement with the political groups , I would like to propose the following changes :
Thursday :
Concerning the sitting on Thursday , the Group of Socialists and Democrats in the European Parliament has submitted a request to hold over the vote on the report by Mr Lehne on annual accounts of certain types of companies as regards micro-entities .
Mr President , our group had a very intensive debate on the Lehne report this morning .
We did not finish discussing this in the group .
That happens in groups sometimes .
We would like Mr Lehne , as rapporteur , to give us until the March part-session to once more consider the direction we can go with this report and the stance that we as Social Democrats want to take with regard to this issue .
There are different approaches in our group - I freely admit this .
I would be grateful if we could conduct the debate , but if you , Mr Lehne , would allow us to postpone the vote until the first March part-session .
That would give my group at least - although I believe other groups too - a little more time for a thorough debate and to arrive at an opinion .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I think it is good that the Group of the Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats in the European Parliament are looking at this in detail .
However , I would like to say that Parliament adopted a resolution almost unanimously in December 2008 in which we called on the European Commission to submit precisely the sort of proposal that we are now discussing .
Parliament must also stick to what it has itself decided and what has been the declared intention of this House for years .
Because it is only natural for there to be concerns about one thing or another in connection with any legislative proposal , we have resolved the open questions by means of a compromise in the Committee on Legal Affairs .
I should make it clear that this compromise is ready for approval .
Nevertheless , I do understand that it might make sense to enlarge the group that are in support of this report a bit more .
If the efforts of Mr Schulz are aimed at increasing the number of supporters , then I have nothing against a postponement until the next plenary sitting in March .
That is my personal opinion on the matter .
It is not the opinion of the group , which expressly decided otherwise this morning .
However , I think we should give the Socialists a chance to reach a conclusion so that they too can do something to help reduce bureaucracy and the burden on small and medium-sized enterprises .

( NL ) Mr President , I would like to thank my fellow Member , Mr Lehne , for what he just said , but I would nonetheless like to ask that , in the circumstances , we be given a chance to submit amendments and debate them .
At the moment , we have only a vote planned without the opportunity to submit any amendments to Mr Lehne 's report .
( DE ) Mr President , I would like to reiterate my request .
There is no doubt that we are in favour of debate .
We are merely asking for the vote to be postponed .
However , in the interests of fairness , I must add that , much as I understand Mr Lehne 's wishful thinking , our group is governed by democracy .
Mr Lehne , I cannot give you any assurances about the result .
( DE ) Mr President , I will be brief .
In the last few days , two important nominations have been put forward : the first is the representative of the European Commission to the United States of America in Washington and the second is the Special Representative for Afghanistan .
Both nominations are controversial and there are various discussions going on about both of them .
I do not wish to go into the question of merit just now .
I would simply like to ask , Mr President , that , before they take office , both of them appear before the Committee on Foreign Affairs to enable us to have an intensive debate there , and I hope that the President of the Commission and the President of the Council will give this their full support with your help , Mr President .
( Applause )
EU 2020 - Follow-up of the informal European Council of 11 February 2010 ( debate )
The next item is the debate on the statement of the Council and the Commission : EU 2020 - Follow-up of the informal European Council of 11 February 2010
President Van Rompuy , as this is your first speech in the plenary session of the European Parliament , we agreed that it could be slightly longer .
President Van Rompuy would like to present to this House his points of view on other issues , on institutional issues , at the beginning of his term of office .
Perhaps 15 to 20 minutes will be enough for you ?
President of the European Council . - Mr President , I am delighted to have this opportunity to take part in a debate with you not only to report on the informal meeting of the Heads of State or Government of two weeks ago - it was , after all , an informal meeting , with no formal conclusions to report - but also to take this opportunity to meet with you early in my mandate .
Had I waited until the first formal opportunity to report on a European Council taking place at the end of March , I would not have come before this Parliament before the end of April , some five months after my designation as President of the European Council .
Let me therefore take this opportunity to lay out how I see my role and function .
I shall spend a few minutes on this so as not to have to return to this on future occasions .
There has , of course , always been a Presidency of the European Council ; not the same thing as the ' President of Europe ' , as some media put it .
So what has changed ?
Three small things , but which will , together and over time , have the potential to make a significant difference .
First is the element of continuity : past presidents changed every six months ; that is , after every second or third meeting .
There was little opportunity to develop a long-term strategy .
Our partners in third countries were bemused at having to meet a different Head of Government every time they had a summit with the European Union .
Greater continuity is fundamental to building relationships and carrying out a serious task .
Second is the full-time nature of the job ; previous presidents had to simultaneously manage their own national governments .
This meant that , at best , they could only deal half-time with European affairs .
By creating a full-time post dedicated to the running of the European Council and its follow-up , including external representation , the European Council now has a better chance to play its role within the European institutional system .
Third is the fact that Heads of State or Government now choose who they want to hold this position rather than it happening haphazardly from an arbitrary rotation system .
I hope this , too , augurs well for the support that the President can count on .
These three changes are all pragmatic improvements to the previous institutional architecture but , taken together with the fact that the European Council now becomes an institution in its own right , they give the European Council a better chance of fulfilling its task under the treaties of ' [ defining ] the general political directions and priorities [ of the Union ] ' .
Some commentators have seen a great deal more in this role ; others have seen less .
On the one hand , some consider the Presidency of the European Council to be a sort of président in the manner of an executive Head of State , as in , for instance , France .
Others , on the other hand , see it as the mere chairmanship of the meeting of the Heads of Government .
In reality , it is neither .
It is certainly not a President and not with executive powers in its own right .
The incumbent must express the views of the collective Heads of State or Government .
On the other hand , the role is not merely one of being a chairman , giving the floor to one or another member of the European Council to speak during its meetings .
The task of preparing and then following up its meetings , and representing the Union externally - for instance , along with the President of the Commission at the G20 Summit - and the role as a bridge between the national capitals and institutions clearly go beyond the task of merely chairing meetings .
The role of permanent President is to enhance a shared sense of direction : nothing more , nothing less .
Where are we going ?
How to deal with our neighbours ?
Who are our main strategic partners in the world ?
Where do we want to be in 10 or 20 years ' time ?
These are vital issues .
As regards my relationship with the European Parliament , the treaty is quite brief on this : it simply requires that I report to you ' after [ ... ] meetings of the European Council ' .
That means a minimum of four times a year , though in most years , that is more likely to be five or six and may , in the future , rise to 10 .
It will not be long before many of you will be fed up with the sight of me !
I will continue to multiply other usual contacts with Members of Parliament , such as the meetings I have begun with leaders of groups and the monthly meeting I have with the President of Parliament .
Indeed , my role should not be confused with that of the President of the Commission .
Mr Barroso chairs an executive that is elected by and is accountable to the European Parliament .
It submits legislative and budgetary proposals to you , I do not do so .
The Commission President has an intimate day-to-day contact with the European Parliament , not least working on those legislative and budgetary proposals .
My task is , rather , to ensure that the Heads of State or Government can collectively agree on an overall strategy for the European Union , both as regards its internal development and in terms of its external relations .
I have a weekly meeting with President Barroso .
We are both acutely aware of the need to avoid any conflicts of competence or misunderstandings as to who is responsible for what .
Public opinion and third countries may well find it difficult to grasp the difference between the President of the Commission and the President of the European Council ; I am very confident that we are on the right track .
In this context , it is also important to remember that I am President of the European Council and not of the Council of Ministers ; these are two separate institutions .
The ordinary Council , which is the other branch of the legislature with the European Parliament , will still be chaired by a Presidency that continues to rotate every six months among the Member States .
Only in the configuration of foreign affairs where it coordinates executive power does it have a permanent president in the form of Catherine Ashton , Vice-President of the Commission and High Representative for Foreign Policy .
I pause at this point to pay tribute to the work being done by Catherine Ashton .
In facing up to multiple challenges in the field of foreign affairs and security and in preparing the External Action Service , she deserves our support .
It will be my privilege to work closely with her in representing the Union externally .
Let me just say a few words about the European Council itself .
The first formal meeting under my chairmanship will take place at the end of next month .
We did , however , have a useful informal gathering of Heads of State or Government earlier this month at the Bibliothèque Solvay , just a few hundred metres from here .
Whether it was because of the more intimate surroundings of the library or the physical proximity of Parliament , our discussions were fruitful .
As I said , I cannot report any formal conclusions to you from an informal meeting .
At most , I can share with you my own personal conclusions from the discussions which I have set out in a letter to the members of the European Council and which I know has been circulated within Parliament .
My aim with this informal Council was mainly to prepare our future deliberations on the issue of how to improve Europe 's economic performance as we exit the immediate economic crisis .
This involves looking at our targets and ambitions - and we have a very useful paper from Commission President Barroso on this - but also how to improve our governance of these issues .
How we go about managing our integrated European economy - the world 's largest market - in order to improve our economic performance is one of the central questions facing the European Union .
Our initial exchange of views on this involved looking at how we set targets , how we follow them up , how we evaluate results .
It is in large part about coordinating the exercise of national competences whilst making full use of the European Union competences and instruments available .
It is therefore a task to which the European Council is eminently suited .
At the Solvay meeting , all members of the European Council agreed that we need better , more focused economic coordination in the Union , both for major economic policy - certainly in the euro area - and for micro-economic policy .
A lot of this is very technical , but let us just take the idea of bringing down the number of common economic objectives to concentrate on four or five .
These objectives should be quantifiable and divisible in national set objectives ; it makes no sense to have scoreboards on , say , 65 different sets of data .
Moreover , all members of the European Council are willing to take more responsibility in a common European strategy for growth and jobs .
Such personal involvement is indispensable ; we need to go from paper recommendations to real-life commitment .
I was glad to find such a level of ambition around the table .
Whether you want to call it better coordination , better governance , or even a gouvernement économique , the key is the common commitment to success .
We also had a quick discussion on how to better implement Europe 's actions in the reconstruction of Haiti ; we want to take this discussion further with an eye to better implementing Article 214 of the Treaty on the coordination of humanitarian aid .
A discussion on how Europe should respond strategically to the Copenhagen conference on climate change will be pursued at the next European Council .
Unexpectedly , of course , there was a discussion on the situation in Greece .
I took it upon myself to ensure that this was handled in the European Union 's institutional framework and not outside it , and that the agreement reached met with the approval of all 27 Heads of State or Government as well as the President of the Commission and the President of the European Central Bank .
This degree of consensus was a message about Greece 's acceptance of its responsibility to cut its deficit in a credible way and of our solidarity with it if needed .
I very much look forward to hearing your views on all these matters , not least on how we can face all the challenges facing our Union .
I can assure you that I have one overriding goal for the coming years ; to ensure that our Union is on track to be strong enough internally to maintain our own social model and externally to defend our interests and project our values .
I think that all European institutions can , and must , work together for those goals .
( Applause )

President of the Commission . - Mr President , let me first of all congratulate President Van Rompuy on what was a very good informal European Council for the first time under his chairmanship .
After reaching agreement among all of us on an important statement on Greece , we discussed the Europe 2020 strategy - a strategy for sustainable growth and employment .
I had the opportunity to focus on the substantive policy issues we are facing , on the challenges , and on the lines which the Commission will formally propose next Wednesday .
Before the crisis , the European economy was making progress : we saw 18 million new jobs and a more dynamic business environment .
However , these gains have been wiped out by the financial crisis and its impact on many of our areas of activity : a 4 % fall in GDP in a single year , unemployment shooting up to 10 % , a huge hit to our prosperity , a real threat to our societies .
At the same time , the task is getting tougher : we have an ageing population , a growing productivity gap with our competitors , and failings in education and research .
However , we also have many strengths : we have the world 's biggest market economy ; we have the single market ; we have the euro area .
All this has proved to be an important asset in the crisis .
But today , Europe faces a very important choice ; I would say a defining choice for future generations .
Hoping for a return of the good old days is no option .
One option is limited change - the lowest common denominator which brings some reform and some growth .
But we could never get back what we lost in the crisis .
This option would result in a Europe which is second class in the new global order .
Minimal changes , some kind of adaptations .
I believe we can and must be more ambitious .
We can aspire to an economic strategy that puts Europe on the path to competitiveness and that can create millions of new jobs .
But this cannot be done by half measures and incremental change .
We need to instil a sense of urgency , a recognition that business as usual will not protect our European way of life and will not defend our social models .
On the contrary . Those social models will be put at risk if we do not adapt to a much more challenging global environment .
This requires a joint effort .
We need the Member States ; we need the European institutions ; we need stakeholders and society at large ; and we need specifically the active involvement and support of this Parliament , the European Parliament , for shaping this strategy and for communicating it to the people .
Next week , the Commission will set out the key elements of the strategy that it will formally propose to the European institutions .
It will centre on three priorities : smart growth , inclusive growth , sustainable growth .
First , the core driver of growth must be knowledge ; knowledge and innovation that produces tomorrow 's ideas , tomorrow 's skills , tomorrow 's technologies .
Second , to keep in force our European model of society , we need to deliver more jobs .
Our goal must be healthy , prosperous , secure societies , where everyone feels they can play their part .
That means giving people jobs and skills and it means tackling the scourge of poverty head on .
The problem of poverty is not only a national problem ; it is a problem for which we need a common European response .
Our social market economy must be hardwired to seize the opportunities of the future .
I am talking about sustainable growth , recognising the importance of tackling climate change , recognising the pressure on resources .
With this , I mean a competitive economy , deepening the internal market , creating better conditions for investment - especially for SMEs - a European economy able to hold its own in a globalised market place .
These priorities are not unfamiliar .
But the fact that we have not yet succeeded in realising these goals makes them more important , not less .
Where we need to make a radical change is not in our prescription of what the European economy needs , but in our approach on how to make it happen .
What do we need in order to succeed ?
Firstly , the strategy must be comprehensive .
We cannot have a pick-and-mix strategy allowing everyone to do the easy parts , the feel-good things , and leave the real challenges to the others .
There are still many issues : when I think about completing the single market , about the quality of our taxation systems , about the way we spend money at a time of intense pressure on public finances , to name but a few .
Secondly , our strategy must engage all parts of our societies .
We will not succeed in putting European society on the right track for the future if this comes at the cost of social conflict .
That is why a proactive approach to creating jobs and addressing the scourge of poverty are essential .
It is also why we have been wise to reform financial markets .
We want a strong financial sector able to finance innovation and help businesses to grow : one which acknowledges its broader responsibilities to society and governments which came to its aid at the time of need ; one which accepts that effective supervision at European level is necessary today .
Thirdly , we must not confuse having an overall vision for the European economy with the question of ' who does what ? ' .
It should not be a question of a debate on competences .
What we have to see is the added value of a European approach .
It is quite evident at a time of globalisation , when we need to discuss with America , with China , with Russia , with others , that there is added value in a common approach ; for instance , in the G20 , an initiative that was in fact launched by the European Union during the French Presidency by the President of France and myself , when we proposed to the American President to accept those summits .
It is indeed necessary to recognise that we have greater influence if we act together .
It makes no sense to recognise global interdependence and to reject European interdependence .
That is why we need to act together .
Still , a lot of action will have to come at national level .
Of course , there are national responsibilities which we expect to be addressed mainly by governments , but we also expect governments to commit sincerely to a European approach .
The European approach is necessary , not to bring back powers in Brussels - this is not our intention at all - but to help the indispensable reforms in our societies so that they can bring more prosperity , more well-being to our citizens .
We will only succeed if we are ready to work together , not against each other , and therefore we need credible ownership at all levels .
We need strong and true coordination in the economic field .
The Lisbon Treaty gives us these instruments and we will use them .
In this European Council , I saw awareness of this problem .
I can compare the discussions this time with the discussions five years ago when we were discussing the Lisbon Strategy .
Let me tell you very frankly and very openly that I saw among Heads of State or Government much more awareness of the need to act together and also of the external constraints on the European economy .
I sincerely hope that this time , narrow national interests will not again resist the need for closer coordination and an effective system of European governance .
We also need significant European Union level flagship measures to typify what we are trying to achieve : some concrete plans .
We are going to present some of them : projects like an Innovation Plan , a new skills programme , a proper industrial policy , a digital agenda , green technologies , and a specific plan or action against poverty ; projects that have a value , an impact in themselves ; projects that show why Europe provides part of the solution and which show that the European Union is not just talking , it is acting .
Let me finish by calling upon you , the European Parliament , to show your strong support for these projects as legislator , as budgetary authority and as champion of European action in every corner of the European Union .



Mr President , Mr Van Rompuy , Mr Barroso , ladies and gentlemen , the European Council of 11 February was the first to be convened and presided over by Mr Van Rompuy , whom I would like to welcome on his first appearance in the plenary session of the European Parliament .
Mr Van Rompuy , the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) expects a lot of you .
I welcome the positive and pragmatic spirit of your speeches since your nomination , and I appreciate the tone that you want to set in the European Council , but I expect you and the Council of Ministers to be aware that with the Treaty of Lisbon , your relations with us , the MEPs , have changed .
We are equal decision makers , and that has not only legal consequences , but political ones as well .
Now I would like to come to the substance of the debates of 11 February , which is , of course , the 2020 strategy , but it is also the euro and economic and budgetary policy , since speculation against the Greek debt and the euro were certainly unexpected guests in the Solvay library .
I would like to put the following question : is the weakening of our common currency solely due to the Greek crisis , or is the euro the target of direct attacks by those who are unhappy about its power and that of the Member States involved ?
Secondly , are we going to wait until the situation in certain euro area countries deteriorates before we react , as we did with Greece ?
If not , what plans are there to put things right in the countries most at risk ?
A question for you there , President Van Rompuy .
I ask these questions because , while I am happy with the solidarity measures taken on 11 February , I seriously doubt whether we Europeans are really on top of the situation .
What is the situation , if not the fact that the Greek warning has shown the extent to which we must take courageous decisions to finally make sure that our currency , the euro , reflects the political power behind it ?
Of course , we talk a great deal , we talk about economic governance , we also talk about monetary governance , but we could make matters a great deal simpler and certainly more effective if we devised and implemented real budgetary coordination of the euro area members .
The former French Prime Minister , Edouard Balladur , has himself recently recognised the need to abandon sovereignty in some areas - something that is not easy for a Frenchman - and has spoken in favour of the national budgets of the euro area States being approved by the Eurogroup even before being submitted to the national parliaments .
I would like to take up this bold idea , and I ask the European Council to consider it and to analyse it seriously .
By properly coordinating their budgets , the euro area States would acquire unprecedented influence and room for manoeuvre .
This power would mean that they have a strong influence on the development of new global regulations , but it would also demand that the European forces unite within the international financial organisations , where the euro must speak with one voice .
Let me cite a striking example - which was mentioned by Mr Barroso I believe - that of the IMF , where the voting rights are calculated according to the economic weight of the states .
With these criteria , the United States enjoys 16.7 % of the voting rights , Japan 6 % , China 3.6 % and the six founding members of the European Union 18.49 % .
However , if they presented a united front to the IMF , the euro area countries would represent 23 % of the votes , and all the countries of the European Union , still united , would represent 32 % of the votes , that is to say , twice as many as the United States .
Presidents , ladies and gentlemen , that is the reality of the balance of power in the world .
However , because it is still divided , Europe is unable to punch its full weight .
Can we tolerate this any more ?
The PPE Group does not think so .
It is time , President Van Rompuy , for the euro area countries to open their eyes to this state of affairs and to learn from it .
They would then be prepared for what they will soon have to do out of necessity , namely , truly unite instead of clinging to this facade of economic sovereignty , which is nothing but a dangerous pretence .
on behalf of the S & D Group . - Mr President , since the start of the economic and social crisis , over seven million people have joined the unemployment lines in Europe .
By the end of this year , it is quite likely that over 25 million people will be unemployed .
The good health of our economies and public finances , which we have striven so hard to put in order since the early 1990s , has been ruined in less than two years .
Despite costly recovery measures , all we have managed to avoid so far is a complete collapse of the system .
Economic growth remains extremely weak , and many people have lost faith in the idea of an early recovery .
Fears for the future trouble our societies , inequalities of all kinds have widened and some of our Member States are in desperate need of EU-wide solidarity and protection , having become the targets of ruthless and uncontrolled speculation .
The crisis has gravely undermined Europe 's global competitiveness and weakened its political influence .
That is the gloomy landscape in which Europe now needs to reinvent its future in order to safeguard its model of economic and social development .
President Barroso , you are going to be asking the Spring Council where we want Europe to be in 2020 .
That is a very important question , but can we afford to argue about the distant future without first providing an answer to those millions of Europeans who are now feeling the impact of the crisis on their lives and who worry what will happen to their lives tomorrow - will they have a job ; will they have the prospect of finding a new job ?
What answers can you give them ?
I cannot go back to my region tomorrow and tell my people that they do not need to worry , that we have a plan for 2020 .
I need to answer their immediate worries and fears , and I want to be able to tell them that they will be able to keep their jobs , that new jobs will soon start to be created and that these jobs will be decent jobs with decent salaries .
At the moment , the only medium-term policy agenda is that set down by the European Council in December : the consolidation of public finances .
By 2011 , Member States are expected to start consolidation to bring their public deficits within the 3 % limit within two years .
At the same time , unemployment will still be rising ; growth will be too weak to bring unemployment down .
There are other ways to pull Europe out of the crisis : putting people at the heart of our policy agenda and especially those who have been most hit by the crisis .
I would urge President Van Rompuy and President Barroso to reconsider the nature of the so-called exit strategy .
Europe should choose a morally decent way out of this crisis : a human way based on our fundamental values - which actually is also a smarter way in economic terms .
This will not be the case if macro-economic policy is totally focused on rapid consolidation .
That would mean cuts in public investment , in education and training , in social and in health services .
Consolidation cannot be achieved through tax rises alone .
Europe 's growth potential would suffer even more than it already has and , as a result , the recovery would be extremely slow and a large share of the current unemployed would become long-term unemployed .
Europeans deserve a more balanced and socially responsible policy approach .
We believe this approach should involve an ' entry strategy ' into the labour market , which should form an integral part of the 2020 strategy and constitute its roadmap for the years up to 2015 .
It should combine the macro-economic policy agenda with structural policies in the economic , social and environmental fields to aim at the creation of at least five million net new jobs by 2015 , particularly in the green economy .
The European Council should state this intention clearly at the March summit as a key objective of the new strategy .
Proper economic policy coordination reaching well beyond the policing role of the stability pact should ensure that gradual fiscal consolidation in the different Member States is combined with the preservation of key public spending in growth areas and key social policies .
This will demand a political leap in thinking with regard to Europe 's - and , in particular , the eurozone 's - economic governance .
The March or June summit should give a mandate to its president , in close cooperation with the Commission , to submit an ambitious plan for the strengthening of economic governance in the EU for decision by the December 2010 Council .
We need to challenge the old way of doing things if we want to learn lessons from the current crisis and make it history as soon as possible .
This is a chance to make Europe relevant to people and not just to markets .
This can only become a reality if the 2020 strategy is indeed about people and about jobs - in other words , if it incorporates an ambitious social and decent-jobs agenda .
In the name of my group , I urge you to do all you can to put people , and not least , the most vulnerable people , at the heart of the European project .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Mr President , first of all , let me come directly to what I would call the most urgent problem today .
We can talk about 2020 , but we have a more urgent problem today : the eurozone and Greece .
We have to find solutions to that .
I think we , the European Parliament , have to take the initiative in this field .
It is important to determine what exactly happened in Greece .
Today , we received contradictory information .
Greece says that it has given all the information to the European Union and European institutions .
At the same time , the European Commission and Eurostat are saying that they did not receive all the necessary information .
At the same time the investment banks - Goldman Sachs , Morgan Stanley , Deutsche Bank - are minimising what they have done in the Greece case .
I therefore think it is the task of this Parliament to organise hearings with the relevant committee as quickly as possible , so that we can hear all the parties concerned on this matter and find out exactly what is happening in the case of Greece .
We cannot talk about remedies , about solutions , about reforms in the European Union if , first of all , we do not know what really happened in the case of Greece in 2008 and 2009 and before that , and I think it is absolutely necessary that the different parties are heard by this Parliament .
The second point is that we also have to tackle the problem of the Greek debt .
I think there is only one good solution to that .
Yesterday , I read the article by George Soros in the Financial Times on the matter , and a few days ago I read the article by Joschka Fischer in the German press .
He is saying what many people are saying : the best solution to the Greek debt is a European solution - euro obligations , or a European monetary fund , without any costs to the European taxpayer , but with a solution for the future .
I think it is also the task of this Parliament to ask the Commission and the Council to reflect on that possibility and to go beyond the national interests of the current Member States of the European Union to examine this possibility .
Thirdly , I think the most important part of this debate is , naturally , what to do about 2020 .
I think Greece is a very good example of what went wrong with the Lisbon Strategy .
The Lisbon Strategy was too weak ; the gap between the German economy and the Greek economy widened over the last 10 years : it became bigger , not smaller , after the Lisbon Strategy .
What we need - and it is the first decision to be taken by the Commission and the European Council - is to recognise that the open coordination method was not a good method ; it was too weak a method .
We need a bolder instrument inside the European Union .
This bolder instrument is economic governance inside the European Union .
Mr Barroso , I hope that in a few days ' time , at the beginning of March - I think it is 3 March - you come forward with a paper on this .
I hope it will include a bolder strategy than the things that were concluded or not concluded at the informal summit .
It is still an intergovernmental , open-coordination method .
They make it a little bit better , a little bit faster , but at the end , it continues to be an open coordination method based on intergovernmentalism .
What we ask from you is to take the lead on that , on this economic policy and on this economic governance , and to come forward , together with Olli Rehn , with a bold proposal to have economic governance inside the European Union .
It is nonsense to have monetary union on the one hand and not to have an economic and social and political union on the other .
The problems with Greece are proof of that .
( Applause )
I think this is a time when we can expect something bold from the Commission , and I hope that on 3 March , the Commission will propose a document that is far more ambitious than the - in my view - disappointing conclusions of the informal summit .
( The speaker agreed to take a blue card question under Rule 149 ( 8 ) )
Mr President , I would like to ask Mr Verhofstadt this question : are you advocating that countries which are not in the eurozone should bail out countries which are in the eurozone ?
Is that what you are advocating ?
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Maybe it will be necessary in the near future to bale out Britain , because I have seen that the fiscal deficit of Britain is even higher than the fiscal deficit of Greece .
( Applause )
The fiscal deficit is , if I am not mistaken , 12.9 % of GDP for the moment .
So I think what is most important for the moment is that we have a credible strategy towards the eurozone , and I am very sure - maybe not tomorrow but the day after tomorrow - there will come a time when Britain is a member of the eurozone .
Be sure .
Mr President , I hope that the British kindergarten will be kind enough to listen for a moment .
( Heckling )
I had intended to start my speech with the EU 2020 strategy , but now I am going to begin by talking about Greece , particularly in light of the intervention from the right of this House .
I believe that what is least helpful in the dispute over the situation in , and the prospects for , Greece is an anti-Greek , nationalistic or anti-European attitude .
In my opinion , mistakes that have been made for a long time are now being revealed in Greece - often , more comes to light in a crisis than in good times .
I would like to pick up on an issue raised by Mr Verhofstadt .
If we do not want anti-European developments , we need to discuss who in Brussels is responsible for allowing these things to be concealed in Greece for so many years - probably even during the entire preparatory period for the monetary union .
Mr Barroso , I believe that you have a crucial share of the responsibility in this regard .
This , in particular , is something that you need to disclose , because as yet , we have only seen the tip of the iceberg in terms of responsibility and we have not seen the system of irresponsibility that lies beneath it .
Secondly , a lot needs to change in Greece , too .
We need to have a - preferably friendly - discussion with Greece about this within the euro area .
If this help is necessary - which I think it will be - and if European solidarity needs to be employed once again - and I would not want to rule it out in any way at this point - then Greece needs to make some real changes .
There is the excessive public sector , for example .
If I am to believe the Greeks with whom I have spoken , 25 % of Greek workers are employed in the public sector , and it is not even a good public sector .
It is definitely in need of reform .
However , it is not only in terms of expenditure that changes need to be made , as there is clearly something very wrong with the revenue side as well .
I think that Mr Papandreou has the right idea with his intention to publish the tax declarations of the high earners in Greece .
It is not necessary to buy CDs from Switzerland ; there is another way to go about this .
This will very quickly shed light on the fact that , in Greece too , the revenue can be considerably improved if tax evasion is ultimately prevented and the people in Greece who are living in the lap of luxury pay their taxes like decent citizens .
My colleague , Mr Giegold , will probably talk more about the Eurobonds later .
I would just like to say one sentence about the EU 2020 strategy .
Mr Barroso , you made absolutely no mention of the failures of the Lisbon Strategy .
I believe that the failure to evaluate the Lisbon Strategy does not bode at all well for the success or possible success of the new strategy .
As an integrated strategy , it is , in principle , not bad , but ...
( The President cut off the speaker )

on behalf of the ECR Group . - Mr President , I would like to thank Mr Verhofstadt for reminding us all of the failure of left-wing economic policies in the United Kingdom .
We are very grateful for the advice and I hope my colleagues and I will be able to remedy that in the forthcoming general election .
Even before the recent crisis , the economies of Europe were losing ground to our major rivals and competitors .
Our growth level was less , our unemployment higher , our relative trading position was in decline and our share of global output falling .
We had launched the Lisbon Strategy , but without enough conviction or commitment ; unsurprisingly , it has not succeeded .
Europe 2020 must not go the same way .
I am very pleased that my group was among the first to submit proposals to help with its progress .
We now need to set a new course for our economies .
We must recognise that governments do not create productive jobs or raise living standards .
Only competitive business and successful entrepreneurs can do that .
Our Member States and the institutions of the European Union then need to support them by reducing the burdens they face .
We cannot expect to have dynamic economies if we make even greater demands on those who are generating growth and jobs by imposing heavy tax regimes and bureaucratic regulations .
We need to encourage more research and development , improved higher education and better vocational training , as President Barroso has just emphasised .
The internal market needs to be reinvigorated and extended to new fields .
The stakes could not be higher .
For almost three centuries , the strongest economic powers in the world have also been those with the most liberal and the most democratic constitutions ; the cause of freedom and economic prosperity have marched together .
We are now entering a new era .
By the end of this century , considerable economic power may have shifted to states with undemocratic governments .
That authoritarian capitalism may not evolve gently into the democratic and responsible capitalism we enjoy today in Europe and the West .
We hope those states will liberalise .
We will offer them friendly encouragement to do so , but we know the risks .
It is in the interests of our citizens that the 2020 programme succeeds in stimulating the creation of good jobs and rising living standards , and it is in the interests of the free world that the 2020 programme points the way to a stronger economic future for all our citizens .
Mr President , in times of need , you discover who your friends are , as the saying goes .
There are 27 governments in the European Union trying - each in its own way - to rescue their own banks and large-scale industries .
This has so far resulted in more debt for each individual country and catastrophic savings rates for citizens .
The euphemistic wage restraint policy , reducing non-wage labour costs and the privatisation of life risks such as age , family , sickness and desired education have all been mentioned .
The banks are now using the state rescue packages to speculate against the national budgets .
The banks have already made more progress than the states .
Hypo Real Estate and Commerzbank , which , in Germany , were rescued using billions of euros of taxpayers ' money , are right at the forefront when it comes to the business of excessively expensive government bonds in Greece .
Taxpayers ' money is being used for speculation and this is money from normal , honest wage earners who do not have Swiss bank accounts like those to which the richer people are fleeing .
( Heckling )
Believe me , I find no pleasure in using negative examples from Germany .
However , one governing party in Germany is constantly calling for tax relief , while at the same time , the Greek Government is being called on to increase taxes .
Who will have to find this money , though ?
I fear that it will primarily be those who are already finding it hard to make ends meet .
Was it not Germany , formerly the world 's highest exporter , that years ago separated wage increases from productivity , thus resulting in social dumping ?
In ancient Greek theatre , a crisis means an opportunity - yes , the challenge of a turning point .
In order to bring about such a turning point , we must demand that a statutory minimum wage finally be put in place .
The same work in the same place must receive the same wage .
We need harmonisation of tax types within the Union , but above all , we need genuine European regulation and control of the financial markets and a real European economic and finance policy , coordinated on the basis of solidarity , with binding social and environmental targets .
on behalf of the EFD Group . - President of Europe - this long-awaited day .
We were told that , when we had a President , we would see a giant global political figure : the man that would be the political leader for five hundred million people ; the man that would represent all of us on the world stage ; the man whose job was so important that of course , you are paid more than President Obama .
Well , I am afraid what we got was you .
And I am sorry , but after that performance that you gave earlier ...
I do not want to be rude , but you know , really , you have the charisma of a damp rag and the appearance of a low-grade bank clerk .
( Protests )
The question that I want to ask and that we are all going to ask is : who are you ?
I had never heard of you ; nobody in Europe had ever heard of you .
I would like to ask you , Mr President : who voted for you ?
( Loud protests )
And what mechanism - I know democracy is not popular with you lot - what mechanism do the peoples of Europe have to remove you ?
Is this European democracy ?
I sense , though , that you are competent and capable and dangerous , and I have no doubt that it is your intention to be the quiet assassin of European democracy and of the European nation states .
You appear to have a loathing for the very concept of the existence of nation states ; perhaps that is because you come from Belgium , which , of course , is pretty much a non-country .
( Reactions )
But since you took over , we have seen Greece reduced to nothing more than a protectorate .
Sir , you have no legitimacy in this job at all , and I can say with confidence that I can speak on behalf of the majority of the British people in saying : we do not know you , we do not want you , and the sooner you are put out to grass , the better .
As you said , Mr Chair , you would not like to be rude .
I prefer to go ahead .
Mr Chair , will you take a blue card question ?
Mr Farage , are you willing to apply Article 9 of the treaty to ask to simply leave Europe ?
That way , you will be happy .
Mr President , I am very disappointed in you , Mr Buzek .
It is unacceptable for a group chair to call the President of the European Council a ' damp rag ' in this Parliament , rather than offering political criticism .
( Applause )
Mr President , I would expect you to respond to that with a call to order .
It is not acceptable for this man to freely trample the dignity of this House underfoot .
To Mr Daul , I would like to say that it is not a question of the United Kingdom leaving the EU .
It would perhaps be better for Mr Farage to relinquish his mandate if he finds the European Union and the European Parliament so objectionable .
( Applause )
What I said to Mr Farage two months ago I say , again , today : speeches of this kind , which make personal attacks on particular people , are not acceptable in the European Parliament .
When I spoke with Mr Farage about this , I pointed this out to him .
I would like to say , Mr Schulz , that I have done and am doing just as you suggest .
You may not like what I say , but just consider your behaviour .
After the Irish people voted ' no ' in a referendum , you said that , by supporting the ' no ' vote , our group had opened the door to fascism ; you said that we had behaved as a group in the Parliament like Hitler and the Nazis in the Reichstag .
We have been called mentally weak by Danny Cohn-Bendit .
You know , it has to be ...
It cannot be one way ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
Mr Farage , I am sorry but it was not a personal statement .
We must keep order and all the regulations of our Parliament .
( NL ) First of all , allow me to state calmly the fact that we are conducting this debate in this Chamber , in Brussels , in Belgium .
In the current economic context , we could describe the country of Belgium as the Greece of the North Sea without any exaggeration whatsoever because this country , Belgium , has , after Greece and Italy , the largest government debt in percentage terms in the whole of Europe .
Fundamentally , we are a sick country in Europe and , if I can put it this way , that is in no way a credit to one of the previous speakers , Mr Verhofstadt , former Prime Minister of Belgium .
When it comes to fraud and artificially inflating the budget , he could even teach the Greeks a thing or two !
However , let us not get too worked up about that .
In particular , let us not claim that we will be able to avert the crisis by running up a higher government debt , the infamous Verhofstadt proposal for a European government loan , which is a bill that somebody will have to foot sooner or later .
On the contrary , we have seen , time and again , that it is European decisions that have led us into the crisis , European decisions to throw the Maastricht criteria and the Stability and Growth Pact out of the window all for the sake of appearances , because Europe had to be seen to move forward .
It is also that same Eurocrat obstinacy which is now ramming Turkey 's accession strategy down our throats .
The economic and geographical reality must now be pushed to one side and European citizens have to pay through the nose for the potential accession of a country which is not even European .
The solution is not ' more Europe ' .
The solution is national responsibility and the obligation of individual Member States to cut their coats according to their cloth .
( NL ) President Buzek , President Barroso and , of course , also President Van Rompuy , we are delighted to have you here with us today .
Your comments at the beginning of the debate made it clear that you wish to set to work ambitiously , but also that you wish to perform your role as intended in the Treaty of Lisbon .
I should like to congratulate you on this in advance .
It is important that you are here in connection with the forthcoming 2020 strategy , because it is crucial for re-establishing Europe 's role in the world .
Mr President , and here I address President Barroso as well , you know what our priorities are .
They centre on a green , social , market economy .
This means that our foremost task should be to get small and medium-sized enterprises , as the powerhouse behind our job creation , back on their feet again .
We are not talking about just our trade and services here , but also about our European industry , which we have to make competitive again on the world stage .
We are also talking about our agricultural sector and high-quality food production , which are also competitive on the world stage .
That means that we need SMEs with knowledge , innovation and sustainable technology at their core .
The 2020 strategy must be built on such a foundation .
Such a foundation means an exit strategy that will go hand in hand with a strong stability and growth pact and with the necessary reform of Member State governments ' spending .
Mr President , the old Lisbon Strategy contained too many vague objectives and demonstrated the failure of the open coordination method .
Therefore , my question to you is : what specific objectives are you going to bring in to force the Member States , ultimately , to show real commitment to this new strategy , while remaining within the limits of the Treaty of Lisbon when it comes to subsidiarity ?
( SV ) Mr President , according to the Commission 's own figures , 80 million EU citizens are currently living below the poverty line .
That is indecent and it is also an obstacle to all other development .
At the same time , a man like Mr Farage stands here in Parliament and lets fly with insults at a time when Europe is in crisis and we have a great many important matters to debate .
He should be given a time-out and should not be permitted to attend next week 's session in Strasbourg .
It would be a mild punishment for the behaviour he has exhibited .
Our task now is to produce a new Lisbon Strategy , in other words , EU 2020 .
In this context , it is important to realise that social cohesion and sustainable development are essential for economic growth .
The first society to get away from our dependence on fossil fuels , for example , will take the lead in the creation of new green jobs .
However , we need resources if this is to succeed .
At least 50 % of the funding set aside by the EU and the Member States to get us out of the crisis needs to be invested in a new Green Deal capable of creating these new green jobs .
The Seventh and Eighth Framework Programmes must concentrate on research and development relating to renewable energy .
The Commission must also make vigorous efforts to prevent the social exclusion that is currently taking place around Europe and to strengthen the parties of the labour market .
In recent years , the EU has rightly begun to be seen as a threat to the trade union movement .
This needs to change .
A first step would be to revise the controversial Posting of Workers Directive or , as it has come to be known in Europe , the ' Wage Dumping Directive ' , which is generating so much anger and so much conflict .
We have had enough of that here today in Parliament .
Mr President , the aim of EU 2020 should be to free the potential of the European citizen .
All too often we forget that our strategies for growth are put in place for the benefit of our citizens and the future of our children .
There is no doubt that the Lisbon Strategy failed when it attempted to include everything .
With such a broad agenda , the focus was lost and so were the possibilities to achieve the ambitious goals that were set .
For the 2020 strategy to be more effective , the format needs to be changed into something completely different .
The work should be targeted at the few specific areas where the fundamentals of sustainable growth should be addressed .
As the only directly elected body of the EU , and with full codecision powers in place , this Parliament will have its say in the 2020 strategy .
In order to ensure legitimacy and openness , the Commission and the Council will therefore be wise to include Parliament in the ongoing work of the 2020 strategy .
Just as openness and transparency are essential for the creation of a citizen 's Europe , they are also key instruments in avoiding crises in public finances such as those currently hitting countries across the Union .
Everyone is pointing their fingers at Greece but there are also other Member States that have avoided benchmarking , deceived Europe about their deficits and cheated with their financial statistics .
The method of open coordination has turned into a closed collusion and open humiliation .
Remember , what is true for citizens is also true for governments .
Freedoms also bring responsibilities .
It is now time for governments across Europe to take that responsibility seriously because the problems we face are serious .
( FR ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I agree with the idea of reducing the number of goals in the EU 2020 strategy to a limited number , provided that they are at least ambitious .
Ambitious , firstly , as regards the reduction of our ecological footprint .
Therefore , this is not just about the climate and , from that point of view , returning to the 20 % figure is , in our view , far below what is really required .
Not even 30 % is ambitious .
Next , an ambitious goal concerning the reduction in inequalities : for example , reducing the level of poverty in Europe by 50 % by 2020 ; that certainly would not be a maximum to achieve .
An ambitious goal with regard to education , research , development and innovation , and , of course , an ambitious goal with regard to job creation .
These goals , as has already been mentioned , must be measurable and must be binding ; whether it is a bonus-malus system or something else matters little , but we need results .
However , we will not achieve these results without two absolutely vital ingredients .
The first ingredient is strong market regulations and , from that point of view , Mr Van Rompuy , the developments with regard to financial market supervision and the positions adopted by the Council worry us greatly .
As regards the second ingredient , I would like to stress what Mr Daul said .
Indeed , Mr Daul , Member States will have to abandon more of their sovereignty , in particular in the fiscal area .
I wonder where the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) stands on that .
Without strong fiscal convergence , we will be unable to bring stability back to our public finances and build our tax system on a sustainable basis .
We are thinking of energy , we are thinking , of course , of taxation on financial transactions .
Mr President , I support the direction of the EU 2020 strategy , particularly at this time of economic crisis , and would urge that the EU focus on Europe 's existing comparative economic and competitive advantages and use all tools and resources available , particularly in the area of R & D , to create real EU added value .
I would seek for us to prioritise the completion of the single market for services and goods and to take an ambitious approach in creating a single market for innovative research .
There should be wide encouragement of research and development both in universities and in private enterprises in Europe so that we can be at the forefront of new sustainable industry and technologies .
We must , however , remain vigilant against legislation that serves to hinder these developmental processes .
We need to improve the link between private sector and academic research and work to facilitate the transfer of knowledge into job- and wealth-creating enterprises .
As well as improving the availability of finance for innovation , we need to ensure a reduced administrative burden , particularly for SMEs and micro-entities .
Following SME-friendly procurement policies and allowing SMEs to participate in public / private partnerships will be a start .
An EU 2020 strategy focused on innovation in areas of existing expertise ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
( EL ) Mr President , huge unemployment rallies are being held in Greece today by workers in the private and public sectors .
Anger has spilled on to the streets and the workers are indignant in the face of the harsh measures being taken by the Greek Government at the insistence of the European Union , especially the recent European Council at which , instead of taking measures for the benefit of the weak economies , instead of taking measures to put an end to speculation and create an umbrella of economic and social solidarity , instead of accepting that the Stability Pact does not exist and that bringing it back will deepen the recession and instead of accepting that the Treaty of Lisbon has failed resoundingly , the Council is preparing the 2020 European Commission as an expansion and continuation of the treaty .
You are treating Greece as a scapegoat , dictating measures against the workers , who are not to blame for the crisis , that will usher in similar measures for other countries .
The people of Greece and the people of Europe will shortly deal with you as the people of Argentina dealt with the International Monetary Fund .
( LT ) It is symbolic that 20 years after the fall of the wall that divided Europe , today we are talking about Europe 2020 .
Firstly , I would like to approve the fundamental priorities of the Europe 2020 strategy : knowledge and innovation , a society of high employment and a competitive and sustainable economy .
I propose that we add two more priorities - infrastructure development and an effective energy policy .
While stressing the strengthening of energy security as one of the most important priorities of European energy policy and aiming to ensure the diversification of sources of energy and supply routes , we must not forget the important Rail Baltica and Via Baltica projects which are important not only to Lithuania .
I believe that while preparing a new strategy , we must assess the reasons we failed to achieve the goals outlined in the Lisbon Strategy .
We must not only set out new strategy goals and tasks , but turn discussions that sometimes last too long into concrete action with precise deadlines .
( ES ) Madam President , I believe that this crisis is an opportunity to move forward firmly and with conviction in creating a strong Europe .
In this strong Europe , we will probably have to dispense with the expression ' improving coordination ' , as it means that everything is dependent on the subjects that have to be coordinated and inevitably leads to paralysis and a lack of clarity .
We know that the finances and the public deficits of European countries will suffer until we move towards European financial integration and Eurobonds are issued .
In any case , the European institutions can already take specific action - I will not focus on all the hot air about coordination .
On the one hand , we have the European Central Bank for harmonising financial supervision and on ...
( Remainder of speech not available for technical reasons )


( DE ) Madam President , Mr Barroso , Mr Van Rompuy , if the 2020 strategy is to succeed it must - unlike the Lisbon Strategy - actually be implemented .
In contrast to what previous speakers have said , the goals were not wrong .
The main reason for the failure of the strategy was the fact that the Member States did not stick to the rules and fulfil their obligations .
Moreover , the Commission was not courageous enough , Mr Barroso .
It was not courageous enough in connection with the implementation , in demanding reforms or in executing its own strategy .
With a broad majority , you have a new Commission for your second period of office - I hope that you will improve everything , that you will re-inject dynamism into Europe , that you will promote technology and that we will not only talk about redistribution but that we will compete with the other economic regions of the world .
These regions do not ask whether Europeans agree amongst themselves or whether they are implementing new redistribution programmes .
They have their own dynamism , and we need to respond to this .
That is the task that this strategy must allow us to fulfil .
As yet , only drafts have been tabled and I hope that they will be improved upon , because these drafts seem very much to have a ' carry on as before ' mentality .
There are no really new approaches .
There is not even anything really new from the Council and the new President of the European Council .
However , we need this strategy in order to be able to keep up with the rest of the world .
For this , new framework conditions need to be defined .
We need to think carefully about the climate objectives of the past .
We need to promote technology and not continue to put obstacles in its way .
As a collegial body , the Commission is called on not to represent the interests of individual commissioners , but to take a leading role in Europe .
You can be certain of our unreserved support .
Only then will the 2020 strategy succeed - not with the cowardliness of the governments and the insistence that someone pay for what the relevant partner in Europe does not deal with themselves .


( FR ) Madam President , President Barroso , Mr Van Rompuy , I would like first of all to say that , as far as the 2020 strategy is concerned , everyone agrees on the targets .
However , the problem our continent has today is that it is emerging from a serious crisis , the characteristics of that being that we have extremely weak , or even negative , growth globally .
This therefore requires political awareness and , for me , that has two goals .
Firstly , that of knowing how we organise ourselves politically .
In the positions you hold , you have two major responsibilities : to encourage coordination of economic policies - this is absolutely vital - and to set targets with tools to achieve them .
This brings me on to the second goal , which I believe is essential , and , at the same time , it will be a question .
To achieve goals in public policy , a budget is needed .
Today , Europe is confronted with this dilemma : the Member States have significant deficits and the more significant their deficits , the less they will throw in Europe 's common pot .
Therefore , we are less able to revive our growth .
How do we solve this dilemma ?
This is the question I put to you .
It depends on two elements .
Firstly , what are the guidelines that you will defend when discussing the budgetary perspectives with the Member States ?
Secondly , are you able to move towards innovations that will allow the European Investment Bank and the European Bank of Reconstruction and Development alike to assume much greater responsibility and - why not ? - to enable Europe to borrow to finance this necessity , which is the growth of tomorrow ?
( FR ) Presidents , after the Lisbon Strategy , we now have the 2020 strategy .
Is it a simple name change or a change of direction ?
I address this in particular to Mr Barroso .
While reading your contribution to the informal Council , while hearing you talk today quite rightly of the number of poor in the European Union and of the need to develop financial regulation , I said to myself , Mr Barroso , that it is a pity that you were not a proper President of the Commission over the last few years !
Then you would have been able to do everything that you are proposing to us today .
Today , you say that it is the crisis that prevented you from doing it , but it is easy to blame the crisis .
In the end , every sin can be forgiven , so let us not waste any more time .
I turn therefore with hope to Mr Van Rompuy , firstly to offer him a warmer welcome than the one he was offered previously by one of the other Members - not by the others .
It is you we are counting on .
It is slightly paradoxical , Mr Van Rompuy , but we are counting on you to relaunch Europe , a proper European community , and you come from a country which knows what the word ' community ' means in terms of the general interest .
If you tackle this , you will have the support of this Parliament , and I believe that , as far as the 2020 strategy is concerned , we must not let ourselves be misled by words .
If words mean anything , we must , above all , think medium term , think global and think beyond nationalism .
I agree with what Mr Lamberts said : right now , the Members of the Council are not giving us a great European perspective on financial supervision .
They have both feet on the brakes .
For my part , I therefore propose a single goal , which you actually mention in your own paper for the Council , and that is to have an Economic and Monetary Union in all its forms , to consolidate disciplines and , of course , to consolidate solidarity .
It is also to remind the Council that , while there are problems in Greece , they are partly down to the Greeks and partly down to a lack of solidarity .
( DE ) Madam President , it is easy to set fine goals .
We all do this at the beginning of every year , we set fine goals , but whether they remain a dream , a sermon or whether they become an agenda depends on whether we provide specific answers to the questions of who , what , how , how much and when .
That is what we need to see for the Europe 2020 agenda .
In my opinion , Mr Daul hit the nail on the head at the beginning of this debate .
The question is , are we prepared to renounce national sovereignty in the area of economic policy , or would we rather do without the cohesion of the Union , or without the euro , or without what we have spent decades building up ?
The alternative is that dramatic .
I would also have liked to have heard some clear statements from the representative of the Christian Democratic Union of Germany ( CDU ) , because , as we know , it is the Conservatives in Germany who have so often stood in the way of this .
Madam President , Mr Van Rompuy , Mr Barroso , I would like not only to hear the President of the European Council say , with quiet assurance , that the Council wants to lay down guidelines in this area , but I would also like to see the Commission , together with Parliament , taking on the task of actively and with energy working to produce these guidelines for common European economic governance .
In so doing , it should not merely be led by the hand of Mrs Merkel and Mr Sarkozy , but should make a sincere effort to bring Europe together under a common economic policy .
( EL ) Madam President , as you are well aware , while we are debating the results of the informal European Council , the entire Greek workforce , down to the last man , is on strike in protest against precisely these measures , against precisely these results .
They are protesting about the European Union itself and the policy of the centre-left and centre-right governments unanimously taking anti-grassroots , anti-labour measures purely and simply in order to safeguard the profits of the monopolies .
The European Union , governments and the Commission are trying to terrorise workers throughout the European Union in a bid to make them bow down before the storm of the anti-grassroots measures .
However , in this war , the workers are responding with mass strikes , demonstrations and rallies , about which I have heard you say nothing , Mr Barroso , with demonstrations and strikes being organised by the class-conscious trade unions in numerous countries of the European Union .
There is only one answer which the workers can give to the front being put up by the parties of capital , to the European one-way street , to the compromised trade union leaders , to the widespread attack by the government on wages and pensions : a development in their interests .
( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , there has been a formal show of solidarity with Greece , but in reality , the aim was simply to impose a rigid austerity policy on the Member States of the European Union .
At the closing press conference , Mr Van Rompuy clearly stated that the idea is to establish a kind of dictatorship of the European Union , turning the Council into an imperial junta , with ever greater powers over the Member States .
Before the summit - the Independent revealed - he sent a letter to the Heads of State or Government in which he wrote , in one of the enclosures , that the Members of the Council were responsible for economic strategy within their governments and that they should be responsible for it at EU level too .
Whether one calls it policy coordination or economic governance , only the Council is able to formulate and uphold a European strategy .
He also added that the European Council is very ambitious , that it wants control and wants to act as a leader , albeit , of course , within the scope of consultation , and that that was why he had proposed that the Council meet each month .
These are imperial designs of the architects of the European Union , and they also feature in a project that is circulating in the corridors of the Commission , which calls for 80 % of the EU Member States ' debt to become European Union debt .
The campaign for an economic superstate launched in recent days is liable to turn not only Greece but all the 27 Member States of the European Union into protectorates .
( DE ) Madam President , the EU has now adopted a post-Lisbon Strategy in which it has been careful not to commit itself to any testable goals at all .
Focusing on the green economy will not , in itself , be enough to guarantee the competitiveness of Europe as a centre of production .
In my opinion , in addition to a well-functioning energy supply and infrastructure , this will require well-trained workers and not wave after wave of migrant workers flooding the labour market with cheap labour .
If it is necessary to make the national labour markets more flexible , then it must not lead to the transitional periods for the new Member States being lifted by the back door .
A time of crisis , in which more and more people are becoming unemployed or having to eke out a living from part-time work or ' one-euro jobs ' , is not the time for the EU to give new impetus to the existing merciless competition on the labour market .
The European Union should not , as a general rule , employ despotism .
It must not immediately withdraw financial aid from structurally weak regions because no reforms have been carried out - not even as a threat .
We certainly do not need a new advisory committee to evaluate the goals , which will probably end up on the shelf once again .
Instead of more centralism , we need to move the subsidies back to national level .
Europe 2020 must not trigger another competition marathon and privatisation exodus .
Instead , it must guarantee the prosperity of the citizens of Europe .
The EU has a chance now to gain status as a bulwark against globalisation and this will probably be its only chance .

( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , President of the Council , you may not be well known , as Mr Farage maintains , but I know that your ideals are deeply rooted in European tradition and culture , and for that I admire and respect you .
Precisely for that reason , may I take the liberty of commenting on your very rational speech by drawing an analogy from the world of football .
The vision that you have of your role seems to me to be similar to that of a halfback , of a midfielder who has the job of bringing order to the game for a team which , after the rule changes introduced by the Treaty of Lisbon , may find it harder to score goals , that is , to achieve its objectives .
In the light of this example , I believe that it is up to Parliament to risk more than the other players , to be a striker who continually reinvents the game , taking inspiration from the new rules so as to strengthen the team 's attacking ability and to put our hypothetical centre forward - the Barroso Commission - in a position to score .
What will happen if we do not follow this approach , which I wholeheartedly support ?
We will withdraw into a defensive position and we will score an own goal against the interests of our fellow citizens .
Precisely for this reason , Mr Van Rompuy , I ask you to support the new leading role played by Parliament and to see it not as an obstacle , but as an opportunity .
We are all required to rise to this historic occasion , to perform a historic role , a historic task , and I am certain that you are the right man to lead us .
( ES ) ( Beginning of speech not available for technical reasons ) ...
If we are talking about the 2020 strategy , we are not only talking about the post-Lisbon strategy , but also about the strategy of recognising the failure to fulfil Lisbon , or to put it more harshly and crudely , the strategy of recognising the failure of Lisbon .
It is a strategy that was designed to ensure growth and sustainability , but it has not been fulfilled , because it has not succeeded in ensuring sustainability , from a financial , environmental or social point of view .
From a financial point of view , Europe has constructed the Monetary Union , but it is very far not only from constructing the Economic Union , but even from coordinating economic policy and the fiscal stimuli that should accompany the Monetary Union .
From an energy point of view , a single European policy is still yet to be invented .
From a social point of view , all over Europe , there is discontent among workers , unions and the most disadvantaged classes , who are concerned about the sustainability of the model that made us better when it made us Europeans , the very model that has succeeding in ensuring welfare and social cohesion .
In view of the informal Council meeting that was held on 11 February , I would like to ask what commitment the Council , the Commission and all the European institutions want to make in order to strengthen the commitment to the social pact that was mentioned in the speech by the rotating President of the Union for the next six months , the Spanish Prime Minister , José Luis Rodríguez Zapatero ?
A social pact that is able to clearly state that this time , Europe is going to make a commitment to financial and environmental sustainability , and also to preserving the social model that made us better when it made us Europeans .
Mr President , Mr Barroso talked earlier on about wanting an ambitious strategy , and it is true that there are parts of the document EU 2020 which are ambitious , but certainly the greenhouse gas emission figure is not ambitious : it is pathetic , and it is not going to get us where we want to go .
We should be looking at 40 % by 2020 . Of course , the issue is not only about climate but also about resource availability and increasing resource efficiency .
There is a lot , as well , that we seem to have seen before in this strategy , not least about economic growth coming through more and more as a goal rather than an indicator .
It should not be the goal of a strategy .
The EU has many areas where we have tried to decouple growth from transport , energy use , whatever , and it has long been decoupled from jobs .
So , can we please not talk as if , somehow , growth is going to deliver jobs ?
We also need to be looking not just at reducing poverty but reducing inequalities , because that has known demonstrable benefits , and we need to make sure that our financial institutions do not undermine the ambitious goals that we might put in place .
( DE ) Mr van Rompuy , first of all , I would like to thank you for the letter that you sent us .
I can tell you that I fully support the principles , values and the direction to take that you set out in the letter .
I am pleased that you said today that you want to meet almost on a monthly basis , because it is your job to bring the Heads of State or Government and the Member States back to Europe .
The Lisbon Strategy itself was not wrong , but the methods were wrong and the political will was lacking for the objectives to be implemented in the Member States .
It must be your job to coordinate the Member States in areas where the powers of the European Commission and the Union are inadequate .
You said very clearly that the market is not enough .
Yes indeed , we want a social market economy .
The monetary union is not enough .
We need political union .
The first test for all of us will be the 2011 budget , which will already have to be based on the Europe 2020 strategy .
Europe 2020 is not the goal ; it is the instrument with which we will do what we need to do in response to the financial and economic crisis .
We need more coordination in budgetary policy , fiscal policy , economic policy , research policy and education policy , because we cannot improve our competitiveness with economic goals alone .
We therefore need the Small Business Act to be implemented in the Member States .
Our motto should be ' small businesses first ' , because that will create jobs in the regions .
There are three things I would like to see .
Mr Barroso , we need a study of the effects of all of the Commission 's measures on the real economy , not just on the banking sector .
We need a review of our finances which also takes account of demographic changes and the social security and pension systems .
We also need a joint package that includes coordination , the excessive deficit procedure , the exit strategy and Europe 2020 , so that these do not contradict each other .
( ES ) President Van Rompuy , President Barroso , I really like the sound of what I have heard today .

I hope that the lyrics will be the same next week , because as we have all understood - as have you - that would mean that we can and must set ourselves objectives , and that we can choose our future .
It would mean that there is no economic determinism , that there is a voice for politics , a voice for citizens , a voice for our future in our own hands .
It would mean the economy sets limits for us and provides us with the means , but that the objectives are set by us , and that the economy should be serving society rather than the other way around .
It would mean that , as has been said here this afternoon , we need a long-term strategy , not just a short-term strategy , because I believe that is the lesson we can learn from the past .
The lesson we can learn from the past is that we have experienced considerable economic growth , but on the basis of speculation , which has not taken into account justice , fairness , the environment , the future or future generations .
I therefore really hope , President-in-Office of the Council , that next week , we will have documents that contain an ambitious agenda , an agenda that points to sustainability , an agenda that makes economic , social and environmental concerns compatible , because they are interdependent .
I would now like to say a few words about the social dimension of the agenda : that is where the demands , dreams and fears of citizens are manifested , the dreams and fears of those that are within and outside the labour market , of the victims of the arrogance of the financial markets , which has taken control of the real economy and destroyed it .
That is where the hopes lie that we will put an end to this , that we will make a policy for full employment , for quality jobs , for jobs that are inclusive for all , and that we will finally make Europe 's objective excellence rather than the fight to lower social standards .


( DE ) Madam President , Mr Barroso , Mr Van Rompuy , the crisis in the European economy is so deep that we have to expect very specific proposals in this situation -. specific proposals along the lines of those put forward here by various speakers .
European economic governance has been called for in many different ways by Parliament .
Provide a proposal for how the risks relating to the high levels of debt can be distributed so that Greece and other countries are not crushed by high interest rates .
Provide a proposal - as called for by the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs yesterday - for how we can tackle the imbalances .
It is not only the countries with the deficits that need to be penalised and to make changes .
Reforms also need to be made in the countries that have excessive surpluses .
We need European statistics that are independent and we need to take effective measures to prevent tax competition .
Such proposals have been put forward in Parliament .
It is now up to you to finally put these things on the table .


( FR ) Mr Van Rompuy , Minister , Mr Barroso , ladies and gentlemen , finally , you are with us , President of the European Council , welcome !
However , I will begin by reiterating my great disappointment that your first political move was not to come and present yourself to the representatives of the peoples of Europe following 1 December , the date you officially took office .
Like us , Mr Van Rompuy , you are a politician , and politics cannot exist without democracy .
The democratic lesson of the French and Dutch referendums of 2005 and of many other peoples , had they been consulted , is that citizens are saying they are not against Europe , but they have the feeling that it is being built without them , and sometimes against them .
It is therefore thanks to Mrs Merkel , who was in your seat in 2007 , and to Mr Sarkozy , who had just been elected President of the Republic of France , that citizens were once again placed at the heart of European integration with the Treaty of Lisbon , which created the high office that you hold .
Mr Van Rompuy , you must understand that nothing can be done without the citizens and their representatives , just as our Parliament must understand that nothing can be done without the Member States and hence , the Heads of State or Government .
Let us get to the point : the peoples of Europe are suffering because they no longer understand the huge global disruption going on around them .
Your duty is to give meaning to it , to set the course , to convince the European Council that Europe is not a problem , but a solution .
Europe does not expose , it protects .
Europe does not suffer , it acts .
What is your vision of the world and of the European Union 's place in it ?
Could you tell us what part intergovernmentalism plays in your European strategy , in particular , with regard to the economic governance that we are lacking and the establishment of the External Action Service ?
Mr Van Rompuy , the European Union walks on two legs .
The Member States and governments and the peoples .
We are looking for the head , and you are the head !
Moreover , you should not be in the passenger seat , but in the driving seat , and the future of the European Union will depend on your ability to steer the Member States towards a political Union .
Thank you for being here , Mr Van Rompuy .
You are a man of great quality .
Do not fear the peoples and their representatives .
Love them and they will love you back .
( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , in defining the mid-term strategy , the Union will have to take account of the effects of the economic crisis , which is today penalising this part of the world - and other parts too - and , of course , of the shortcomings that gave rise to the modest results of the previous strategy , the 2000 Lisbon Strategy .
The crisis gives us some specific pointers with regard to development and full employment , if we want to incorporate - as I believe is necessary - this objective in our action .
Firstly , regulatory instruments and supervision of the financial system and of the banks are required to ensure that the negative conditions that are severely penalising us today are not repeated .
Secondly , we will need to invest heavily in innovation , research and training , particularly if we want to move towards a green economy .
For substantial investment to be possible , however , Europe must equip itself with Eurobonds and with a system of rewards and penalties so that it can achieve its economic objectives .
Those are the main shortcomings of Lisbon I.
We will have to introduce uniform redistributive policies with regard to both taxation and pay .
Moreover , a coordinated industrial policy is required for sectors in order to protect the historic manufacturing structure of our region of the world .
Lastly , we need to reshape and relaunch social dialogue as a force for cohesion and for curbing the dangers of long-term unemployment with which we have to come to terms .


( ES ) Madam President , President Van Rompuy , President Barroso - who is not here , but whom I am also addressing - the truth is that it has been very good to see you together and , in my opinion , this is because we have seen that there is a move towards and a focus on what should be the foundations of the common strategy in the next ten years and , in my view , this is extremely important .
What most interested me about the proposal that we have seen in writing and what you have said is that there only need to be a few objectives : only the top-priority objectives ; that they need to be tangible , that we need to be able to measure them and they need to be constantly evaluated in order to see whether or not we are making progress in that direction .
I think this is fundamental , and it is a substantial change from the Lisbon Strategy .
I am going to highlight one objective : the internal market .
The European internal market was conceived more than 20 years ago .
Twenty years later , there is a long way to go before we have a truly internal European market in the majority of sectors .
In some cases , this is because they are very new sectors , such as the digital market , but in other cases , there is such a degree of fragmentation and such barriers that we are depriving the European economy of the large-scale framework that it needs in order to be able to really develop all the competitiveness that it needs , which will bring about growth , which , in turn , will bring about employment .
Mr Van Rompuy , Mr Barroso , we need a great deal of political impetus : ' business as usual ' can no longer be a tool .
We need a great deal of leadership , and you have a big responsibility .
You do , of course , have my full support for making this possible .
( HU ) Ladies and gentlemen , as a member of the Trio Presidency and as a Hungarian MEP , I follow with great appreciation the activity of President Van Rompuy for the strong European commitment and faith with which he took on his new duties .
It is absolutely true that now is the time to determine how the Presidency of the European Council will operate .
I am convinced that Europe , in the throes of a crisis , needs a strong hand and orientation at the helm .
It is also a question of credibility for the new programme to avoid the fate of its predecessor , the Lisbon Strategy .
I say this also as a member from a previously communist country .
In that nook of Europe , there is - perhaps understandably - a natural aversion to bombastic long-term plans .
I have one institutional and one substantive comment .
Concerning the institution : we have to decide to whom this strategy is addressed .
If it is addressed to EU leaders , then what has been done until now is adequate and the tight schedule is a good thing .
However , if we think it is addressed to the citizens of the EU , whom we want to win over to our side , whom we want to work with and not against in shaping a stronger , more competitive Union that delivers more benefits to citizens than it does now , then we must proceed in accordance with the Treaty of Lisbon and honestly involve the European Parliament and , what is more , national parliaments as well .
Today 's debate is no substitute for dealing with the topic in this House in the usual manner , with the rapporteur 's statement , in the committees and the political groups .
As for the substantive comment , the most important goal must be job creation .
That must be the starting point for all new strategy .
How to accomplish this ?
We know very little about that at this point .
We know this much : fewer priorities , pinpointing bottlenecks , tighter economic policy coordination .
That is all fine , but please , take into consideration the following : first , let us not throw out that which has been working well .
The EU has been strengthened by the existing community policies , and moreover , it goes against the founding treaties to discard cohesion and agricultural policies that serve well the interests of EU citizens .
Secondly , the new strategy is to serve the interests of all regions , not only those of certain companies or countries .
Through cohesion , the EU 's competitiveness will grow as well .
Thirdly , let us tailor the strategy to the countries .
That is what will lend credibility to the whole thing .
( EL ) Madam President , this is a very interesting debate being held here today on the strategy for 2020 , but we all know full well that the informal European Council on 11 February was dominated by the so-called Greek question .
We also know that the informal summit culminated in a statement by the Heads of State or Government giving political support to Greece , expressing a readiness to take action to stabilise the euro and pointing out that Greece has not requested any financial support from the European Union .
I should like to take this opportunity to remind the House that the Greek Government and the Greek Prime Minister have repeatedly emphasised that Greece is not asking for money , it is not asking for German or Austrian or Swedish or any other European taxpayer to pay its debts , which it will deal with , which it will limit through its own efforts based on the measures which have already been announced .
While we are on the subject , Mr Verhofstadt , it is not correct that Greece has said that it has provided all the information on the Goldman Sachs bond ; it has said that it will provide it promptly .
Moreover - I cannot see the President of the European Commission here ; I should like to express my perplexity as to why explanations were only requested from the Greek authorities and from Greece about a practice which was applied to saturation point by numerous Member States in the euro area over the ten years from 1998 to 2008 , as reported in numerous articles in the foreign press recently .
Greece is not asking for money .
It is asking for something else .
Something which should be self-evident , not only by reason of its participation in the euro area , but also , more generally , by reason of its participation in the European Union : an expression of political support , solidarity and basic and honest trust .
Support not just in words ; support which has substance and content and will not be removed and undermined as soon as we are no longer behind closed doors .
Greece is asking for its partners not to do or say anything to fuel speculation and to stop sowing doubt as to whether or not Greece will be able to achieve results with the measures it has announced because , in the final analysis , that would undermine the efforts which the country is making .
We must not bury our heads in the sand .
We all know that , through Greece , speculators are targeting the euro area and the euro .
So let us take all the measures needed to protect the euro area and the euro .
( Applause )
( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I must express my sincere regret , and that of the entire Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , which I have the honour of chairing , that no reference whatsoever has been made to the agri-food sector in the 2020 strategy .
It is absurd that the Commission 's proposed strategy for the next 10 years does not include the central issue of the challenge relating to food security , growth and job retention in rural areas .
Madam President , how can one conceive of a green and sustainable Europe without taking into account that 45 % of all European territory is managed by farmers ?
How can one fail to take into account the nearly 30 million people who work on that territory ?
These are workers who must be safeguarded and protected .
Before we focus on new jobs , we must protect the existing ones .
I would remind you that agriculture provides a whole host of essential services relating to , among other things , food , biodiversity , the landscape and the environment , and these are tasks that are performed for the sake of the social and economic life of rural areas .
The Spanish Presidency has also insisted strongly on the need for a powerful common agricultural policy .
I am therefore concerned about this very serious omission , which I hope Parliament will be able to put right .
( FI ) Madam President , this is the year of the tiger , and China is an economic tiger .
At the moment , India is a colossal building site , and I think that Indian development will have a huge impact on Europe .
It is precisely for this reason that we need a new rhythm , the new beginning that EU 2020 symbolises .
We need a common economic policy , an intelligent tax policy and the courage to acknowledge our structural weaknesses : research and product development .
These issues have been very well presented here .
I have two questions .
How in future are we to monitor the implementation of the Stability and Growth Pact on the basis of this Greek tragedy and the lesson it has taught us ?
My other question is this : what carrots and sticks are we to employ to enable the EU 2020 strategy to be more successful than the Lisbon tragedy , since the Member States could not care less about it ?
( RO ) Madam President , President in Office of the Council , I am pleased that you are here with us .
I do not understand why the Council is attempting to make a decision in such haste , without any serious consultation with the European Parliament .
We need the 2020 strategy as the Lisbon Strategy has not proved to be effective .
However , the documents which are going round are general and fail to provide any clear statements referring to the future challenges .
One example is the social aspect .
The main social problems in Europe are the increased ageing of the population and the lack of high qualifications for workers .
In these circumstances , allocating less than 2 % of GDP to research , development and innovation is a first mistake which needs to be quickly rectified .
Research and development could be based on public-private partnerships and on encouraging business people to invest in research laboratories and institutes in order to discourage the brain drain to the United States or Japan .
( SK ) I will try to be brief , in order to keep to the limit .
I am disappointed that the President of the Commission is no longer sitting here , but I believe that the man responsible for interinstitutional cooperation is sitting here .
As an important step towards making strategy 2020 a success , I would therefore like to speak in particular about how essential it is for the various EU institutions to stop competing against each other and for us to cooperate together in earnest on the instruments without which it will be impossible to achieve the objectives of strategy 2020 .
It is , therefore , very important for national egoisms to be genuinely transformed into a sense of national responsibility and also a sense of responsibility at the European level , because unless we address the issue of harmonising social policy and harmonising tax policy as soon as possible , it will not be possible to fulfil the objectives of economic policy or of our common European economy which will turn us into a genuinely competitive region in a globalised world .
Madam President , I am most grateful to President Van Rompuy for describing his job spec , but I still do not quite understand why he is declining to answer my parliamentary question .
I would like to ask him to reconsider his approach to the issue of parliamentary questions .
Can I also apologise to President Van Rompuy for the disgraceful performance of Nigel Farage .
I guarantee him that the great majority of British MEPs are going to treat him with great respect .
( EL ) Madam President , the eyes of the whole of Europe - and not just Europe - have been on Greece recently , as numerous speakers have already said .
Against the backdrop of global economic crisis , it is not , of course , just Greece that has serious economic problems .
There are other countries as well , as we all know .
We are witnessing an unprecedented speculative attack which - I am sorry to say - has lately taken the form of slander of the worst form by some of the media .
Be that as it may , you can all be certain that Greece is not bankrupt , Greece is not collapsing .
Moreover , our country has never asked for financial support .
What it has asked for and is asking for is political support .
What it has asked for and is asking for is real proof of solidarity from the other Member States within the framework of European Monetary Union because , in the final analysis , that is what is at stake .
( RO ) At the start of the year , the unemployment rate reached 10 % , while the deficit has grown in numerous Member States .
Europe 's citizens are waiting on immediate solutions to the current fundamental challenges : demographic changes and climate change , as well as the economic and financial crisis .
The European Union must invest , as a priority , in creating and preserving jobs in education , health care , agriculture and transport and energy infrastructures .
The European Union needs a sustainable energy strategy and a modern , safe and efficient transport infrastructure .
We must invest in energy efficiency measures for the benefit of both housing and modernising industrial facilities , thereby enabling us to create more than two million new jobs by 2020 .
In addition , reducing polluting emissions means modernising industrial facilities across the European Union and not relocating European industry to third countries .
Last but not least , the ageing population and fall in the birth rate necessitate reform to the social systems so that every citizen in the European Union can be guaranteed a decent living .

Member of the Commission . - Mr President , honourable Members of the European Parliament , the session went a little bit over time and the President of the Commission had to leave because of other obligations , but it is an honour for me to answer on behalf of President Barroso and on behalf of the Commission .
I would like to start by thanking you all for a fascinating debate , for many interesting ideas , and for the enthusiasm and support you are showing for the EU 2020 strategy .
Without your support , the EU 2020 cannot and will not succeed .
I can assure you that the Commission will be very bold ; the EU 2020 will put citizens , employment and reduction of poverty at its core and centre .
I can also assure you that we have learned the lessons of the Lisbon Strategy and therefore we will focus on a lesser number of targets and we will definitely improve on governance .
At the Commission , we are very much encouraged by the strong interest and what we hope will be strong support from the European Parliament .
We are also very much encouraged by the sense of urgency in the European Council where it is very clear that the atmosphere today is very different from that of five years ago when we were discussing the parameters of the Lisbon Strategy .
But we need to do more ; we need to get local and regional support for this strategy and , most importantly , we need to get the people behind it .
We must make sure that they will not see it as another administrative exercise but that they will see it as an approach on how to improve life in Europe and in their countries and regions .
I would like to ask you , honourable Members , to help us with this task .
Let us not compete among the institutions , let us cooperate , let us focus on the priorities and let us deliver the concrete results .
In the EU 2020 strategy , we would like to introduce a three-interlocking-pillar system based on a smart , greener and inclusive economy and we would like to build upon these pillars flexible initiatives which would be aimed at the bottlenecks , at the problems which are slowing the European economy , which are blocking it from using its full potential .
We would like to focus more on education and training , so that the labour force in Europe will maintain the competitive edge which Europe deserves .
We will keep the EU 2020 strategy linked to the stability and growth pact , because a solid fiscal position is key to the economic stability .
We talked much today about Greece and I would like to assure you that there was consensus that the euro area Member States would take determined and coordinated action if needed to safeguard financial stability in the euro area .
The Commission will closely work together with Greece and monitor how it implements the recommendations .
A mission led by the Commission with the ECB and drawing on the IMF for technical support is now in Athens to assess the need for Greece to take additional measures .

Let me be very clear ; we have the tools to safeguard financial stability in the euro area if needed ; this involves , in particular , the euro area Members , the Commission and the European Central Bank and we stand ready to put in place a European framework for coordinating the action .
But each stage in this process must be allowed to take its course , and it is now for Greece to press on with the reforms and to put the necessary measures in place .
I believe that we are ready to take bold action , be it on the EU 2020 strategy or on the situation in Greece .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I am glad that we have had this debate ; I am glad that I accepted your invitation to come here , at the very beginning of the process of the 2020 strategy , because the debate has only just begun .
We had a debate just recently , on 11 February , we will have a spring Council at the end of March , and we will finalise the 2020 strategy , or the strategy for employment and economic growth , at the end of June .
We therefore have a considerable amount of time in which to exchange views and determine the course of action once and for all .
I therefore welcome this European ambition that I have found here this afternoon , and I welcome this sense of urgency that I have encountered this afternoon .
There was one speech for which I have nothing but contempt , but I am not going to comment on that further .
As far as the economic strategy is concerned , I will make a distinction between three periods .
The first period is the period that we are still in now , in other words , the financial crisis and all its consequences .
Allow me to use a different language from what I have heard this afternoon throughout the entire debate .
I will explain .
I would like to use a language that also reflects what is positive about the European Union , because surprising though it may seem , there are also positive things that have happened recently .
We have drawn consequences and learnt lessons from the crisis of the 1930s .
We now find ourselves one year on from the major crisis and , in fact , in 2010 , we now have positive growth in most countries once more .
That did not happen during the 1930s .
The crisis actually lasted until the end of the decade .
Why do we have this positive growth now ?
Because we have taken measures .
We have taken measures to save the financial institutions , not because we particularly like them as such , but because , without them , there is no economy .
We have conducted an intelligent monetary policy .
We have injected liquidity into the economy , something that no one did 70 years ago .
For at least 16 countries , we have created a zone of monetary stability , in spite of all the problems .
In the 1930s , we had competitive devaluations .
We have not had them today .
We have conducted a risky budgetary policy using budgetary deficits to stimulate the economy .
We did not do what was done in the 1930s , namely restore budgetary equilibrium as quickly as possible .
Therefore , we have protected our internal market , which is not perfect .
We must improve it , and Mr Monti will provide us with some concrete proposals .
However , we have not lapsed back into the protectionism of the 1930s .
Therefore , we have learnt some lessons from the major crisis that we have just experienced .
I would even go a step further .
It is thanks to the European Union that the G20 was born ; we were the ones who took the initiative to create this embryonic world governance .
It is the first time that the big powers , new and old , have come together to combat the crisis , in an imperfect way , but we will continue to work along these lines .
So Europe , the European Union , should not always be put on the defensive .
There are also some very positive things that have been produced .
Now we must leave this strategy , this so-called exit strategy , behind .
We have to find a balance between abandoning the budgetary stimuli too quickly and returning , in the medium term , to budgetary equilibrium , which is absolutely necessary to fund our pension system , our social security system and our health care system .
So it is a difficult balance that we have to find , and the Stability and Growth Pact provides us with the means to do it , because it does not require an immediate return to budgetary equilibrium .
It requires a step-by-step approach , whereby we first reach a stage of 3 % and then , in the medium term , budgetary equilibrium .
I think that we have conducted and we are continuing to conduct a wise policy .
As far as the Lisbon Strategy is concerned , we know its handicaps , but we must not forget either that the financial and economic crisis has completely disrupted the implementation of the Lisbon agenda .
There have , of course , been omissions ; I am not going to list them here , they are well known .
I will say this , however : we need some major reforms , or important reforms , and these important reforms , at European level and nationally , will demand budgetary choices .
It is not by chance - and I have repeated this in the written conclusions that you have read - that we want to link the budgetary discussion , effectively in its legal framework of the Stability and Growth Pact , to economic reforms .
This is because , if we say that we need to do more research and development , for example , then we must make provision for that in the national budgets and in the European Union 's financial perspective .
That means that some budgetary choices will need to be made .
Another consequence of the choices we are making for the Lisbon Strategy is that the goals that we are proposing will not always be soft goals .
It so happens that they could be hard goals .
This is where it gets difficult .
There is , on the one hand , the demand for reforms and , on the other , the implementation of the reforms .
I do not say that I have heard it here , but outside this House , at European level , people are demanding hard measures , major reforms , hard reforms , and when people go back to their countries , I see few results of all that .
We therefore need a consistent position .
It is not just the European Union that will implement reforms .
We can encourage them , stimulate them and provide the right framework for them , but it is at national level that a large number of reforms will have to be made , and therefore , it is a matter of demonstrating significant political will , and political commitment is the most important thing .
It is often said that we need more binding measures .
However , we should think about this .
I have made quite a few proposals , which I believe are more intelligent than binding measures .
However , even the Stability and Growth Pact , which contains many binding measures , has failed to put some countries back on track .
Therefore , the method is not everything , the method does not resolve everything , and without political engagement , without commitment , the method is worthless .
As for the economic strategy , it is all very well for some to say that we need more constraints .
However , as far as economic guidelines are concerned , the Treaty of Lisbon does not make provision for that .
I myself did not draw up the Treaty of Lisbon , others did , but it does not provide for any sanctions , penalties , or negative measures as regards the implementation of the economic guidelines .
Take a close look at Article 121 so that you are fully aware of this .
Political commitment at both European and national level is therefore crucial , and without this political commitment , nothing will be done .
One final word about Greece .
I believe that we have sent out the right message .
We have conveyed the message of the responsibility of the Greek Government , which must handle an extremely difficult situation , a situation that it inherited .
It is taking some brave measures .
On 11 February , it told us that if the current measures are not enough to achieve a reduction in the deficit of 4 % of GDP in 2010 , it would take additional measures .
We have made a commitment to carry out more monitoring , not only on the initiative of the European Commission , but also with the help of the European Central Bank and even of experts from the International Monetary Fund .
I therefore believe that we really have framed and defined very clearly the aspect of responsibility .
If necessary , there is , of course , an element of solidarity .
Greece has said that it does not want to use that , but we have provided for two messages : a message of responsibility and a message of solidarity , if necessary .
Naturally , we must draw conclusions from what has happened in Greece in recent years .
In the euro area too , we must be more proactive with regard to both data collection and politics itself .
This crisis was also a challenge , a challenge in the sense that we must practise the policy of coordination more .
In fact , every crisis is a challenge .
We must learn lessons from every crisis .
Well , we will learn them .
In the same way as we learnt lessons from the crisis of the 1930s , we must now also learn lessons from the financial crisis : more regulation , more monitoring of bonuses , a more far-reaching banking policy .
However , we must also learn all the lessons from the experience of Greece and others .
Ladies and gentlemen , I believe that I have felt the same ambition in this House ; I have felt the same political will to pursue an economic policy and strategy which can cope with the difficulties that we face today .
As many of you have said , this is not just the responsibility of one or two people ; all the European institutions and all the Member States must assume collective responsibility .
Otherwise , we will not save our social model ; otherwise , we will lose our position in the world .
It is therefore in this frame of mind that I have come to meet you here this afternoon , and it is in this frame of mind that I will continue my work .
( Applause )
Thank you very much , Mr President .
It was indeed a great pleasure to have you here with us for your maiden appearance in plenary .
In Greece , we have an expression for someone who assumes tough new duties .
We say : σιδηροκέφαλος , which means may you have an iron head in order to sustain everything that will fall on it during a difficult course .
I think you have exhibited that ; if you do not have it , you are developing it .
Thank you so much for being here with us .
The economic crisis has left a deep negative imprint on the EU countries ' potential for economic growth .
We have followed the debates on this topic and seen that attention has been focused on the measures for exiting the crisis and reviving economic growth financially .
It is undoubtedly a good idea to tackle the problems in order of severity .
However , it is important for us to realise that the situation is no longer the same as it was prior to the crisis .
It is actually the economic model which needs to change .
It must be based more on innovation and non-polluting energy sources , and focus on people 's state of health .
We cannot have a dynamic economy unless we have motivated workers .
We cannot have a sustainable economy either if we support environmental protection only with half-measures .
I believe that in order to restore the potential for economic growth , we need to start with changing the economic model itself , which must focus on what generates innovation and personal motivation .
Exiting from the crisis is basically not a problem about economic or fiscal policy .
Europe has already had a lesson , having been unable to implement the goals set out in the Lisbon Strategy and I hope that it will learn from the mistakes that caused the economic and financial crisis .
Therefore , in future , I call on you to pay greater attention firstly to the creation of jobs and to create not just any jobs , but try to ensure high quality full employment , taking into account the needs of the labour market and ensuring social inclusion .
Secondly , it is very important to fight for gender equality and the abolition of poverty , especially with regard to people in the most vulnerable groups , as they are most affected by poverty during these hard times .
I would also like to draw attention to education systems and the importance of acquiring new skills .
Since the labour markets of the EU Member States are experiencing dynamic change , it is necessary to ensure that workers have the required skills for future labour markets .
Therefore , it is imperative to invest in internal staff training and lifelong learning .
We ought to pay most attention to one of society 's most severe problems , growing youth unemployment .
If young people are not given opportunities to enter the labour market , then there is a danger that Europe will lose a whole generation of young people .
At the informal meeting of EU Heads of State or Government on the Europe 2020 strategy on 11 February , the very important matter of governance was raised .
Although the European Council is very ambitious in this matter , I would nevertheless call on you to ensure even more active participation by the European Parliament , national parliaments and various Council sectors .
in writing . - ( PT ) In this debate , those who hold responsibility within the European Union remain far removed from the real problems of citizens .
The examples which we continue to find on our visits and in our contact with workers , farmers , fishermen and owners of micro- and small enterprises demonstrate that the approaches and policies of the European Union are only serving to render employment more precarious and to aggravate unemployment and exploitation .
At a time when unemployment figures have topped 23 million and poverty affects more than 85 million people , it is not acceptable to persist with the policies which have caused this situation .
We therefore insist on the need to terminate the Stability Pact and to replace it with a Development and Employment Pact prioritising the creation of jobs with rights and an increase in production .
It is necessary to break with the so-called Lisbon Strategy and instead back a Social Progress Strategy which gives priority to the fight against poverty , supports quality public services and social resources , and promotes equality and women 's rights .
That means developing a budgetary policy which speeds up the allocation of Community support funds and transfers them more quickly and easily to the Member States ...
( Explanation of vote abbreviated in accordance with Rule 170 of the Rules of Procedure )
The EU 2020 strategy can only succeed if the Member States demonstrate sufficient commitment to carrying it out .
Besides unequivocal acceptance of national responsibilities , the key to success lies in implementing Community policies with their concomitant resources provided for catching up , regional development and agriculture , which will all contribute to economic growth and job creation .
The top-down working method now taking shape , based on the heightened political accountability of prime ministers , also provides stronger guarantees of a successful execution than was the case for the Lisbon Strategy .
The 2020 strategy also sets out the next budgetary term 's priorities without providing for detailed discussion at present .
Consequently , one has to emphasise right now the importance of a common agricultural and cohesion policy for the next seven-year budget beginning in 2014 .
Without economic , social and territorial cohesion , there is no strong , competitive Europe .
Convergence between the regions strengthens Europe 's competitiveness .
Ladies and gentlemen , one of the most important challenges facing the EU is the reassessment of the Lisbon Strategy , with the associated fight against poverty and exclusion and the strengthening of social cohesion .
The 2020 initiative , which constitutes one of the mainstays of the Spanish-Belgian-Hungarian Trio Presidency , has to respond to the long-term demographic and social challenges facing the continent .
This means no less than a rethinking of the European labour market and educational system .
In the face of the failure of the present European Employment Strategy , the 2020 programme must indeed create more and better jobs , with primary consideration given to the increased participation of women and disadvantaged groups in the labour market .
It is commendable that both the European Commission 's agenda and the action plan of the incoming Trio Presidency place emphasis on factors indispensable to the programme 's success , such as measures targeting undeclared work , the black economy and early school leavers , as well as improving self-employment conditions .
Since socio-economic exclusion is the result of numerous interdependent factors , solutions may come only from a more comprehensive action plan addressing all areas together , rather than from the project-based ideas that have hitherto prevailed .
In order to be successful , isolated initiatives must be abandoned in favour of measures that are woven into a balanced policy package that focuses on early interventions and can ensure genuine improvement in each of the true measures of social exclusion reflected in the Laeken indicators .
The current economic crisis is the most severe in recent decades , with its impact being reflected in the reduction by half of growth potential across the EU .
This economic decline is also going hand in hand with an increase in the population ageing rate , which is hampering the efforts to help the EU economies recover .
Against this backdrop , the 2020 strategy , which is intended to be a continuation of the Lisbon Strategy , must create the conditions required for sustainable growth and fiscal consolidation .
In fact , lifelong learning must be much more accessible , with universities being much more open to accepting non-mainstream students .
Better correlation between supply and demand and greater labour mobility will provide workers with more opportunities in places where there is greatest demand for their skills .
Modern social security and pension systems are required in order to reduce poverty and exclusion .
Employment policy must focus on labour market flexibility where employees assume responsibility for their working life through ongoing training , adapting to change and mobility .
It is vital to adapt to the current climate of economic crisis and an ageing European population so that we are able to provide a sufficient level of support to people who are temporarily out of work .
I share the sentiments of fellow Members who have raised the issue concerning the absence of agriculture from the EU 2020 strategy .
I believe that agriculture is an area which can contribute to the European Union 's development and is , at the same time , an important sector because it is at the heart of the European way of life .
Last but not least , particular attention must be focused on agriculture because it has been hit extremely hard by the economic crisis .
In order to ascertain the extent of the impact , we only need to look at the reduction in real income per agricultural worker , which has reached as much as 35 % in some European Union Member States .
in writing . - In line with the opening statement by President Van Rompuy , my intervention is devoted to the implementation of the Lisbon Treaty .
While , in theory , the creation of the High Representative 's double-hatted position looks good , in practice , given its ' uniqueness ' , it creates problems unforeseen by the authors of the treaty .
In the absence of a deputy , equally double-hatted , the High Representative will more and more have to choose between staying in Brussels and being present , for instance , at the European Parliament , and flying to a foreign capital , where the EU needs equally high representation .
Of course , Lady Ashton can ' deputise ' , but , if she does , it will have to be on an ' ad hoc ' basis , at the expense of either the Council or the Commission .
And if the ' rotating Presidency ' steps back in to restore the balance , we end up with more bureaucracy , rather than less bureaucracy .
Europe 2020 must not repeat the failures of its predecessor , the Lisbon Strategy .
The new strategy has been shaped , to a significant degree , by the economic crisis , the effects of which it is going to have to tackle .
At the same time , we must make up for our neglect .
Since the provisions of the Stability and Growth Pact are so rigorous , how did the EU come to have a deficit of 7 % and debt of 80 % of GDP ?
Who is responsible for this ?
What we most want for the EU is a return to a path of rapid growth , and this is primarily what the strategy should help accomplish .
The current provisions of the strategy do not show how to achieve this , nor do they show how to reconcile Europe 's social achievements with demographic problems , with the poor performance of the health insurance system or the failing pension and benefits system .
Furthermore , what about hours of work ?
Finally , what about the establishment of a system for the oversight and monitoring of banks and other financial institutions ?
Or how do we want to increase productivity ?
We need a new approach to these new challenges .
The priority of the new Euro 2020 strategy is to be a more intelligent and ecological knowledge-based market economy .
To achieve this objective , we should , above all , concentrate on strengthening the single market and increasing the free flow of services .
The role of the European Community should be to promote entrepreneurship , and also to simplify the registration of businesses by lifting legal and economic barriers .
Support , especially for small and medium-sized enterprises , is a significant matter .
Lifting the requirement for micro-enterprises to submit annual financial statements and improving access to credit may be important steps in this direction .
The results of the Eurobarometer survey on people 's entrepreneurial mindset show that the European Union is still behind the United States , but also that over half of young EU residents would like to become entrepreneurs in the next five years .
I also think it is important to concentrate on creating economic growth based on knowledge , and on creating a competitive , cohesive and more environment-friendly economy .
This is also why we have to pay attention to , and increase spending on , the development and preparation of young people to meet long-term challenges .
The EU should implement a European digital agenda as quickly as possible to contribute to the establishment of a truly single , common market in Internet trade , so that consumers will be able to take advantage of competitive price offers in other Member States and SMEs will be able to operate in the European market unhindered .
The EU 2020 strategy must stand on two pillars .
On the one hand , solidarity among Member States which guarantees that no Member State will be left behind in the crisis .
On the other hand , Member States also have to show solidarity with the community by faithfully carrying out jointly decided obligations .
During the debate on the future of the EU , we should never lose sight of the already functioning policies .
Common agricultural and coherence policies are the true results of European integration and symbols of solidarity between Member States and nations .
As a Hungarian Member of Parliament and a politician from a new Member State , I consider the new priorities formulated by the European Commission as having equal importance : building a knowledge-based society , fostering innovation , strengthening social inclusion , creation of new jobs and a more resolute stand against climate change within the framework of sustainable development .
The weakening of the previous common policies cannot be allowed to be the price paid for stronger cooperation in the above areas .
The food safety guaranteed by the common agricultural policy is becoming ever more important in the 21st century as food and drinking water assume the same strategic significance as oil did in the 20th century .
If we really want to strengthen the global competitive position of the EU , we cannot allow certain regions to be left behind because of obsolete infrastructure and poor educational , social and health services .
Therefore , there is a continued need for a strong cohesion policy based on solidarity .
The EU 2020 strategy must mark a breakthrough .
Otherwise , EU 2020 will be a Lisbon 2 , a strategy which will have to be replaced in 10 years ' time by another new strategy .
EU 2020 must clearly mark the start of the post-Lisbon phase .
We must set the priorities for the strategy which we are launching so that the reforms which will be generated by EU 2020 will survive in the medium and long term .
There are three priority areas which must feature in EU 2020 without fail .
The first one is active support for SMEs , based on the correlation of Community programmes with macro-economic policies .
This approach will guarantee a healthy economic environment for private entities .
The second is an education system which prepares the workforce based on the demands of the market .
This process will ensure a better employment level in Member States .
Finally , the European Parliament must have an increased role .
This will allow real information from Member States to be used and prevent the disparities widening between Member States ' economies .
An EU 2020 strategy organised according to clear priorities will quickly revive economic growth in the EU , especially in the context of the current financial and economic pressures .
Parliament 's priorities for the UN Human Rights Council ( Geneva , 1-26 March 2010 ) ( debate )
The next item is the Council and Commission statements on Parliament 's priorities for the UN Human Rights Council ( Geneva , 1-26 March 2010 ) .
Mr President , the European Union is preparing , in Geneva , in Brussels and in the capitals of third countries , for the first session of this year of the Human Rights Council .
The Human Rights Council is a forum for debating the human rights situation in all the regions of the world , and the efforts of the international community to improve the human rights situation , which is one of the principles , one of the elements , one of the essential characteristics of the spirit of the European Union , the thing that gives it its true identity in the world .
The Presidency of the Council has taken the role that it has to play at this time very seriously .
It has taken the challenges that the European Union has to tackle during these sessions of the Human Rights Council very seriously .
Proof of this is that the First Deputy Prime Minster of the Spanish Government , María Teresa Fernández de la Vega - in this case acting as the representative of the Presidency of the Council of the European Union - will be attending the ' High-level segment ' , which is going to begin the Council 's 13th session .
The Presidency is therefore going to have an active presence in the work of the Council .
We will defend the European Union 's positions on matters with special implications for numerous Member States and , in addition to the national initiatives , the European Union is going to table country resolutions .
We continue to believe that the Council needs to have instruments in order to defend human rights , in order to respond to situations of serious human rights violations , either through a specific country mandate - which is the case of Burma or the Democratic People 's Republic of Korea - or through mandates on specific subjects within a country , as we hope will be the case for the Democratic Republic of Congo .
These situations need to be monitored by the international community and by the Human Rights Council if we want the Council to maintain its credibility .
One of the items that are going to be on the agenda for the Council 's forthcoming sessions is something that we are going to discuss later , in another item this afternoon , which is the special sessions on Gaza and the Goldstone report .
The European Union considers - as we will say once again later - that this report is a reliable analysis , and the European Union stressed the importance of conducting adequate , reliable research into the possible violations of international human rights legislation and international humanitarian law .
Finally , I would like to discuss the problem of the Council Review .
This is going to be a crucial year for the negotiations on the review of the Council 's work , which is going to take place specifically in 2011 .
The European Union is beginning to work on , but intends to consolidate , a clear position , a clear strategy for the Union so that we can maintain an active role and a commitment to the protection of and respect for human rights .
In any case , it is clear that the European Union is going to continue to advocate the independence of the United Nations Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights , as it always has done , along with the independence of special procedures , the participation of non-governmental organisations in the Human Rights Council , the capacity of the Council to tackle key serious human rights violations , and the establishment of country mandates .
Spain , and the Spanish Presidency , are aware that it has taken over the rotating Presidency at a crucial time for the Union and for the United Nations in terms of protecting and promoting human rights in the world .
The Treaty of Lisbon has also opened up a new phase , as it has in so many other areas , in terms of the Union 's external action , and we hope that our joint work , under the leadership of the High Representative , will therefore make the European Union 's voice clearer in defending the fundamental principles of the work of the Human Rights Council .
We also hope that this phase of moving towards a more active , transparent and efficient Council benefits from the transitional phase that the Union is going through under a Presidency - which I currently represent - which will do everything in its power to ensure that the paths taken by the Union and by the Council from now on lead to the same goal , which is the promotion and protection of human rights in the world .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , I find it very appropriate that I am here today for the first time on the issue of human rights , which fits the priorities of my portfolio so well .
The Commission very much subscribes to the presentation by the Spanish Presidency , and I would like to add two sets of remarks to what has been presented here with regard to the priorities of the forthcoming session and how the EU would align with those priorities .
The first concerns thematic issues .
The EU and the group of Latin American countries are jointly working on a draft resolution on the rights of the child , with a specific focus on the fight against sexual violence against children .
The Commission is very concerned at the increase in sexual violence in zones of conflict and crisis situations and the spillover on the most vulnerable , especially children .
The EU will , in accordance with the European consensus on humanitarian aid , ensure that this is properly addressed in the resolution .
The EU would also actively participate in a panel on the rights of persons with disabilities .
There is a very clear link with our EU internal policies , as we will soon conclude the accession process to the UN Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities .
Another thematic area of particular interest is the right to food , which is consistent with the achievement of the Millennium Development Goals , as well as the human rights of internally displaced persons who , unlike refugees , are not adequately protected by international conventions , and we will press on in connection with this point .
The second remark I would like to make concerns the support from the EU for the adoption by the plenary of the reports of the Universal Periodic Reviews concerning states that went through this process in December .
This is a very important moment , in which the states reviewed can make public the commitments that they make for the improvement of the human rights situation .
At the same time , states may choose to request international assistance for the implementation of these commitments .
The Commission continues to remain very open to discussing with partners ways and means to support the implementation of the recommendations of these reviews .
Very critical , as already stressed by the Spanish Presidency , is the fact that the impact of this process depends , first and foremost , on the transparency and openness displayed by EU Member States , because we can only be effective by leading by our own example .
on behalf of the PPE Group . - Mr President , I welcome the fact that the European Parliament is going to adopt a resolution on the upcoming session of the Human Rights Council .
I also welcome the fact that the European Parliament will be sending a delegation to the Human Rights Council , since our recommendations to the EU Council are usually tabled on how to improve the work of the Human Rights Council and strengthen the role of the European Union in it .
This 13th session is the most important one to take place in 2010 , and it will include high-level meetings and discussions with government ministers on a number of important issues already mentioned by the Commissioner and the Minister , such as , for example , the impact of the global financial crisis on the human rights situation worldwide .
We welcome the fact that our American partners are heavily engaged in the work of the Human Rights Council .
However , we should note with concern that some countries are trying to hijack the whole process and undermine the credibility of the Human Rights Council .
Iran has signalled that it might run in the elections for a place on the Council .
It would be highly regrettable if Iran was elected , as this would in fact increase the number of countries with problematic human rights records on the Council .
The Human Rights Council would then risk becoming as defunct and inefficient as its predecessor , the Commission on Human Rights .
In other words , the credibility of the Human Rights Council as such is at stake , and we should therefore do everything we can to maintain the Human Rights Council 's authority .
on behalf of the S & D Group . - Mr President , I would like to begin by welcoming this Parliament 's involvement in UN initiatives .
In the autumn , we lobbied in New York for the appointment of a new Assistant Secretary-General to raise the priority for human nights in the UN , and next month we will once again be at the Human Rights Council itself : not simply in dialogue with our EU representatives , but also working with third countries as part of Europe 's common efforts to promote respect for human rights with the rest of the world .
I am proud that , in Geneva , we see that Europe is a champion of human rights and , with the work due to start in June this year , our resolution today says that we should be a champion of further reform of the Human Rights Council itself .
The Council remains too politicised , and our text today justly criticises those delegates who cynically lined up in their cars outside the UN in Geneva at 6 a.m. in order that they could be first in to fill up the speakers list to help Sri Lanka in its ' no action ' motion to evade criticisms of violations in that country and to evade the spirit of the setting up of the Human Rights Council : that it should work throughout the year to deal with human rights abuses whenever and wherever they occur .
In this Parliament , we agree with many of the principles enunciated by the Spanish Presidency in terms of further reform , and I would like to join with my friend Mrs Andrikiento say that it will be a further death blow to the Council if Iran , with its devastating human rights record , is elected unopposed next time , as some fear .
The hardest test on human rights for any nation is when we stand accused of human rights abuse .
That is why I am very pleased that , at the organisational meeting in Geneva on 18 February , both the European Union and the United States spoke in favour of the joint study on secret detention being presented to the Human Rights Council this time .
We will not always agree with criticisms , but we must always be open to them if we expect others to do the same .
( ET ) High Representative , Commissioner , we in the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe want the European Union to be visible at the forthcoming 13th session of the UN Human Rights Council .
As the co-author of this resolution , I particularly want to draw attention to points 9 and 13 in the resolution , which deal with matters relating to Iran .
It is unacceptable to us , the ALDE Group , that the UN Human Rights Council is unable - not to mention unwilling - to react with the necessary speed to the human rights crises in Afghanistan , Guinea , Iran , Yemen and Iraq .
The point of the Human Rights Council , which brings together all the countries in the world , is to constantly monitor the human rights situation on the territory of all Member States and to react without delay to any worsening of the situation .
The current sluggish handling of the situation clearly gives a sign of the weakness and inability of the organisation to adequately implement the goals it has set itself .
The weakness of the organisation is also evident from Iran 's candidacy at the election of the UN Human Rights Council taking place in May 2010 , which is quite comical .
The very thought of it is absurd , considering the helpless attempts by Iran 's theocratic regime to suppress the civil disorder which has seized the whole country using a repressive apparatus .
The only possibility is to blame the entire international community .
We respect the choices of the Iranian people , and the aim of our criticism is to achieve a better future for the Iranian people .
We appeal to the European Union 's High Representative for foreign affairs and security policy and the Vice-President of the Commission to take a resolute stand in this matter , and to put strong pressure on the UN .
Mr President , the European Union has a great opportunity to endorse a move to strengthen international law at the next Human Rights Council .
We have heard long lists of important issues from the Council and the Commission , but do we have any guarantees that the European Union will actually insist that they are addressed ?
For example , I might mention that the Goldstone report on the breaches of international humanitarian law during the war in Gaza has had a very controversial reception in the Member States .
In my opinion , we have a right to receive an account from the representative of the Council on how the various Member States now view this important report .
This report is crucial at a time when we are trying to put an end to seeing all those who are guilty of international humanitarian law violations and war crimes go unpunished and , instead , to bring them to justice .
Secondly , like my fellow Member , Mr Howitt , I would like to mention the new report on secret detention centres .
The European Union must take more decisive action on torture and all inhumane treatment in prisons , some of them secret .
We must also be able to face the fact that the Member States of the European Union are themselves guilty of such things .
This cannot go on ; we also have to investigate these matters inasmuch as they affect us .
We have an opportunity to boost the power of the International Criminal Court by adopting a forceful position on how the Court 's Code of Professional Conduct should be amended this spring .
on behalf of the ECR Group . - Mr President , the Human Rights Council has undoubtedly laudable aims but it is seriously compromised by some of its members .
Many of them have scant respect for human rights and democracy including Cuba , China , Pakistan , Saudi Arabia , Nicaragua and Gabon - and Iran , as a potential candidate - to name just a few .
Clearly , therefore , this body has little substantive moral authority .
It is all the EU has to engage with at UN level and it is nevertheless doing some good work on food security and the rights of the child .
However , they attack Israel 's human rights record obsessively but their own contempt for human rights often escapes scrutiny .
This Parliament 's resolution rightly highlights that the 13th session omits to mention the serious human rights problems associated with regimes like Guinea-Conakry , Afghanistan , Iran and Yemen .
Secondly , this resolution makes reference to the CIA and extraordinary rendition .
We should think twice before attacking our American allies when they are still shouldering a vastly disproportionate burden of responsibility for our security in the European Union .
Mr President , whilst the Commission is very keen on defending our human rights , we British have known since the thirteenth century exactly where we have stood .
I am afraid to say that the Lisbon Treaty is a pale shadow of our Magna Carta .
The Commission likes to see itself as a global actor in the area of human nights and seems to be keen to judge others and to offer help and advice .
However , it should take a critical look at itself .
I find it deeply ironic that , whilst the EU rightly supports the rights of the Kashmiris who patiently await a referendum on the right to self-determination that they were promised by the United Nations in 1947 , the Commission actively seeks to take away competence from its own Member States in the important areas of high policy , via the Lisbon Treaty .
In fact , this brings me on to the subject of a referendum that was promised to the British electorate but which simply never happened .
Therefore , my electorate awaits self-determination , along with the Kashmiris .
( ES ) Mr President , I think that this is an excellent opportunity to affirm the universality , indivisibility and interdependence of human rights , which is what this motion for a joint resolution to be adopted tomorrow does .
Parliament has expressed its opinion on several occasions , normally through the Annual Report on Human Rights in the World , and through various resolutions , as we did recently in the case of Iran .
Some fellow Members have referred to the paradox - a word that they have used - of certain countries that have an extremely poor record on human rights being part of the body that is responsible for monitoring them , and I think that the case of Iran is one of the most obvious ones .
This is not the only example , and I think that the United Nations will become ineffective if it is really resourced by these countries , and will lose all political legitimacy and moral authority to condemn these events .
While I am talking about this , Mr President , this week , another of Parliament 's bodies has been considering the expulsion of a member of this House , the expulsion of Cuba .
In addition , today we must mourn the death of Orlando Zapata Tamayo , a 42-year old builder and political prisoner , who has died following a hunger strike and arbitrary , inhumane and cruel imprisonment .
The Chair of the Cuban Commission for Human Rights and Reconciliation , Elizardo Sánchez , a person who is very close to the spirit of social democracy , has said that this death was entirely avoidable and that he considers it to be a murder dressed up as justice .
Commissioner , I would like to ask you - as we already know the position of the President-in-Office - if you think , from an ethical and democratic point of view , in response to the deplorable events such as the death of Mr Zapata , and if the Commission thinks , that relations between the European Union and Cuba need to be raised to a higher level and given priority ?
Welcome
I should like to welcome Monsignor Jorge Ortiga , Archbishop of Braga , together with the bishops and the Portuguese episcopal delegation accompanying him .
Your Grace , may I take this opportunity to express our solidarity and our condolences to the people of Portugal , especially the people of Madeira , who have suffered greatly over the past few days .
Our thoughts and our prayers are with them .
Parliament 's priorities for the UN Human Rights Council ( Geneva , 1-26 March 2010 ) ( continuation of debate )
The next item is the Council and Commission statements on Parliament 's priorities for the UN Human Rights Council ( Geneva , 1-26 March 2010 ) .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the 13th session of the UN Human Rights Council is an extremely important occasion .
I would simply like to mention one or two cases that are not addressed very often .
Specifically on the subject of prisons , but not those for terrorists , I would like to point out the truly inhumane conditions of the prisons in Rwanda and in Libya , where totally innocent people held in detention are sentenced to death .
Furthermore , I would like to mention the issue of the Sahrawi people , which has remained unresolved for so long now , and I would also like to mention the rights of climate refugees who are driven from their countries by dramatic forms of climate change .
These are all factors that must be taken into account , precisely because they are also the foundations of our society .
( DE ) Mr President , for its 60th birthday in 2005 , the United Nations gave itself two new structures .
The first was the Peacebuilding Commission and the second was the Human Rights Council .
While the Peacebuilding Commission carries out its work fairly effectively and has largely met expectations , the same cannot be said , with the best will in the world , about the Human Rights Council .
It has been said here - and expressed in the resolution - that a reform is sorely needed .
The work of the Human Rights Council is too one-sided - my fellow Members have mentioned this - for example , Israel is discussed from a one-sided perspective .
To be honest , I am not happy that the only major issue that the Presidency has highlighted here is the Goldstone report , which is certainly worth discussing , but it is not the main issue .
If Mr Howitt says that the election of Iran - if successful - would be a death blow to the Human Rights Council , then I would like to know what that means .
I would like a uniform position to be taken on this by our Member States and also by the European External Action Service because I believe that , if things continue in this way , we will need to seriously consider putting the focus of our human rights work in the United Nations back onto the Third Committee , which at least has universal representation and greater legitimacy .
( NL ) You know it , we know it , the UN Human Rights Council is one big farce .
This Council is being held to ransom by the Organisation of the Islamic Conference , which is made up of countries which protect each other and which seek to provoke the fine state of Israel and to falsely accuse it .
Mr President , this so-called Human Rights Council opposes everything that human rights are about , in particular , freedom of expression .
It is outrageous and despicable that this Parliament should take this terrible Council seriously .
Mr President , if this House really does believe in human rights , then it should condemn the steady stream of resolutions which seek to strangle freedom of expression , as well as flagrant human rights violations committed by the countries which make up the Human Rights Council .
Mr President , in addition to Saudi Arabia , Pakistan , Indonesia and Egypt , who are amongst the gravest violators of human rights in the world , now Iran , too , wants to become a member of the Human Rights Council .
Well then , we just need North Korea to join the club and we will have pretty much all the rogue states happily sitting alongside each other .
Mr President , for my party , one thing is clear : the UN Human Rights Council is a dreadful body and one that cannot be taken seriously .
This House must distance itself immediately and directly from the Human Rights Council and absolutely refuse any dialogue with this bunch of villains .
( RO ) I wish to begin by reminding you that , when it was created as a unique body dedicated to human rights as part of the United Nations system , the Human Rights Council inspired hope , namely , the hope of increasing protection for fundamental rights at a global level .
The introduction of the Universal Periodic Review mechanism , which is the most important innovation in relation to the now defunct UN Commission on Human Rights , was intended to resolve the relevant problems , the excessive politicisation and selective approach in handling cases of serious human rights violations .
This mechanism is vital so that the Human Rights Council can fulfil its mandate in whatever way possible .
However , it must be emphasised that the old demons have not disappeared entirely and excessive politicisation continues to affect the work of this body .
On the other hand , we must say that the Universal Periodic Review mechanism is not sufficient to ensure effective protection for human rights .
When the Council does not react with sufficient alacrity , as happened in the case of Guinea , to let me give you just a single example , this has extremely serious consequences .
This can make the perpetrators of human rights violations simply feel that they have nothing to worry about .
This Council 's credibility depends therefore on its ability to take firm , rapid action when serious human rights violations occur .
In this respect , it is important for the European Union to promote the creation of mechanisms at Human Rights Council level specifically designed to respond to crises such as those , if we take current examples , in Afghanistan , Guinea Conakry , Iran , Yemen or Iraq .
I believe that it is in the European Parliament 's interest for this body , the Human Rights Council , to be as powerful and effective as possible , because I would say that we need a credible partner in the dialogue on human rights .
( RO ) I would like to talk about the situation in the Gaza Strip which , as you know , is a constant source of concern in terms of respect for human rights , especially after the deterioration in circumstances as a result of the clashes last winter .
I do not believe that we can measure who has suffered more in this conflict .
Military actions by both sides have meant that mainly civilians suffer , unfortunately .
However , in the context of the situation on the ground , it is extremely difficult to differentiate between soldiers and civilians among Palestinians .
On the other hand , the rocket attacks launched by Hamas have terrorised Israeli civilians .
I visited the area during the conflict and saw the problems and fears facing both sides .
I believe that any attempt to pin the blame for the events which have occurred on just one side is at variance with the reality .
The bloody clashes in the Gaza Strip and the tragic humanitarian consequences are a painful plea for concentrated action in all the hot spots around the globe , in particular , against the causes responsible for making defenceless civilians suffer , and for more extensive and effective involvement by international organisations , with a view to giving impetus to the dialogue for peace .
This is an area where the European Union has not only the necessary capacity and credibility , but also the duty to take more robust action globally .
Mr President , one parliamentary priority is also to address an alarming situation where the Human Rights Council 's activities have resulted in extreme politicisation .
It is therefore of utmost importance that the EU member delegations should stand up for the establishment of criteria for becoming a member of the Human Rights Council .
That applies especially to minimum requirements of cooperation with special procedures , and resisting the use of ' no action ' motions which have prevented the adoption of resolutions on certain states who are keen to avoid criticisms of their human rights policies .
I would like to refer to two other parliamentary priorities .
Firstly , Belarus .
Contrary to expectations , the human rights situation has not improved , but is worsening .
I would like today to stress Mr Milinkevich 's message .
The EU has now got real leverage to put pressure on Lukashenko 's regime to make him bring about genuine improvement as a condition for further EU economic aid and cooperation .
Secondly , I would like to call for support for last week 's public address by the 18 Russian human rights activists , including Sakharov Prize winner Kovalev , who are extremely worried about a further clampdown on independent satellite information in the Russian language , which the Kremlin has achieved through applying pressure .

It is really damaging to the values of the EU to praise human rights advocates like Kovalev and , at the same time , to surrender to Mr Putin 's claims that broadcasting alternative information in the Russian language by European satellites is something hostile .
( RO ) I would like to draw your attention during today 's debate to the case of Israeli soldier Ghilad Shalit , who was kidnapped in Kerem Shalom in June 2006 , aged just 19 .
Last week , I was part of the official European Parliament delegation in Israel and one of the meetings was with Ghilad Shalit 's father , Noam Shalit .
In spite of Articles 13 , 23 and 126 of the Geneva Convention on the rights of prisoners of war , Ghilad , who also holds French citizenship , has not had his rights respected in terms of receiving visits from his family and the International Red Cross , receiving humane treatment and having the exact location where he is being held prisoner disclosed .
I must emphasise that even Article 77 of the Goldstone Commission report , which is otherwise critical of Israel , recommends that Ghilad Shalit should enjoy the rights guaranteed by the Geneva Convention .
On the other hand , Israel respects the rights of prisoners .
( HU ) At the March session of the United Nations Human Rights Council , the European Union must unequivocally state that the international community cannot keep silent about human rights violations , not only those occurring in developing countries but also the contraventions that may be observed in developed countries .
The Declaration on the Rights of Persons Belonging to National or Ethnic , Religious and Linguistic Minorities , adopted by the UN General Assembly on 18 December 1992 , is equally binding on developing and developed countries , including EU Member States .
The first paragraph of the Declaration 's second article states that persons belonging to national minorities have the right to use their own language , in private and in public , without interference or any form of discrimination .
At present , this article is often honoured in the breach in EU Member States as well .
The EU can only be credible if it finds a solution that deals with human rights contraventions within European Union territories in a way that sets an example for the whole world .
( EL ) Mr President , the next two years will be crucial in crystallising the role of the UN in the human rights sector because , as you know , the intergovernmental review of the Human Rights Council will be published in 2011 .
There is a danger , during this period , that the countries to which my fellow members referred and which do not set particular store by this sector , will try to limit the role of the UN .
I should like to add the following to what has already been said : firstly , as the European Union is - and I trust that it will continue to be - one of the most important factors in terms of the defence of human rights , one of our priorities must be for us to speak internationally with one voice and , where possible , to avoid discord .
Secondly , we need to step up our cooperation with the United States of America in the defence of human rights .
Thirdly , and lastly , the European Parliament must - and can - carefully monitor the specific procedures that will follow in terms of the universal periodic examination of the Council , so that there is a real and substantial contribution on our part to the promotion of human rights in all the Member States of the United Nations .

( FR ) Mr President , Mrs Georgieva , Mr López Garrido , I would like to draw your attention to point 13 of this resolution on Iran 's candidacy in the United Nations Human Rights Council .
On 15 February , Iran was subjected to a universal periodic review , which reviews the situation regarding the protection and promotion of human rights in the country .
The Iranian regime asserted that respect for human rights is guaranteed there .
I would like to underline various facts regarding these assertions by the current regime .
Only yesterday in Parliament , Mrs Radjavi gave us an overview of the arbitrary arrests and acts of torture inflicted on Iranian women and opponents of the regime .
We also deplore the political conditions prisoners must endure , and Camp Ashraf has become the symbol of non-respect for human rights .
My parliamentary colleagues provided several eyewitness accounts during the January part-session .
Today , we cannot accept Iran becoming a member of the highest authority for the defence of human rights .
Consequently , I wonder what message we are going to send out to other states that genuinely respect human rights .
Europe must speak with one voice , demonstrating its consistency , and , as Baroness Ashton said in her statements , let us say that , at this stage , Iran 's candidacy is inconceivable .
( SV ) Mr President , as regards our group 's joint resolution on the UN Human Rights Council I am particularly pleased about paragraphs 6 and 25 , in which we repeat the EU 's strong support for country-specific resolutions .
In those cases where human rights are systematically abused , country-specific resolutions are an incredibly important instrument , both in the Human Rights Council and in the UN General Assembly .
In many cases where the government of a country has long failed to participate in dialogue or programmes to improve the situation in question , country-specific resolutions represent the only remaining action that the international community can take against these crimes .
It is not about naming and shaming , as some critics believe ; neither is it the case that we in Europe enjoy poking our noses into other countries ' internal affairs .
It is quite simply a matter of signalling that we will not accept a regime 's systematic abuses and oppression of its own people .
It is about showing that we side with liberty , not with oppression .
That is why it is important that the EU camp continues to defend the existence of country-specific resolutions within the UN system .
Mr President , the countries of the European Union should put their own houses in order before pointing their fingers at others .
Many European Union members prosecute and imprison people for non-violent freedom of speech .
In particular , they seek to make any opposition to immigration a criminal offence .
Book-burning is alive and well .
Political parties are banned , as in Belgium , or their ban is sought on invented evidence , as in Germany , or a backdoor ban is sought , as in the United Kingdom , where my own party has been banned , by a court order sought by the government , from accepting new members for an indefinite period .
It is not enough for countries to call themselves democratic : they must also respect freedom of speech , they must respect freedom of association and they must respect freedom of elections .
Mr President , I am grateful for the speeches by Members regarding this absolutely essential and crucial issue , which , as I said in my first speech , is one of the core elements of the European Union : defending human rights .
In this respect , we believe that participation in the United Nations Human Rights Council , including support for the existence of the Council , is a position that must be upheld by the European Union .
The European Union has always advocated that a Human Rights Council should be established to replace the former Commission , as I said before .
Furthermore , it has believed that it should be an instrument that can adequately deal with human rights situations worldwide , situations which require the United Nations and its members to take action , adopt a position or make the corresponding declaration .
In fact , the Presidency of the European Union , the Presidency of the Council , has always systematically taken part in the discussions at the various part-sessions of the Human Rights Council on behalf of the European Union , and this will continue to be the case .
The Presidency of the Council of the Union will take part in the next part-session of the Human Rights Council on behalf of the Council of the Union .
Naturally , this is perfectly compatible with the declarations and positions of each of the Member States of the Union and of the European Commission , as another institution of the Union .
I therefore would like to say that we are in favour of the existence of this body , and in favour of drawing on all of its potential , which , in some cases , is achieved , and in other cases is not : obviously , there are certain situations in which , as a result of the votes that take place , the European Union and its Member States do not achieve all their objectives .
There are really positive cases , for example , the position on Somalia : there are violations of human rights in that region .
There are other cases in which the objectives have not been achieved , but the positives always outweigh the negatives .
I would like to say that we are going to talk about some of the cases of countries that have been mentioned in the various speeches .
I do wish to talk about the case of Iran , because there have been repeated allusions to the subject of Iran 's candidacy .
As you know , declarations have constantly been made on this subject .
Here in front of me , I have three declarations made this year alone by the Union 's High Representative for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy , Catherine Ashton , regarding the situation in Iran , condemning and expressing her concern about cases of human rights violations and executions that have taken place in Iran .
Regarding the question of the candidacy , we first have to say that this is a matter that is currently still one of national competence ( the position regarding candidacies of countries to join the Human Rights Council ) .
In any case , the matter of the human rights situation in Iran and the human rights violations , and therefore the question as to whether or not Iran 's candidacy for the Human Rights Council will be accepted , must be managed carefully in order not to cause the opposite of the desired effect .
We therefore understand that the European Union , here , must try to have the most coordinated position possible ( which is what is happening at the moment ) , while respecting national competence and , as I said , exercising caution .
In short , Mr President , we consider the Human Rights Council to be a place where we must defend the European Union 's position , and we think it is the right place to do so .
Furthermore , our commitment to it has always been to ensure that it does not cause the universal movement defending human rights to take steps backwards , to regress , especially in terms of humanity 's achievement , which is considering human rights to be a universal value , a universal value that should be defended over and above borders , traditions and diversity , because it is something that is linked to the very essence of human beings .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , thank you very much to all Members of Parliament for the recommendations they have conveyed .
We will make sure that we share these with the High Representative .
Let me make four points in response to specific questions and comments .
First , on Iran and the candidacy of Iran : I very much support the view expressed by the Spanish Presidency .
I can only stress that each and every elected member of the Council is expected to display in practice the highest commitment to the protection and promotion of human rights .
On the very sad case of the loss of human life in Cuba , the death of Mr Orlando Zapata , I would like to express the condolences of the Commission to his family and strongly condemn the continuous imprisonment of more than 200 political dissidents in Cuba as well as other expressions of disrespect for fundamental human rights .
The Commission calls upon Cuba to change its policy and to live up to its obligations under international law .
We will continue to address the human rights issue in the dialogue with Cuba , with the authorities there , and we will use this dialogue as a vehicle to press the issue of human rights .
On the calls by many for the EU to speak with one voice on human rights issues , the Commission is very strongly in support .
The fourth point , on Gaza : I think it would be more appropriate to take up this point in the next discussion on the Goldstone report .
I have received six motions for resolutions to wind up the debate in accordance with Rule 110 ( 4 ) of the Rules of Procedure .
The debate is closed .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
I have many reservations about the UNHCR 's overall credibility .
In any case , I hope that the presence of a delegation from the Subcommittee on Human Rights at the next session of the Council will provide the European institutions with an opportunity to raise the urgent issue of Christianophobia .
We are well aware that we do not need to turn back the clock to find serious cases of anti-Christian persecution : we are not in fact talking about the past , but about the present , and unfortunately , in all likelihood , also about the future , because , every day , from every corner of the globe , we receive worrying , tragic news of Christian believers being attacked , discriminated against and killed .
We also know that the issue is a sensitive one , and that although it has not been addressed properly up to now , this has happened not only because of the diplomatic balance that the participants have to maintain in meetings such as the UNHCR , but obviously also because of the anti-Christian policy pursued by countries which , whilst they are not exactly enemies of Christianity , do at least traditionally tolerate anti-Christian acts .
It follows that the EU and this House , on an occasion illuminated by the spotlight of world politics , should promote within the international community a new approach to the issue of Christianophobia , so that it is universally and immediately recognised as a serious violation of human rights and of religious freedom , and so that the community takes action to halt its worrying spread .
in writing . - I support this resolution which calls , inter alia , on the High Representative of the Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy and the Member States to work towards a strong EU common position on the follow-up to the Goldstone report and demands the implementation of its recommendations and accountability for all violations of international law , including alleged war crimes , and urges all sides to conduct investigations that meet international standards of independence , impartiality , transparency , promptness and effectiveness , in line with United Nations General Assembly Resolution A / 64 / L.11.
It further stresses that respect for international human rights law and international humanitarian law by all parties and under all circumstances is an essential precondition for achieving a just and lasting peace in the Middle East .
The resolution also calls on the EU High Representative and Member States to actively monitor the implementation of recommendations included in the Goldstone report by means of consultation of EU external missions and NGOs in the field and calls for the recommendations and related observations to be included in EU dialogues with all parties , as well as EU positions in multilateral fora .
Implementation of Goldstone recommendations on Israel / Palestine ( debate )
The next item is the Council and Commission statements on the implementation of Goldstone recommendations on Israel / Palestine .
President-in-Office of the Council . - ( ES ) Mr President , I would like to thank the European Parliament for the opportunity to speak on this issue of the fact-finding mission , a mission sponsored by the United Nations , on the conflict in Gaza , which took place between the end of 2008 and the beginning of 2009 , and is known as the ' Goldstone report ' .
The United Nations took careful note of the statement by its Secretary General , Ban Ki-moon , to the Security Council on 21 January 2009 , in which he gave his impressions following a visit to Gaza and South Israel just after the hostilities ended .
In addition , the report that has already been referred to in some of the speeches on the previous item , the Goldstone report , which was published in the middle of September last year , was debated in the 12th Session of the Human Rights Council , from 14 September to 2 October .
From the very beginning of this conflict , the European Union has insisted that the parties fully respect human rights and comply with their obligations under international humanitarian law .
The European Union made it clear that it would closely monitor the investigations into the accusations and violations of human rights .
In Geneva , the Swedish Presidency of the Council established the European Union 's position in the following way : firstly , the European Union considers the report to be serious , as it contains reports of serious violations of international humanitarian law , including deliberate attacks on civilians .
Secondly , the European Union stresses the importance of adequate and credible investigations being conducted into the possible violations of international law by the parties to the conflict , in line with international legislation and therefore ensuring that the mission directs its recommendations to both the Israelis and the Palestinians .
The European Union confirmed its constructive position with regard to the Goldstone report when , in the debate of the United Nations Security Council on 27 January , just one month ago , it highlighted the importance of conducting adequate and credible investigations into the possible violations of international human rights law and international humanitarian law .
I can inform you that , subsequently , on 4 February 2010 , a few days ago , the Secretary-General of the United Nations published a report on the application of the United Nations General Assembly 's Goldstone Resolution .
The Secretary-General relayed the responses of Israel , the Palestinian occupied territories and Switzerland , and in his observations , he said that the processes initiated by these three parties were under way and that no opinion could be given on the application of the Resolution by the parties concerned .
It remains to be seen how this matter is going to be dealt with in the United Nations General Assembly .
The Spanish Presidency 's priority in this respect is to achieve a consensus regarding the Union 's position on the draft resolution that the Palestinian authorities want to submit to the United Nations General Assembly at this time .
We have two objectives : firstly , we want the resolution to be adopted by consensus , and , if not , we want a European Union position to emerge on this that is as integrated as possible .
In any case , I repeat that the Presidency of the Council endorses what the Goldstone report asked for , which is for credible , investigations to be conducted that are independent of the parties .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , I just want to endorse what has been said by the Spanish Presidency .
Although the EU has not endorsed all the recommendations , it made it clear that it takes the Goldstone report very seriously .
It has invited all parties of the conflict to launch investigations into alleged violations - caused by parties of the conflict - of international humanitarian law and international human rights law .
This investigation should be in accordance with international standards .
So far , the steps taken by Israel , the Palestinian authorities and Hamas fall short of providing tangible results , and yet accountability must be established .
Therefore , the EU keeps repeating our key message that the parties to the conflict make substantial efforts in conducting independent and credible investigations into the alleged violations .
Since this directly concerns my responsibilities , it is worth recalling that the Commission provides substantial funding to humanitarian organisations whose projects aim to provide vital assistance and protection to Palestinian civilians .
The EU will strive to ensure that the appropriate follow-up is given at the Human Rights Council meeting in March and to engage at an early stage in the preparation of a consensual resolution .
In this context , I would like to state here that on 18 February , the Palestinian Delegation tabled a draft General Assembly resolution further to the United Nations ' Secretary-General 's report as a follow-up to the Goldstone report .
The Palestinian side indicated that it is their intention to seek General Assembly action on the resolution on Friday , 26 February , to reiterate the main points of the General Assembly resolution 64 / 10 of 5 November 2009 , and to ask the United Nations ' Secretary-General to report again in five months .
As we sit in this room , Member States and the Commission are in intensive consultations on this issue with the aim of reaching a common position on this resolution .
May I - very much in support of the Spanish Presidency - end up with the point that it is important to seek a common EU position and avoid the previous three-way split .

Mr President , Mr López Garrido , Commissioner , I believe that a credible investigation into the violations of international humanitarian law is important and that this is what we must focus on .
The conclusion needs to be examined , but this applies equally to both parties involved , including to those waging asymmetrical war by firing on Sderot and other towns from a densely populated area , thereby determining the battlefield .
This is being investigated fairly and no one-sided conclusions will be drawn in this regard .
This also goes to show that , in the Middle East , but also in other comparable regions , only peaceful solutions will bring lasting results .
As long as no peaceful solution and no lasting understanding can be found , we will never solve these problems .
In such cases , full account must also be taken of the security aspects of the State of Israel and these aspects must be taken seriously , including in light of the fact that new rockets are being developed here , which are problematic .
However , I would also like to point out that it is right to call for an international investigation , although not everything can be investigated within the framework of the Goldstone report .
This report is intended to deal solely with the occupied territories .
It has been pointed out that not a single Member State of the European Union voted in favour of the report in the Human Rights Council .
Some abstained , others voted against it and others - such as the United Kingdom and France - refused to take part in the vote at all .
We should also take this into account , as the resolution was carried by such ' representatives of human rights and democracy ' as Cuba , Nigeria and China .
We ought to bear this in mind when evaluating this matter .
We need to stand up for human rights , but not on the basis of this report in order to wage political war against one of the sides .
In December 2008 , Operation ' Cast Lead ' in Gaza resulted in around 1 500 deaths , the majority of those killed being women , children and other civilians .
Families were destroyed , and schools bombed .
A population was thrown into panic , trapped and unable to escape .
I was in Gaza during the military operation , with some of my colleagues present here , and we were stunned that such a tragedy could unfold in front of the international community without leading to a huge wave of protest .
Gaza has not changed since then .
The destruction remains and the siege continues .
However , there has been the Goldstone report .
Mr Brok , what is the difference between the Goldstone report and the resolution that followed ?
The Goldstone report , this brave report that simply demands that justice be done , is that too much to ask ?
The pressure today to bring down this report and the discrediting of Judge Goldstone is unbelievable .
His name is being dragged through the mud ; he is being called an anti-Semite , even though Israel is not the only one to have the finger pointed at it in the Goldstone report .
Fatah and Hamas are not spared criticism .
However , today I will say quite clearly , and I apologise to my fellow Members , that the Israeli Government is the only one that has established a sort of reign of terror and practised censorship to block any follow-up to the report .
Mr Lieberman , you are not in this House , but you were here yesterday , and I would like to say to you : there will be no intimidation in this Parliament !
We want independent inquiries that are in keeping with international standards , not military tribunals judging their own soldiers .
Mr Lieberman , I will also say that you are not welcome , not because you represent Israel , but because your racist and xenophobic positions are incompatible with European values .
No democratic state can dare to break international law without having to justify its actions .
This Parliament will not allow itself to be intimidated .
It will simply continue to demand that justice be done , that light be shed on the tragedy of Gaza , not in a fierce way , but in a determined way .
Today , I implore the Council and the Commission simply to abide by that .
Light and justice , nothing else .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Mr President , the Goldstone report tries to fulfil the mandate it was given .
That mandate is , or was , the following : ' To investigate all violations of international human rights law and international humanitarian law that might have been committed at any time in the context of the military operations that were conducted in Gaza during the period from 27 December 2008 and 18 January 2009 , whether before , during or after . '
And that is exactly what the Goldstone report has done - although it was not just Mr Goldstone , it was also his two female colleagues .
They conducted investigations on what happened in Gaza and came up with conclusions that are disturbing to say the least .
They are extremely disturbing because they find in most of the instances they looked into that breaches of international law and international humanitarian law and breaches of the Geneva Conventions have indeed been committed by the forces of a state that claims to be the sole democratic state in the region .
That is indeed very disquieting .
We should not let it pass .
So when we are called upon to take a position on this report , the question is not whether we are for or against Israel , for or against the Palestinians , for or against Hamas ; the question is whether we condone breaches of international law , of international humanitarian law and of the Geneva Conventions , no matter by whom they were committed .
That is what we need to answer .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - Mr President , let me say how delighted I am that we are finally discussing the Goldstone report in plenary , because it is a vitally important issue , and to date , the EU has been shamefully absent in these issues .
It is quite unacceptable that the Council still has not endorsed the recommendations of the Goldstone report .
The Commission says it is taking it very seriously , but that is not good enough : we want an explicit endorsement .
The Presidency says that it backs it : well , it should back it publicly and explicitly and make sure that the rest of the Council does as well .
Against that backdrop , I have to say I am pleased that in Parliament 's motion for a resolution on the Human Rights Council , which we will vote on tomorrow , we have two very strong paragraphs calling on the High Representative and on Member States to publicly demand the implementation of the report 's recommendations .
The resolution further calls on them to actively monitor the implementation of the recommendations for consultation of EU external missions and with NGOs in the field , because the evidence we have so far is that neither the Israeli authorities nor Hamas are taking their responsibilities sufficiently seriously .
In Israel , the investigations into targets and tactics used during Operation Cast Lead have been carried out by army commanders or military police , severely compromising the independence of the findings , and from the Hamas side there is still a failure to address adequately the firing of rockets into southern Israel .
In the light of these failures , it is clear that the EU should put pressure on the UN Secretary-General to prepare a genuinely independent assessment .
Finally , given the ongoing humanitarian crisis in Gaza , I call again on the Council and the High Representative to put far more pressure on Israel to lift the siege which is preventing reconstruction and exacerbating the suffering .
Mr President , the Goldstone report is exceptionally unbalanced and unfair .
It comes from the United Nations Human Rights Council , whose members include countries such as Iran , Nicaragua , Somalia and Libya .
What right do those countries have , where respect for human rights has been reduced to zero , to evaluate Israel , the only democracy in the Middle East ?
The report comes from a very suspect source which is obsessively ill-disposed towards Israel .
Out of the 25 resolutions on human rights which the UN Human Rights Council has adopted , as many as 20 are devoted to Israel .
Not one of them is about the countries which are members of the Council , countries which , and I stress this , have an awful human rights record from women 's rights to electoral rights .
I stress that this report is completely unbalanced .
It attempts , in fact , to absolve the terrorist activity of Hamas .
The report does not state the fundamental fact that , in the eight years before Israel , in its own defence , took action in the Gaza Strip , thousands of rockets were fired at innocent Israeli citizens .
Every country has the right to defend itself against terrorists .
Israel , too , has that right .
It should also be said that 150 criminal investigations of the actions of particular Israeli soldiers are currently under way in Israel .
In Israel , there is a free parliament , and there is a free press which often criticises its own government and its own armed forces .
None of these features is to be found , unfortunately , on the terrorist side .
I think , therefore , that this unbalanced and unfair report , which , in my opinion , attacks our main ally in the Middle East in a shameless fashion , should not be taken seriously .
Mr President , the report by Justice Goldstone provides the most blatant proof of the crimes and of the infringements of international law and international humanitarian law by Israel against the Palestinian people .
The investigation has given rise to strong indications that the Israeli forces have committed serious infringements of the Fourth Geneva Convention .
It should be noted that , while the Palestinian side , although criticised in the report , accepts international law and calls for its application , Israel , on the other hand , refuses .
While certain parties are trying to undermine the report , we call on the Member States of the European Union to stand up for the principles that govern international law and the European Union and to support the debate of the report at the UN General Assembly and its notification to the Security Council with a view to its ultimate ratification and for measures to be taken .
The report should be sent to the International Criminal Court in The Hague for examination .
If the European Union is truly interested in resolving the Palestinian problem , then it should stop tolerating these crimes , because tolerance translates into encouragement and complicity .
Furthermore , based on the conclusions in the report , suspension of action to upgrade relations between the European Union and Israel and the application of the provisions of the association agreement should be examined immediately .
The people of Palestine and of Israel have every right to a future and to life .
We have an obligation to exert pressure to achieve a fair solution and peace .
The Goldstone report should be used to give new impetus , with a view to achieving a fair solution .
The Goldstone report was very much the focus of attention last week , during the working visit to the Jewish state of the Delegation for relations with Israel .
The delegation received detailed information about Israel 's judicial investigation during and after the military operation in Gaza , from both military and civilian representatives .
This thorough investigation of their own actions provides a detailed rebuttal of the Goldstone report 's damning accusations against the Israeli authorities .
Moreover , quite apart from the Goldstone report , the IDF , the Israeli armed forces , take any allegation levelled at them seriously and investigate them thoroughly .
There is a marked contrast here between the IDF and Hamas , the terrorist movement that is to blame for the Gaza operation .
When have we ever seen Hamas investigate its own actions ?
Mr President , the available documentation about the Gaza operation leaves us in no doubt about the answer to that .
Hamas deliberately exposed Palestinian citizens to an acute threat of war , even in places likes mosques .
In contrast , just consider the intentions and actions of the Israelis , consider the protection of the lives and property of Jewish citizens against Hamas 's terrorist rocket attacks , which have been going on for years , as well as Israel 's real concern for Palestinian lives .
Look at all the precautions they took during the operation .
Mr President , despite the intentions of the Goldstone report , this biased investigation leads to justification on two counts : that of Israel 's military operation against Hamas and that of Israel as a democratic state governed by the rule of law .
You only need to visit the Middle East !
( NL ) It was clear from the very start that Israel was going to be labelled as perpetrator and aggressor in the Gaza conflict .
Goldstone and his working methods are endorsed by countries such as Egypt and Pakistan and we know the state of human rights in those countries .
It is beneath any acceptable standard .
The report makes no mention of the twelve thousand rockets fired on Israel from Gaza , which posed a very serious threat to the local population .
Israel was exercising its right of self-defence .
There is not a single word in the report about Hamas , nor about the fact that they used their citizens as a human shield or that they used civilian buildings in which to store arms and from which to launch rockets .
Not a word about that .
Not a word about the fact that the Hamas police force was once part of a military organisation which waged an armed struggle against Israel .
Mr President , there is only one thing we can do with this Goldstone report and that is to throw it in the bin , and right away , too .
We should not waste any more time on it .
This is part of a political process .
This cannot carry on .
Put an end to this political persecution of the state of Israel .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , public opinion is divided on the Goldstone report .
In particular , the Israeli armed forces are accused of having deliberately caused the deaths of countless civilians during the urban guerrilla operations .
This is a very serious accusation , which appears to overlook certain undeniable facts , such as the distribution of leaflets throughout the battle zone to explain that houses containing weapons and munitions could be hit , and the telephone and radio warnings , including on Hamas frequencies , before attacks were launched on buildings identified as arms depots .
The so-called ' roof knocking ' technique was also used : if , after all those warnings , the air force still identified buildings full of people , small explosive and , above all , loud , charges would be launched to quickly evacuate the buildings .
The Israeli army introduced warning signals for the Gaza civilians that no one else had put into practice before .
Anyone who uses all these precautions cannot , under any circumstances , be accused of deliberately targeting civilians .
Yesterday , on the same day , I met two major political figures : the Israeli Minister for Foreign Affairs , Avigdor Lieberman , in the morning , and the President of the Palestinian National Authority , Abu Mazen , in the evening .
In both cases , the meeting was held in a calm and relaxed atmosphere , and the hope expressed that , after too many decades of fighting , weapons will finally be abandoned in favour of a peace process .
Just as both governments have also requested , Europe must maintain its balanced role as an impartial judge , sheltered from ideological positions that could only further inflame the feelings of both sides .
Mr President , late last year , you and the High Commissioner for Human Rights , Ms Pillay , came to this Parliament and told us that the Goldstone report into the human rights violations on both sides in the Gaza conflict was thorough , objective and met international standards .
So let us not try to rubbish this report .
Let us act on it .
With others in this debate , I have personally spoken with representatives of the Israeli Government , representatives of the Palestinian Authority and , in Gaza itself , representatives of the commission set up by the de facto authority , to plead with them to cooperate with Goldstone and to undertake their own credible and independent investigations to bring to account those responsible for violations .
I spoke with the US Assistant Secretary of State , Michael Posner , when he was here , to encourage Israel to do the same .
To our Spanish Presidency colleague preparing for this Friday 's UN vote , I say : do not pursue EU consensus at all costs .
The idea put forward by some for a unanimous EU abstention would be a travesty for all the victims of this terrible conflict .
We should negotiate the best text possible , but then I hope more than the five EU States who voted ' yes ' last time will vote ' yes ' , to keep the pressure up .
This investigation into alleged breaches of international humanitarian law by the Human Rights Council - just as much as the 2004 International Court of Justice ruling on the separation rule - should be treated with the proper status of legal rulings of international treaty bodies that they are .
I condemn the leader of the Conservative Group in this debate , who has called the UN , a ' suspicious source ' .
It represents the highest aspirations for all of us on this planet and deserves all of our support .
I would like to say - in a European Union forged from war - for us , war crimes must be held to account .
So , when the UN Secretary-General reported to the Security Council concerning compliance by Israel and the Palestinians that ' no determination can be made ' , that cannot be good enough .
These allegations must be determined , and Europe must show determination that they should .
( FR ) Mr President , the purpose of this debate is not to set ourselves up as prosecutors and judge what we are not qualified to judge .
Our aim , a twin aim as it happens , is , first of all , to help shed light on the responsibility of the different parties in the Gaza war and , beyond that , looking more to the future , I would say , we must ask ourselves what we can say and do today to help rebuild a dialogue .
As it happens , I do not think that the Goldstone report is constructive in this regard .
Furthermore - and it is worth recalling because it is rare - this was the conclusion reached by all the European countries , none of which have supported it in front of the worthy prosecutors and great defenders of freedoms and of human rights that are China , Pakistan , Saudi Arabia , Russia and Cuba , to cite just a few examples .
The report is much debated , it is biased and , whether we like it or not , it will not help us move forward .
On the other hand , it is up to Israel to choose to assume its responsibilities as a democratic state and to shed full light on the war in Gaza .
At stake are its military , diplomatic and media interests - those interests that the Hebrew state was able to establish in the past .
( DE ) Mr President , I am pleased that the European Parliament has succeeded in producing a resolution on the Goldstone report that has fairly broad support without simply transferring the conflict in the Middle East to Brussels .
If we want to retain the chance of lasting peace , we must appeal to what unifies all parties involved , instead of - as some are doing here - emphasising the sources of division .
The source of unification is the applicability of international law , in particular , with regard to human rights , throughout the world .
However , just as the parties to the conflict must allow and support an independent investigation , the international community must avoid making a one-sided judgment .
Therefore , we also need to make it absolutely clear that the one-sided demonising of Israel is not only inappropriate in this debate , but it is inappropriate in general .
Those powers that are working to call into question the legitimisation of the State of Israel must be clearly repudiated by us in Europe .
Instead , the powers in Israel that are fighting with us for peace , tolerance and human rights in the Middle East must be strengthened .
It therefore needs to be made clear here and now that we find the obstruction of the NGOs in Israel by government representatives like the Foreign Minister , Avigdor Lieberman , unacceptable .
This policy is harmful to the people of Israel and therefore to peace in the Middle East .
Mr President , the Goldstone report was commissioned by the UN Human Rights Council , which is inundated with Israel 's enemies , so you could hardly have expected a balanced analysis .
The US Congress called the Goldstone report irremediably biased and unworthy of further consideration or legitimacy .
It fails to mention Hamas terrorism and ignores the fact that Israel is investigating 150 allegations of misconduct by the IDF and will prosecute wrongdoers .
But behind the controversy about this report lies a human tragedy , the tragedy of the Palestinians who long for moderate and incorrupt leaders who will bring them peace , security and prosperity through a settlement with Israel .
Neither must we forget the tragedy of civilians in southern Israel , targeted relentlessly by Hamas Jihadi fanatics who hid in their schools or launched their deadly rockets .
The ECR Group continues to press for a two-state solution as the only way to bring about a long-term sustainable solution to the conflict in the Middle East , but the Goldstone report does nothing to bring us any closer to that point .
( DE ) Mr President , Israel 's right to existence , the protection of its people and the efforts to promote as close cooperation with Israel as possible are , for me , as a German and a left-wing politician , political givens .
However , I find it unacceptable that , for years now , 1.5 million Palestinians have been placed in the largest open-air prison in the world as hostages of a misconceived policy .
Anyone who is aware that more than 44 % of children under the age of 14 live in the Gaza Strip will realise what a dangerous legacy this policy has created for the future .
Clearly , the 2008 war and the inhumane policy towards civilians are intended to be forgotten .
For that reason , we call for an investigation and for atonement .
Taking a relativistic attitude to the violation of humanitarian and international law and granting the perpetrators exemption from punishment will only lead to new suicide attacks and wars , and the spiral of violence will continue .
Europe must not continue to look away .
Thus , the implementation of the Goldstone report , including in the United Nations General Assembly , must remain the job of the EU .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the UN Human Rights Council has adopted the Goldstone report by an overwhelming majority .
Nevertheless , the names of too many of the countries that make up this large majority - China , Saudi Arabia , Pakistan - give us pause for thought and make us concerned about its composition .
We wonder when we read that it is these countries , which do not exactly set an example where human rights are concerned , that are calling for Israel and Hamas to carry out in-depth investigations into the human rights violations committed during ' Operation Cast Lead ' .
We do not intend to side with either of the warring parties , preferring to maintain a balanced judgment , voicing the need to guarantee Israel 's security within its borders and the right to exist of the State of Israeli and of the Palestinian State , and stating our opposition to the use of violence , terrorism and war to resolve conflicts .
Our Christian culture and our conception of mankind and of history give us cause to hope that all the violations committed will be punished in a firm and balanced way .
( NL ) I have said on more than one occasion that , if you do not know or recognise your past , you can never build a future .
This certainly holds true for the conflict in the Middle East .
I have heard a lot of criticism here about Mr Goldstone 's report .
I know Mr Goldstone from when he was a great conciliator , carrying out and heading up many investigations in South Africa .
In my opinion , Mr Goldstone is the prime example of someone who can lay the facts on the table in order to bring conciliation closer .
Unfortunately , the way in which this report has been received suggests that no conciliation has come about and instead there appears to have been even greater polarisation .
This is why the report has simply been ignored .
Mr President , Israel has ignored the conclusions of the report but , at the same time , it has , in fact , recognised that it did make mistakes by paying out compensation to the UN for the damage inflicted and by prosecuting some of its military .
The Palestinian side , on the other hand , has not taken any such steps .
I wonder if the Committee of Investigation which has been set up in Ramallah is in a position to carry out a thorough investigation in Gaza at all .
Mr President , this coming Friday a meeting will take place at the UN and I very much hope that our new foreign policy representative will be able to bring unity and clarity to the European position .
We have to respect human rights and the rights of both parties under all circumstances .
Mr President , if we can achieve that unity on Friday , I will be very pleased and then , perhaps , a solution in the Middle East would be within our reach .
( CS ) It is always deceptive to compare numbers which conceal the fate of individual human beings .
Operation Cast Lead left more than a thousand victims among the inhabitants of Gaza , compared to thirteen victims among the Israeli armed forces .
Do we need to know any more in order to conclude who is the guilty party and who is the victim in this war ?
I believe we most definitely do .
For example , the fact that after 2006 , thousands of rockets were fired against civilian populations in Israeli towns from the Gaza strip , and these were launched from densely populated areas and quite clearly from public buildings as well .
We should ask further questions .
How can a state defend its citizens in such a situation ?
Is it possible to fight with an army against terrorists who use civilians as human shields ?
If so , is it possible to avoid civilians becoming victims ?
What did the international community do to prevent this form of terrorism ?
Are there not intentionally varying standards in the area of adherence to human rights ?
Finding an answer to these serious questions is a challenging task for the common foreign policy of the EU .
The aim of the policy should be to assist dialogue , build trust and seek patiently for a sustainable peaceful solution for the Middle East as a whole .
An open-minded enquiry into all of the circumstances accompanying and also preceding the conflict in Gaza might be a step in the right direction .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Goldstone report is destined to remain a milestone of which the full possible future ramifications have perhaps not yet been considered , including as regards the affirmation of international law , to which we liberal democrats are particularly attached .
We welcome the request made in the report for compensation to be paid to civilian victims of an unequal conflict and for the International Criminal Court to be seized of any cases in which the parties fail to conduct genuinely independent and impartial investigations , as was requested last January by numerous Israeli human rights associations .
These are facts that may damage even a state such as Israel , which seems to have ceased to draw inspiration from the extraordinary humanism of the great Hebrew culture from which we are all descended .
The truth is that violence remains a disastrous policy .
Hezbollah is stronger after the attack on Lebanon , and Hamas is stronger today in Gaza .
Anyone who has been to Gaza after the conflict can testify to the people 's enormous suffering .
We Europeans must also say today , especially to Gaza : let us stay human !
( NL ) I think that the Goldstone report has clearly shown that both Israel and Hamas have committed human rights violations during the war in Gaza .
The UN has already twice called on both parties to carry out independent investigations , but fourteen months later , they are still brushing this call aside .
I also ask myself why the European Union is not standing up for international law .
Why does it allow impunity to reign in this region ?
Any credibility in our respect for international law will be lost if the EU leaves these war crimes unchallenged .
This report is not about Israel 's security .
This report is about major human rights violations .
There is therefore no conceivable argument why the recommendations of this report should not be implemented .
I therefore call , not only on the High Representative , but on Member States as well , to make every effort to ensure a proper follow-up on the ground .
After all , that is the only way we can give the reestablishment of peace negotiations any chance of success .
( NL ) This report is one-sided .
It levels a great deal of criticism at Israel because , amongst other reasons , it fired on economic and civilian targets .
However , Hamas misused these facilities .
Unfortunately , Mr Goldstone has not seen fit to investigate whether this actually was the case .
Mr Goldstone has therefore failed to investigate what Hamas did wrong and consequently rapped Israel over the knuckles .
That inspires no confidence in this report , because there are other sources which suggest that Hamas did indeed entrench itself in hospitals , ambulances and civilian buildings .
Mr President , I will conclude on a positive note .
The Goldstone report makes many accusations and they have to be investigated .
The Israeli Government has rightly taken the initiative in this regard and has launched a criminal investigation .
That is to be welcomed .
Yet I fear that we will have to wait a long time for Hamas to show the same level of self-examination .
( FR ) Whether we like it or not , the Goldstone report has been endorsed by the General Assembly of the United Nations , and I do not see why there should be double standards in relation to international law .
International law is international law , and the Goldstone report uses the term ' war crime ' , something moreover that was clear for everyone to see on their television screens .
Even Israeli soldiers have testified that they received orders to shoot at civilians .
Under these circumstances , the European Union and our Parliament must create the conditions to ensure that the Israeli Government abides by international law , using the suspension of Article 2 of the EU-Israel association agreement as a sanction if necessary .
This article stipulates that ' relations between the two parties must be based on respect for human rights and respect for democracy ' .
It is that simple ; it just needs to be applied .
The European Union must therefore make clear its determination to refer the matter to the International Criminal Court if nothing is done , in line with the recommendation made in the Goldstone report .
Finally , our Parliament must decide on a fundamental issue : do we want a harmonious world in which justice and peace ultimately reign supreme , or the law of the jungle that is the politics of might ?
We must assume our responsibilities to the peoples of Europe and the peoples of the whole world .
( DA ) Mr President , this matter - this report - is a fundamentally embarrassing chapter in the history of the UN .
Who can , in all decency , discuss the issue of the war in Gaza without also including the thousands of Qassam rockets that rained down over the peaceful citizens of Israel for eight years ?
Who can , in all decency , discuss this issue without mentioning the hundreds of tunnels that exist between Egypt and Gaza and other areas , through which weapons are smuggled in order to damage Jewish interests in Israel ?
Who can , in all decency , write a report like this without including the fact that Israel has a well-functioning legal system , whereas not one of the murderers in Palestine and not one of the terrorists in Palestine has ever been brought to account for his crimes ?
The answer to all three questions is Judge Goldstone .
This is scandalous !
It is embarrassing for the UN system , and by having this debate at all in this Parliament , we are making it an embarrassing affair for the EU , too .
Mr President , listening to the debate , it is difficult to know what report some of the speakers have read .
It is certainly not the one I have read .
Israel denies this Parliament its democratic right to meet Palestinian Legislative Council members in Gaza and denies our Foreign Ministers access .
A Hamas militant has been murdered , most likely by Israeli agents using forged European passports , thus breaching Irish , British , French , German and Dubai sovereignty .
Israel is treating us with contempt , which is not surprising given the impunity with which it continues to infringe the rights of millions of Palestinians .
The acid test of our commitment to human rights and the rule of law is our response to the Goldstone report , which found that the siege of Gaza is collective punishment of the population and that Operation Cast Lead was to further that policy .
It found evidence of wilful torture , inhumane treatment and wilful causing of great human suffering .
The report recommends going to the International Criminal Court and that the Quartet should insist on the rule of law .
I support Goldstone 's call on Member State parties to the Geneva Conventions , including Ireland I have to say , to start criminal prosecutions in national courts against the alleged perpetrators of war crimes .
Could I just make one correction before I conclude , which is that it has been claimed repeatedly that this report does not deal with the firing of rockets into Israel by Hamas .
However , on page 31 , the report mentions the impact on civilians of rocket and mortar attacks by Palestinian armed groups on southern Israel .
( FI ) Mr President , as members of the European Union , we need to remember what Europe 's values are .
They are democracy , human rights and freedom of opinion , and we need to adhere to them everywhere .
The purpose of the Goldstone report was to undertake an unbiased study , but , regrettably , it failed in that .
That is recognised by all parties who have familiarised themselves with it , and it is also obvious from the report 's source material .
We should also remember that this whole thing was started by countries such as Cuba , Pakistan , Egypt and Saudi Arabia , which do not recognise the same values as the European Union and Israel .
I am quite shocked by the remarks that Mr De Rossa and Mrs De Keyser made here .
I wonder just what report you have read .
If you know , as you do , something about the civil war between Hamas and Fatah , and how much human life has been destroyed in it , then you will agree that we should intervene in the process whereby the Palestinians find leadership and a common voice , and start to build their own country , and not just destroy it , and Israeli democratic society too , by firing rockets at it .
I would like to say that this report is , unfortunately , a blot in the UN 's history .
We Europeans should also remember that Ghilad Shalit , a European , a Frenchman and an Israeli soldier , is still a prisoner of Hamas , and we must push for his release .
That is the first step we should be taking .
Mr President , those of us that are friends of Israel may well have questioned many aspects of the way in which Israel intervened in Gaza , but not the right of Israel to defend herself and to take effective action against those that are planning and executing acts of terrorism against her .
I have enormous sympathy for the ordinary Palestinian people , but for 60 years , they have been let down by those that claim to lead them and those amongst them whose profession is terrorism .
It was clear from the start that a report emanating from the dubious Human Rights Council of the UN - and that , Mr Howitt , is what the leader of our group criticised , not the UN ; I am afraid your rather petty party point was rather demeaning - would be a one-sided condemnation of Israel .
While it makes far-reaching demands of Israel , it says little about Hamas .
It does not call for an end to terrorism and attacks on Israel but merely asks so-called Palestinian armed groups to renounce attacks on Israeli civilians and to try and avoid harm to Palestinian civilians .
I see nothing in a 554-page report that offers constructive , positive proposals for lasting peace and stability .
Instead , we find that the rhetoric of human rights and the instruments of the ICC are enlisted to attack Israel , and I have to say such distortion does no credit to the United Nations .
( DE ) Mr President , neither party to the conflict has so far met the demands of the United Nations for a credible and independent investigation into the accusations of the Goldstone report .
This is regrettable , particularly on Israel 's part , because , however controversial the Goldstone report might be , any state that calls itself a democratic state based on the rule of law is obliged to allow such serious accusations to be subjected to an independent investigation .
An internal military investigation by the Israeli army , which is itself under suspicion , is not sufficient .
If the EU takes its own principles of respect for human rights and international law seriously , it must increase the pressure on both sides , including in the context of its bilateral relations , and insist that the investigation that has been called for into possible violations of international and humanitarian law is carried out according to the principles of the rule of law .
War crimes must be punished under international law , as has been said here many times .
If necessary , the Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court will have to carry out the investigations on the basis of Article 12 ( 3 ) of the Rome Statute .
However , irrespective of the Goldstone report , there is currently no reason to continue the siege on Gaza .
( SK ) The Goldstone report , the conclusions and recommendations of which we are debating , ignores Israel 's right to self-defence .
Last year 's intervention by Israel in the Gaza strip was a tough measure and , personally , I feel sorry for the victims and their families .
We must not forget , however , that it was a final response to years of Palestinian attacks on a densely populated area of Israel .
Hamas recently announced that it was ready for dialogue with the international community , including the EU and the US .
I would like to make a strong appeal for us not to entertain such an idea until Hamas unambiguously recognises Israel 's right to exist and renounces violence .
We look with pity on the victims of this long-running conflict , but it is essential to have a reliable Palestinian partner for the peace negotiations , and that means a legitimate , trustworthy and responsible representative of the Palestinian people .
Until that happens , it will be a waste of time to produce hundreds more pages of international recommendations .
I would also like to emphasise the role of Egypt , which must act forcefully to prevent any assistance reaching terrorists in the form of weapons smuggled through underground tunnels into Gaza .
( EL ) Mr President , the Goldstone report hits the nail on the head .
The policy of treating both sides on equal terms is not helping .
A series of crimes has been carried out and is being carried out in Gaza .
There is poverty , misery and blatant disrespect for the human rights of the Palestinian people .
There are witnesses to this .
There are reports by the Red Cross , the International Bank and the Council of Europe on crimes against the Palestinians , on financial impoverishment and on inhumane living conditions in Gaza .
We must not turn a blind eye .
Mankind has been witnessing acts of violence against the Palestinians for several years now .
The Israeli war machine has been striking out mercilessly on the pretext of self-defence .
The Palestinian people are suffering .
We condemn the murder of civilians in Israel also , with all our heart and soul .
However , that does not mean that Israel is entitled in self-defence to keep committing a barrage of crimes against the Palestinians .
It does not give Israel an alibi for engaging in such criminal acts .
Of course we are not public prosecutors , however , nor does the role of Pontius Pilate become us .
We cannot wash our hands and allow the bloodshed to continue and for Israel 's crimes to go unpunished .
In wishing to be respectful and failing to act , we are allowing unaccountability to rage .
We are letting the perpetrator go unpunished and are playing fast and loose with the victim .
We are allowing the law of might is right to prevail .
( DE ) Mr President , the Goldstone report describes human rights violations by both sides .
Over 1 400 victims in the Gaza Strip are obviously too many .
However , I am also certain that , without the rocket attacks on Israel , there would have been no military response .
During a visit to the country by the Delegation to Israel , we discovered that Israel does not take military action lightly .
The main accusation of the Goldstone report , that Israel deliberately and continually attacked civilians , does not hold water .
The question of the extent to which Hamas used civilians as shields has not been adequately investigated .
However , the report mentions that the Israeli army provided warnings by means of telephone calls and flyers .
Hamas did nothing like this in connection with the rocket attacks on Israel .
However , we also need to ask whether the UN itself did enough in Gaza , for example , to prevent the Hamas rockets being fired in the vicinity of UN facilities .
I do not believe that the Goldstone report is a basis for further terrorist attacks on Israel - it does not justify that .
It perhaps does not help any further , either .
However , it is clear that , here in the European Parliament , we must demand respect for human rights and call on both sides to return to the peace process .
( FR ) Mr President , in Israel , Judge Goldstone 's work is demonised and completely discredited in the eyes of the public .
At the same time , a violent smear campaign is being conducted against human rights defenders , notably the New Israel Fund , a foundation which funds the main Israeli organisations for the defence of human rights and , in particular , against its president , Naomi Chazan , a former Member of the Knesset , an academic and intellectual known for her commitment to the defence of women 's rights and peace .
Thirteen pacifist groups , such as Bethlehem and Breaking the Silence , are the victims of a veritable witch-hunt .
The European Union must provide unfailing support to human rights defenders in all countries including , of course , Israel , whose impunity is an insult to democratic values .
The European Union must protect Israel from its own demons .
Mr President , there is guilt on both sides , but an overreaction on the part of Israel over this report and indeed over Operation Cast Lead .
Goldstone is a respected judge of considerable repute , and Jewish .
There are undoubtedly flaws in this report , but Israel must recognise that the core of the criticism is based on fact .
You only have to listen to Israeli soldiers who admit to their dubious activities on occasions in the organisation ' Breaking the Silence ' .
Israel has been forced to admit the use of white phosphorous as a result of this inquiry , so why has there been no real investigation into the actions of some of their soldiers who have been involved in potential , if not actual , war crimes ?
The PLC has admitted its transgressions , but Israel on this issue and on the recent Dubai assassination must cease to be so arrogant and recognise the justified concern of sensible decent people throughout the world .
Mr President , it seems to me that the three key words in this debate are ' independent ' , ' equal ' and ' neutral ' .
There needs to be an independent investigation into alleged breaches of human rights .
There has to be equal condemnation of the perpetrators of those breaches and , above all , there is need for a powerful neutral voice to mediate in this unfortunate conflict , something that is sadly lacking at the minute because the position of the vast majority of powerful countries is fairly well known .
I think there is a wonderful opportunity for the High Representative or the newly created President of the Council to supply that neutral voice , something similar to what George Mitchell did in Northern Ireland , as a result of which we now have peace , and people who were shooting and killing one another for years are now in government together .
That same opportunity is there for the High Representative to supply that neutral , independent and fair voice that is so sadly lacking .
Mr President , can I ask Mr Kelly , and I am sure he will be glad to do so , to clarify .
While the party that I represent in Northern Ireland is certainly in government , my party has been an entirely peaceful party and has not been shooting and killing anybody .
Rather that has been the IRA and their political representatives .
Mr President , there has been a debate , which I think has been very diverse , around not only the Goldstone report itself , but also around the prior situation that triggered the report .
I think that we can say once again on behalf of the Presidency that the Goldstone report is a reference point , as the Council has said , and as Mrs Georgieva has said on behalf of the Commission , and I thank her for her speech .
It is a reliable report , it appears to be objective and it expresses the existence or possible existence of extremely serious human rights violations originating from different parts of the conflict .
The European Union cannot remain indifferent in response to the content of the Goldstone report .
The European Union cannot remain indifferent in response to a report which objectively and reliably relates the possibility of some very serious human rights violations .
We therefore believe that the proposal arising from this report - which is to conduct independent , credible investigations - is the most appropriate way to respond to the report , which is an important report that should affect all of us .
It should provoke a reaction in those of us who , as is the case in the European Union and Parliament , believe in the existence of human rights and in defending them .
It should therefore provoke us to react to the extremely serious human rights violations that have taken place in this case .
The debate on this report is going to take place , and we believe that this debate in the United Nations should be supported .
It is also going to be debated in the Human Rights Council .
We can tell you that the International Criminal Court is working on this and investigating it , and I think that the European Union should therefore maintain a constructive , coordinated position , in relation to the extremely serious matters raised in the Goldstone report , and this is what the Presidency of the Council will do .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , let me first clearly state that the Commission has consistently and forcefully expressed its utmost concern for the humanitarian situation in Gaza .
My predecessor , Louis Michel , went to Gaza immediately after Operation Cast Lead .
He eye-witnessed violations on both sides and he spoke up against those .
We in the Commission are very keen that two issues should always be high on our agenda .
First : the necessity for full respect of international humanitarian law by all parties ; second : the necessity to ensure that humanitarian relief efforts can actually reach the people in Gaza .
Since the conflict in January last year , the EU has made it clear that we will closely follow investigations into alleged violations of international humanitarian law , and the Commission has underlined and continues to stress the importance of accountability and countering impunity for violations of international law .
In the context of the Middle East peace process , respect for human rights and international humanitarian law is as important today as ever - and maybe even more important than ever .
For the EU to be a credible player in the peace process , it is necessary to demonstrate that it applies the EU 's fundamental values in all contexts and that it complies with the international-law acquis consistently at any point and on any issue .
Let me again reiterate in support of the Presidency that a common EU line on the Goldstone issue would be a very important step in this direction .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place during the next sitting .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
The Goldstone report relating to an extremely controversial situation which stirs up strong passions finds it difficult to obtain the consent of the parties involved when the clashes which occurred in December 2008 and January 2009 between the Israeli army and Palestinian militants in Gaza , an area dominated by Hamas , have caused suffering on both sides .
Regardless of the parties ' position on the Goldstone report , I hope that it will not be used as a pretext to stonewall discussions aimed at resolving the Palestinian problem in a peaceful way for good .
In fact , the priority in the region is to restart the peace talks which will involve , as has been the case so far , both the European Union and the United States of America .
The solutions which will be reached must ensure the State of Israel of its continued existence in the region and provide the Palestinians with the guarantee that they will be able to live with dignity in their own viable , democratic and independent state .
The European Union must be prepared to assume greater responsibility in this process in order to establish normal relations between Israel and Palestine .
I believe that we must remember the most important point made in the Goldstone report : nothing can justify the suffering of defenceless people , and dialogue is a preferable way of putting an end to this situation rather than confrontation and the use of force .
On 5 November 2009 , the United Nations General Assembly adopted the Goldstone report and passed Resolution 64 / 10 .
These documents called on both Israel and the Palestinians to investigate , within three months , possible human rights violations during the Gaza conflict .
Unfortunately , neither Israel nor the Palestinians have as yet complied with this request .
This is a great shame , because the Goldstone report provides a very extensive list of the misdeeds and crimes of both sides .
According to the report , during the three-week-long attacks , Israel committed major violations of international law .
Civilians were attacked indiscriminately and houses were bombed .
The use of phosphorus bombs , condemned by the international community , has also been mentioned .
The Palestinians , in turn , used rockets and mortar shells to deliberately kill civilians , according to the report .
The accusations are so serious that it is imperative that they be investigated , and quickly .
As the UN Security Council has rejected the Goldstone report , it cannot be assumed that the recommendation it contains to refer the matter to the International Criminal Court ( ICC ) in The Hague will be followed .
I therefore call on the new High Representative of the Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy , Baroness Ashton , on behalf of the EU , to apply a great deal of pressure to both parties to the conflict and ask them to review the crimes .
Mr President , Justice Goldstone 's report is being presented in the international arena as an objective document on the operation in the Gaza Strip in the winter of 2009 .
Meanwhile , according to various sources , it has not been prepared in a way which would allow us refer to it with a clear conscience .
I would like to mention several features which Ambassador Dore Gold presented during a debate with Mr Goldstone at Brandeis University , and which have been stressed by the Israeli Ministry for Foreign Affairs .
It seems the members of the mission had been expressing convictions on the conflict even before the mission began , and when they were in the Gaza Strip , they were accompanied by representatives of Hamas and witnesses were interviewed in their presence .
Justice Goldstone did not show sufficient care when examining the evidence .
It also seems unjust that the words of the Israeli authorities which are quoted in the report are considered unreliable , whereas the position of the Gaza authorities , such as Hamas , do not give rise to any doubt in the members of the mission .
In the light of the foregoing criticisms of the Goldstone report , I call on the Commission and the European Parliament to ensure that European public opinion is able to become acquainted with the arguments of both sides concerning the situation in the Gaza Strip .
The European Union takes care that economic relations with Israel are as good as possible .
Therefore , it is even more important that we are able to build our relations on mutual trust .
Reliance on the report of Justice Goldstone alone will not contribute to this .
Situation of civil society and national minorities in Belarus ( debate )
The next item is the debate on the statement by the Council and the Commission on the situation of civil society and national minorities in Belarus .
Thank you , Mr President , for giving me the opportunity to speak on this item regarding the situation of civil society and national minorities in Belarus .
The European Union is certainly very concerned about the deterioration of the situation in Belarus , especially with regard to human rights .
The lack of freedom of expression and assembly , the constantly increasing pressure on the media , the laws restricting the use of the Internet and the actions against opposition activists are causing the human rights situation in Belarus to deteriorate and worsen .
In her statement on 16 February , last month , Mrs Ashton , the High Representative of the Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy , also expressed her concern regarding the situation of the Polish minority in Belarus , and regarding the detention by the police of some members of that minority .
This statement , this formal position of the High Representative , was also sent to the authorities in Belarus through official diplomatic channels .
On Monday , we were able to discuss this matter in the Foreign Affairs Council , and we were able to have a thorough debate that I am sure will be repeated in future .
There was , incidentally , a speech made by the Polish Minister , who expressed his concern and his feeling that there was a need to react and to take a position regarding the systematic harassment of members of the Polish minority .
It must also be said that the different facets of the European Union are , without a shadow of a doubt , very concerned , and are monitoring this situation very directly and very closely .
I think it is very important to convey to the authorities in Belarus that they must comply with the commitments that they have made in the OSCE to respect human rights and to protect minorities as an essential part of respecting human rights .
In the Foreign Affairs Council that I referred to , there was an express request made to the European Ministers to draw the attention of the authorities in Belarus to this situation through the appropriate channels and in the appropriate forums .
I think that it is in the common interest of Belarus , the European Union and all Europeans that we manage to have an influence in stopping these actions , which are contrary to human rights and to the rights of minorities , that are very considerable and significant in Belarus .
At the same time , I think that it is important for Belarus to be working in the right direction , and all of the dimensions of the Eastern Partnership are an opportunity to influence Belarus in the right direction , including the multilateral aspect .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , further to the EU Presidency statement , which actually referred to the position expressed by the High Representative , Baroness Ashton , on the matter very clearly and very forcefully , let me just add the concern about the deteriorating human rights situation in Belarus , in particular with regard to the Polish minority .
The very regrettable backtracking of the advancement of democracy in Belarus in the last years is a very serious matter but , that being said , we must also remain engaged with Belarus and we must keep channels of communication open , however difficult this may be , not necessarily only through government channels - we can , of course , build on the Eastern Partnership and use it - but also through people-to-people contacts .
Those contacts may be the most important ones to pursue in Belarus , through student exchange , through business opportunities and through providing cultural exchanges as a platform of engagement with the people of Belarus and as a way of retaining an opportunity for advancing democracy in Belarus .
In closing , let me say that , despite this reversal in the last two years , the Commission would like to remain engaged and pursue , through its interaction with Belarus , acceleration of a positive development bringing the process of engagement back on track , as it was two years ago .
Mr President , my thanks to the Spanish Presidency and to the Commission for their words on this situation .
I think we need to be clear about one thing : what we are talking about now is not a single incident - it is the actions of a dictatorship and a brutal regime that is denying minority rights as well as the rights of its individual citizens .
That is how things are in Belarus , and I think that must be the point of departure for our discussions on the dialogue with the regime .
A dialogue must be mutual .
When we show openness , we need to require the regime in Belarus to deliver , and they have not delivered the changes and the reforms that they should deliver .
I would like to say and underline very much that this is not a Polish issue .
Belarus is in the neighbourhood of the European Union .
It is included in the Eastern Partnership .
This is a European issue and , by its actions now , the regime in Belarus is distancing itself from open dialogue and cooperation with the European Union .
We shall require , first of all , in a fundamental way , respect for minorities , respect for human rights , a stop to police brutality and a willingness to have a constructive dialogue with the European Union .
I think this message must be made clear to the regime .
Our dialogue must be a dialogue for democracy and human rights and , of course , we should turn to civil society because Belarus is much more than the regime .
It is the people living in Belarus - the students , men and women , society .
I think what we have seen lately has proved that we must now proceed with a dialogue directed at civil society in order to strengthen freedom and democracy and respect for human rights .
Mr President , let me , on behalf of the Group of Socialist and Democrats , express our concerns about the human rights situation in Belarus , and particularly with regard to the recent developments with the Union of Poles .
We would like also to express our solidarity with all the citizens of Belarus who are not able to enjoy their basic civil and human rights .
This is in a European country in the 21st century .
I think this is an issue which is not acceptable and we can all agree on that .
This is the starting point .
The main questions we have to pose now are , first , where we want to bring Belarus and , second , how we can do it .
On the first question , I think we can all agree : we want to see Belarus democratic ; we want to see Belarusian authorities democratically elected - parliament , president , governments , and local representatives ; we want to see these authorities creating a free and creative atmosphere in Belarus ; and , of course , we want to see the country moving closer to the EU .
The second question is how we can achieve this .
The European Union has changed its policy towards Belarus from isolation to engagement , and it seems that this policy is producing some results .
Of course , it is not enough , it is not being done quickly enough , and the developments we see , as in the last two weeks , show that we have to be much more committed .
What I have discovered as chair of the Euronest delegation and chair of the delegation that is going to Belarus tomorrow to see the situation on the ground is that we lack a joint strategy between the three main institutions : Council , Commission and Parliament .
We need such a strategy in order to reinforce each other 's efforts , and we really need a political dialogue ; we need a roadmap for Belarus which is very concrete , not just general recommendations but an action plan - a roadmap - which Belarus should adhere to .
This is the way to continue and it is not enough to do it only under the economic cooperation and the Eastern Partnership .
( NL ) I , too , regard this evening 's debate as more of a regional matter .
We have seen that Mr Yanukovich has been elected in Ukraine .
He is clearly a president who is looking more to Moscow than to Brussels .
We must not allow his visit next week to pull the wool over our eyes .
In my opinion , what is now happening in Belarus and the kind of actions that Mr Lukashenko has dared allow himself to take when it comes to the Polish minority in this country are signs that he also is looking more to Moscow than to the West .
In so doing , he has evidently felt able to strip a minority of an EU Member State of its fundamental human rights .
How is this possible ?
This is , of course , a consequence of Europe having turned its back too much on the East .
We have not been open enough to the idea of genuine access to these countries .
Naturally , we must firmly condemn what Belarus is doing to its Polish minority , but we should also relax our policy a little more and operate a less restrictive visa regime .
Let us look at our energy policy and let us attune it more to countries like Belarus and Ukraine .
That is the plea I make : that Europe should again turn more of its attention to these countries .
That will have a much better impact on their internal political developments than if we condemn them too harshly now and leave things to Moscow .
Mr President , a crucial reason why this subject is now on the agenda is surely the peaceful demonstration in which 40 representatives of the Union of Poles were arrested , which we must naturally condemn .
Another reason , of topical interest , is something my fellow Member , Mr Vigenin , has already mentioned : after a long , long gap , tomorrow Parliament is sending a factfinding delegation to Minsk , and I am representing the Subcommittee on Human Rights , as one of the four in the party .
We should be concerned about the human rights situation in Belarus .
There are problems there to do with freedom of speech , freedom of the media and freedom of assembly and association .
We must insist that Belarus should abolish the death penalty , and , if relations between Belarus and the European Union are to develop , the country will need to improve the human rights situation there in all its aspects .
Like others of my fellow Members , I agree that civil society has a vital role to play in this development .
Mr President , a lack of a decision is also a decision .
A resolution of the European Parliament on Belarus adopted in March will be necessary , but it is even more necessary now .
The persecution of Poles in Belarus is not only a matter for Poles , as those who have spoken before me have stressed , but is a symptom of an attitude to European standards , including standards concerning national minorities .
Europe should draw Belarus out of the sphere of Russian influence , but should also require respect for those values which are the essence of the Union , such as civil liberties , freedom of the press , the rights of national and religious minorities and the right of association .
If Lukashenko does not understand the language of European values , he will certainly understand the language of sanctions .
However , not sanctions which hit at Belarusian society - we do not want sanctions like that - but sanctions which make life difficult for politicians and officials responsible for discrimination against Poles and the democratic opposition .
There is an imbalance in relations between the EU and Belarus : the Union is opening the door for Minsk , but is receiving nothing , basically , in return .
This one-way street leads nowhere .
It is time for sanctions of a political nature , albeit temporary ones , even if in the form of the absence of representatives of the Belarusian Parliament from the Euronest Parliamentary Assembly and a return to the blacklist of officials of the Minsk regime who will not be admitted to European Union territory .
Mr President , as the Co-Chair of the Intergroup for Traditional Minorities , National Communities and Languages , I strongly condemn the actions taken by the Belarusian authorities against the largest Polish minority organisation and the members of the minority community .
As we hear today , these were mostly elderly people .
The facts show clear violation of not only minority but also basic human rights .
These actions prove the undemocratic nature of the political system and we , those MEPs who have witnessed the Communist regimes , clearly recognise the methods .
Since its establishment , the intergroup consistently has stood up for the rights of national minorities and holds any violation of minority rights to be unacceptable .
We ask the Commission , the High Representative of the Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy , to take concrete steps in order to send a clear message to the Belarusian Government that , without engagement in respecting human rights , including minority rights , sanctioning of the relations between the EU and Belarus is not foreseeable .
Minority rights as part of human rights cannot be considered an internal matter .
This issue cannot be considered a Polish-Belarusian internal affair .
It is an EU matter because , as has been already said , this is about our neighbourhood policy , about our Eastern Partnership .
So we ask the Commission to send a clear message and take clear steps .
( PL ) Mr President , I thank the Council , and also the Commission , for such a quick reaction .
This is , indeed , a very good example of our European standards .
Firstly , allow me to say that there is , really , no ethnic conflict here .
This is not a Polish-Belarusian or a Belarusian-Polish conflict .
It is , quite simply , a disregard for human rights and the principles of free speech , and violation of the rights of national minorities .
It could have happened to any other minority .
Why has it happened to the Polish minority ?
It is because it is large , organised and democratic , and because , among others , it has Mr Milinkevich , a winner of the European Parliament prize .
Therefore , it started with us .
I would like to ask what we should do .
I have had the opportunity to speak to Mr Milinkevich and Mrs Borys twice , now .
They declared : we are loyal citizens of Belarus and do not want any economic sanctions .
We do not want political sanctions , we want a rapprochement of Belarus and the European Union .
We want balance , and we want cooperation to be conditional on progress in the process of democratisation of the country .
We , too , should proceed like this .
This is why we should open up to the citizens of Belarus , and also make it easier for them to obtain visas .
Are charges for visas and a visa policy necessary at all ?
It is good that , tomorrow , our fact-finding mission is going to Belarus .
Let us await its report , and only then will we decide on further action .
( PL ) Mr President , with the Treaty of Lisbon , we were promised , all of us , much greater effectiveness of European Union foreign policy .
It quickly turned out that our role in Haiti was delayed and unseen , the European Union-USA Summit was a failure , and creation of the diplomatic corps was conducted in an atmosphere of squabbling between EU institutions which was detrimental to the quality of the corps .
Today , we had another opportunity to show that the Union can act .
Unfortunately , the Council has postponed its decision , and Parliament is not capable of reacting to an obvious situation of human rights violations in a country whose role in EU policy was supposed to increase .
Mrs Georgieva , the policy of open doors and student exchange for Belarus has failed , it has failed today , so please do not repeat the same things about student exchange that we have been hearing for five years .
This is a defeat which has affected the Union 's credibility .
The European Union is , today , a weak and undecided player .
Washington knows this , Moscow knows this , and with the ambiguous reactions to the crisis in Belarus , Minsk knows this , too .
( PL ) Mr President , As Chair of the European Parliament delegation for relations with Belarus , I often have contact , not only with representatives of the opposition , civil society and non-governmental organisations , but also with representatives of the official authorities .
I hear the arguments they use , how Belarus has the right to adopt certain international standards at its own pace .
Theoretically , the European Union should not put pressure on this responsible , sovereign country , because responsibility for the internal situation in the country is borne by its authorities .
Theoretically , it would be possible to agree with such a course of action , if not for the fact that in these international standards , which Belarus itself accepted when it joined the Organisation for Security and Cooperation in Europe , human rights are not an internal matter .
As happened recently in Iwieniec , a small town in central Belarus , when the authorities used , and I would say abused , the police force against a group of elderly people , pensioners , led by Teresa Sobol , who had , on her own initiative , raised considerable funds , mainly from abroad .
She used this money to renovate a ruined building in the town centre .
She then transformed the building into a vibrant cultural and social centre for the Polish minority .
The police were sent to these people before a court had ruled on the legal status of the building .
Next , people called by the activists as witnesses are not being allowed to appear in court to testify and make it a fair trial .
This is not a pace of adopting international standards .
This is a departure from international standards , standards to which Belarus has committed itself and which it promises us to respect as part of its dialogue with the European Union .
Therefore , I would like to say one more thing .
We can talk about sanctions , and the time will come for this .
However , it is most important that the economic assistance which is being considered should be conditional upon abandoning this kind of practice and on true , real liberalisation and democratisation in Belarus .
( LT ) Government institutions must immediately resolve conflicts and misunderstandings regarding Polish minority organisations in Belarus and do this democratically , without the use of force or violence .
I would also like to support the Commissioner 's view that we must continue cooperation and maintain people-to-people contacts .
Tomorrow , the first official European Parliament delegation in many years leaves for Belarus .
Let us hope for open discussions , both with the opposition and with the government .
Impressions brought back from Minsk on the conflict mentioned , as well as on Belarus 's participation in the Euronest Parliamentary Assembly , could shift EU relations with Belarus in a better direction .
The local elections which will take place in two months are an even more important litmus paper , which will open up the prospect for relations .
This time , these should not be elections without a choice , where the media sings from the same hymn sheet and the opposition has no voice and is ignored , where , after unmonitored vote counting , almost 100 % of the voters supported one political party and , in the end , deputies were , to all intents and purposes , appointed , not elected .
( PL ) Mr President , Mr Liberadzki of the Group of the Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats in the European Parliament began by praising the authorities of the European Union for their reaction .
It is because of your group , Mr Liberadzki , that we are not adopting the resolution today , so it may be that you really do feel satisfaction .
However , if Mrs Georgieva , who is , in fact , involved with development every day , is telling us today about what has been proposed , well , I do not know who this might satisfy .
It may satisfy you , Mr Liberadzki , and it may satisfy your group , but it certainly will not satisfy Belarusians and neither will it satisfy those who wish Belarusians well .
If even Mrs Georgieva , the Commissioner , who has five minutes available for her speech , uses only two minutes of that valuable time , it means that not only what you said , Mrs Georgieva , is not very satisfactory , but that you did not use the opportunity to speak out clearly on the subject .
So I call on you , Mrs Georgieva , and also on the authorities of the European Union , to make use of the instruments which are at their disposal to oppose violations of human rights .
We are not talking only about violations of the rights of citizens of Polish origin ; we are talking about violations of human rights .
( HU ) What we have witnessed in the past few days in Belarus is a dreadful example of the political repression of the democratic opposition and the Polish minority .
Imprisonment of political opponents and intimidation of minority representatives are well-known practices used by authoritarian regimes .
As a citizen of Slovakia and a representative of a minority , I understand the situation of the Polish minority as well as the plight of Mrs Borys in Belarus .
The treatment of minorities as enemies and hostages of a neighbouring country is a regressive political manoeuvre usually seized upon by a political leadership when facing difficulties .
Harassment of national minorities is part of the political practice in undemocratic regimes .
Minority rights are an integral part of universal human rights , however , as confirmed by the Framework Convention of the Council of Europe .
Violation of minority rights , harassment , intimidation and discrimination against persons belonging to minorities cannot , therefore , be considered a country 's internal matter .
For that reason , the threatening , blackmailing message of the Belarus Government , conveyed to MEPs by the ambassador of Belarus , is completely unacceptable .
Mr President , there is only one message the European Parliament can send to the government of Belarus , namely , that its repression of the democratic opposition and policy of threats against a minority are simply unacceptable .
( PL ) Mr President , I listened with great attention to what was said by the Commissioner , Mrs Georgieva , and would like to say that I expect behaviour which is a little more energetic .
I suspect that Mrs Georgieva 's statement would have been the same two weeks ago , before these events .
This is certainly not acceptable .
However , there is one thing with which I do agree , only I would expect clear effects and slightly different emphases to be evident .
It is , indeed , true that those who , today , are arguing for sanctions sometimes forget that sanctions have already been tried , and that Belarusian policy was exactly the same , in spite of the sanctions .
We must not say , today , that we are going to support civil society in Belarus because someone who has been there knows that , in fact , civil society may be just beginning to appear .
I expect , today , from European institutions , that the obligations which the state has towards its citizens , and which are not being met in Belarus , will be met for that state by the European Union .
I would expect that we will help to establish independent media there , that we will support the first free television station which exists there and which has been financed up till now by , I think , the governments of two European countries .
It is my expectation that we will be able to create real possibilities for large numbers of Belarusian citizens to study in Europe , because it is they who make up civil society .
( PL ) Mr President , in the previous term , the European Parliament adopted several resolutions on Belarus , in which , accurately diagnosing the situation , it called upon the Lukashenko regime to stop violating human rights .
The European Union has shown good will , partially lifting visa sanctions against Belarusian officials .
It is with surprise and anxiety that we have observed the recent aggressive policy of the Belarusian authorities towards national minorities , especially the Polish community .
This policy should be seen in the context of preparations for the elections to be held in Belarus next year .
The illegal seizure of property belonging to the Polish minority , and the ostentatious repression of opposition leaders , who , it should be noted , were awarded the Sakharov Prize by the European Parliament , is a manifest provocation of our institution .
Our House should not only react in the traditional fashion with an appropriate resolution , but should take specific action to discipline the Belarusian authorities and should appeal to Mrs Ashton to appoint , on the basis of Article 33 of the Treaty of Lisbon , a special representative to monitor breaches of human rights in Belarus .
( PL ) Mr President , Mrs Georgieva , it is very good that we are talking about Belarus here in the European Parliament , but talking is not enough .
Today , the European Union - and this is what I would expect from the European Commission - should prepare a strategic plan for supporting the democratic opposition , for supporting civil society and non-governmental organisations , and for supporting free media .
We are talking , today , about matters such as democracy and human rights , which are something natural for us and are what Europe is built on .
Belarusian society is mostly made up of people who can only dream about values like this .
Therefore , we expect the European Commission to develop a strategic plan to help civil society .
Mr President , following these speeches , I can only agree with the condemnation that has been expressed by Members regarding the human rights violations taking place in Belarus which , in this specific case , are affecting a minority , the Polish minority in that country .
They therefore affect the European Union , not only because they concern a minority that has a national reference point in a European Union country , but also because what we are talking about is a serious violation of the human rights of minorities , and therefore our attitude would be exactly the same whether it was a Polish minority or another minority .
We are talking about a violation of human rights , which we have said are universal rights , and so this is not an issue that strictly requires a reaction from the European Union simply because in this case it concerns a Polish minority .
We should say exactly the same thing if a different minority were involved , because all human rights are indivisible and universal .
I would like to say that the fact that a regime makes mistakes and violates human rights should not mean that its citizens are punished .
We therefore believe that it is important for Belarus to be in the Eastern Partnership .
What Commissioner Georgieva said to us about ' people-to-people contacts ' is important .
All of this is important , and it is , of course , equally important , as many of you have said , to constantly , clearly and directly convey to the Belarusian authorities our entirely critical and condemning attitude to the human rights violations .
This is , incidentally , what the High Representative , Mrs Ashton , is resolved to do , as she is monitoring this matter in close contact with President Buzek , who is currently chairing the debate .
She is also going to use the opportunity of attending the forthcoming investiture of Mr Yanukovich in Kiev , which it is presumed will be attended by Mr Lukashenko , to tackle this issue , which will continue to be discussed in future by the European Union 's Foreign Affairs Council , because it is a very important matter .
I am therefore very glad that today , it has been possible to debate it immediately in Parliament , in this House .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , let me first thank Members for the discussion in this House , and make four points .
My first point is that respect for human rights is categorically a cornerstone of external relations of the European Union , and it is the foundation on which engagement with any country , including Belarus , is built .
Second , the deterioration of democracy in Belarus had a very unfortunate low point recently , but it did not start last week .
It started around mid-2009 , and this led the EU Council of Ministers in November 2009 to request that the Commission formulate a proposal for the so-called ' joint interim plan ' in support of reforms to be implemented with Belarus .
The Commission 's services have prepared a draft of this joint interim plan for reforms .
It is now with the High Representative , and the High Representative certainly would gladly take into account the recommendations coming out of the fact-finding mission that Parliament is starting tomorrow .
My third point is that it would be with this last event in mind when the High Representative turns back to the services with feedback on this joint interim plan , that it would be finalised .
Let me make my fourth and last point .
In the second half of the 1980s , perestroika started in the former Soviet Union , and it led to , for the first time in the lives of many - mine included - an opportunity to compete for student and professional exchanges .
In my case , it led me to the London School of Economics .
It dramatically changed my professional life .
It certainly made me much more helpful , more useful , to my own country .
It is with this strong belief that it is by opening up the democratic channels for countries under oppressive regimes that we as Europeans can help these countries that I made - and again would repeat - my point on the importance and usefulness of people-to-people contacts , the usefulness of support for businesses , the usefulness - despite the great difficulties , the very unfortunate disrespect for minorities , which we condemn - of remaining engaged in a way that would lift up the chances of the Belarusian people to take the road to a free world and to be connected with the Union , and I would repeat the call for us to remain engaged in that way .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place during the next monthly session .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
The Republic of Belarus is one of the European States for which involvement in the European Union 's Eastern Partnership marks an important step forward in the development of bilateral relations , as well as in the relations between Belarus and every EU Member State .
In regarding this partnership as a positive instrument for bringing about change in the Republic of Belarus , consideration must also be given in this mechanism to the position of civil society in this country because of the important role played by civil society in the operation of the rule of law .
In particular , civil society maintains the transparency of the Partnership mechanism , helping to reinforce cooperation between Belarus and the EU .
In addition , civil society must be guaranteed participation in all key processes as part of the Partnership ( platforms , committees etc . ) , as well as public control of these processes .
Belarusian civil society must be able to participate in drawing up the public agenda , which will lead to social , economic and democratic progress in Belarus .
This is why frequent meetings between representatives of civil society and the government must be encouraged .
The repression which has recently been used against activists of the Polish minority in Belarus is part of a much wider problem .
The Belarusian authorities do not tolerate any independence .
They do not want , and they do not accept , the idea of civil society .
Every manifestation of independence is treated as political opposition .
This is not , therefore , an internal conflict in a non-governmental organisation , and neither is it a Polish-Belarusian conflict .
It is , rather , an expression of the consistent stance of the Belarusian authorities , which are attempting to prevent liberalisation and democratisation .
It is a pity that in Poland , there are political forces which are trying to use the situation to achieve their own , particular goals , and are using events in Belarus to discredit the policy of the Polish Government .
Politicians who behave in this way surely do not understand that they are doing exactly what Lukashenko expects .
It is in his interests to polarise and divide public opinion in Poland and Europe .
Repudiation of Polish and European policy towards Belarus is an abuse of freedom , and is detrimental to the effectiveness of joint action for freedom and democracy in Belarus . Thank you very much .
Beijing + 15 - UN Platform for Action for Gender Equality ( debate )
The next item is the debate on the following :
oral question to the Council : Beijing + 15 - UN Platform for Action for Gender Equality , by Mrs Svensson , on behalf of the Committee on Women 's Rights and Gender Equality - B7-0007 / 2010 ) , and
oral question to the Commission : Beijing + 15 - UN Platform for Action for Gender Equality , by Mrs Svensson , on behalf of the Committee on Women 's Rights and Gender Equality - B7-0008 / 2010 ) .
The issue of women 's rights is always high on my agenda , and therefore I am particularly pleased when they are also a focus of our discussions here in plenary , as today .
The Committee on Women 's Rights and Gender Equality has adopted a resolution that represents Parliament 's position as regards the Beijing platform .
I would like to thank our colleagues on the committee very much for their good cooperation .
The platform adopted in 1995 within the framework of the United Nations was an historically important step .
The Platform for Action adopted was the first global document of its type .
It took an overall view of women 's conditions and rights .
The UN has a long and proud tradition in the area of human rights and adopted a declaration as far back as 1948 .
The Universal Declaration comprises 30 articles and they are often cited .
This Declaration already stated - in Article 2 - that everyone is entitled to all the rights and freedoms without distinction of any kind , and sex is expressly mentioned .
Within the EU , the issue of equality between women and men has a clear basis both in the treaties and in the Charter of Fundamental Rights .
The committee was united on the importance of the Beijing platform and the need to work more specifically within the EU on systematically monitoring developments and ensuring that we move towards increased equality in every area .
The new European Institute for Gender Equality , based in Vilnius , will be a way for us to obtain assistance with this work and will also be able to provide research to show which political measures are most effective , for there are many areas in which we do not have the necessary facts or knowledge .
I support the proposal for a European Protection Order , which I am very pleased that the Spanish Presidency has tabled .
The Beijing platform contains a number of areas that are incredibly important if we are to make progress .
These are areas such as poverty which , first and foremost , affects women , inadequate access to health care for women , violence against women in all its forms , and inequality in economic structures and in economic policy .
As you are aware , a delegation of eight MEPs is to travel to New York to represent the European Parliament .
We will follow the discussions and negotiations that form part of the assessment of how far the world has come in 15 years towards achieving the objectives of the platform .
We will take the resolution that we are adopting tomorrow with us to New York , and it is important for us to have it with us .
The Committee adopted one paragraph stating that sexual and reproductive health and sexual and reproductive rights are part of women 's rights and that these need to be improved in Europe and globally .
The Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) has requested a separate vote on this paragraph .
We all know that when people want to vote separately on a paragraph , it is because it is particularly important , and that is why they do not want it voted on in a block with the rest of the resolution .
I entirely agree with the PPE Group that paragraph 9 is central .
However , I fear that they want to vote down this paragraph , which I feel would be deeply regrettable .
I am fully aware that the Members of this Parliament have differing views and values , and that is only right .
That is why we debate and discuss .
This wording is a minimum , however , and should be able to be supported by everyone .
No other wording has been proposed to replace paragraph 9 .
It would be most unfortunate if we went to New York with a resolution that does not even state the minimum on this fundamental issue , which is , after all , an extremely central issue at global level .
I hope and believe that everyone can accept the wording as it stands , because it only states what is self-evident to all of us .
In the process , we also worked closely with thousands of different women and women 's organisations , giving this document a unique basis .

Mrs Svensson , thank you very much for your question , because you know that one of the key , central and priority issues for the Spanish Presidency of the Council of the European Union is gender equality .
The Presidency has a series of objectives expressing this idea of equality in terms of the importance of the non-discrimination directive , and also in relation to something that you mentioned , which is combating gender violence and the importance of having an order to protect the victims of gender violence .
In this respect , I am very happy to see Commissioner Reding here , who is responsible for implementing everything relating to equality between men and women from a judicial point of view .
I would also like to start by apologising that the Spanish Minister for Equality is not here , as she has just attended a vote in the Spanish Senate on the reform of the abortion law , which , incidentally , had a good outcome , as it has just been adopted this afternoon in the Spanish Parliament .
The Council of the European Union has always approved and has always been behind the Union and the United Nations in the area of gender equality .
The Swedish Presidency produced the Beijing + 15 report , which the Spanish Presidency is going to present to the 54th session of the Commission on the Status of Women , and it must be said that although a great deal of progress has been made in this area , there is still a lot to be done .
In this respect , the Presidency has highlighted , for example , the need to improve the data and to make better use of the indicators that we created at the Beijing Platform .
As you know , there are 12 indicators produced within the European Union for monitoring , assessing and evaluating actual gender equality , although in some cases , we have still not succeeded in designing them , for example , in the areas of human rights , the media and the environment .
I would like to say that the Spanish Presidency is going to hold a technical meeting in May to discuss women , the media and stereotypes , as a subject relating to the media , which is also something that falls under the remit of Commissioner Reding .
I would like to conclude by saying that there is a very important issue at the moment , as everyone knows , which is the economic crisis .
As well as the damage that is being done , it could also be an obstacle to the progress of equality between men and women .
It is , however , also true that paradoxically , gender equality could help us to overcome and combat the crisis : through gender equality and equal access to jobs for men and women .
I am talking very specifically about the Europe 2020 strategy .
The European Union institutions have made it clear that they want the Europe 2020 strategy to have a gender equality dimension right across the strategy , so that the issue of equality between men and women is also part of the strategy .
In its report last year , the European Parliament asked the Council and the Commission to include a chapter on integrating the gender dimension in the 2020 strategy .
The Employment , Social Policy , Health and Consumer Affairs Council on 30 November last year , the informal EPSCO Council , the one that has just taken place in Barcelona , also said that the Member States and the Commission must work to ensure that , in accordance with their competence , the gender dimension can be consolidated in the 2020 strategy , and that all the relevant political fields are taken into account .
I am therefore sure that this , along with the Commission 's programme of work , a major programme of work that has always been a fundamental instrument for guiding this strategy , is going to mean that this aspect is included in the document which the Commission has promised us for 3 March on the 2020 strategy ( which has been mentioned by President Van Rompuy and the President of the Commission , José Manuel Barroso ) .
We need to keep on working , we need to keep driving gender equality policies forward .
It is not only an issue of justice , but an issue of consistency with the spirit of the European Union , so that it can continue to be a reference point in the world for equality between men and women .
Mr President , for me it is an honour that my first speech during Question Time in Parliament is an answer to questions concerning women .
Indeed , as Commissioner for Fundamental Rights , I think that the subject of fundamental rights linked to equal treatment between men and women is one of the most important and also one of the oldest .
Furthermore , I recall with great emotion how , more than 15 years ago , as a young Luxembourg MEP , I prepared the Beijing Platform for Action in Luxembourg ; now , here we are in the European Parliament to prepare the follow-up to the Beijing Platform for Action .
We have come full circle .
I do not need to underline that ; as you know , equality between men and women is one of the fundamental values of the European Union , and you can count on the unfailing commitment of the Commission in this area .
In the course of this year , I will present a new Commission strategy for gender equality , which will be a follow-up to the existing Roadmap for equality 2006-2010 .
In a few days ' time , when the work of the 54th Commission on the Status of Women begins at the United Nations , marking the 15th anniversary of Beijing , the European Parliament will send a very important delegation .
I myself will be present there , along with the President of the Council , and this will be a first .
We will both take the floor during the plenary session .
I think that this , too , is a very strong symbol .
It will also be an opportunity to gauge , at international level , the progress made in the 12 areas for action which were identified in Beijing , but also to see what inequalities persist , because even though there have been successes , there are still challenges to meet .
Furthermore , I must say that the European Union is and will remain an important supporter of the work of the United Nations , concerning both the ongoing reform of the institutional mechanisms and the creation of this gender entity within the United Nations .
The European Union also represents an influential supporter in development terms , in particular , in the context of the Millennium Development Goals , which ensure an important place for 50 % of the citizens who contribute to this development globally .
Indeed , we know very well that without the contribution of women , there will be no development .
That is why equal treatment between men and women is a horizontal policy in the Commission , conducted not just by the Commissioner responsible for this area , but also by other Commissioners in their own areas of responsibility , namely the areas concerning policies within the European Union as well as its external policies and , in particular , its cooperation and development policies .
We all know that the creation of the Beijing Platform for Action represented a major step forward .
Following the adoption of this platform , gender mainstreaming became widespread throughout the European Union .
That was the signal sent out in Beijing .
The impact has been truly remarkable given that , in all our Member States , our equality policies are no longer confined to targeted actions , but are , from now on , integrated into all relevant policies .
The Beijing Platform for Action has also enabled us to follow progress made in relation to equality on the basis of indicators developed by Council for most of the areas of action .
There are 12 actions and nine indicators .
We are very proud of the results , but there are still three indicators to establish , which I think the Council is committed to doing by adopting conclusions to forge ahead and develop these outstanding indicators .
The 15th anniversary of the Beijing Platform for Action .
The Swedish Presidency has taken stock of what has been done in the EU with regard to equality .
The Council has adopted some conclusions , and Parliament will present these papers , which will , of course , also find their place in all the other policies that the European Union will develop .
Both Presidents have just expressed their opinions on Europe 2020 .
It is only natural that in this system , which is going to get Europe moving again , women will play a special role , especially at a time when fewer and fewer people are in employment .
In fact , we no longer even have a choice : we need women for economic development .
It is no longer even just a question of gender equality ; it is a question of economic policy , and that alone .
We therefore have no other choice in the matter .
We need women if we want Europe to overcome its difficulties , and these new indicators will , of course , help us in this way .
Within the high level group , we have developed a work programme that will enable us to monitor existing indicators and create indicators that still need to be implemented .
Naturally , we will be assisted in this task by the European Institute for Gender Equality , which , from next week - and this is another symbol , which comes at exactly the same time as the meeting is being held in New York - will be established permanently in Vilnius .
Mr President , on my return from New York , I will visit you to discuss the Commission 's strategy on equality .
We will do it together .
We will do it for 50 % of our population , for 50 % of our citizens , and we will succeed .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the World Conference on Women next week in New York will give us the opportunity to bring the equality of men and women to the attention of society worldwide .
In so doing , we will certainly subject our current position with regard to what we have achieved and what we still want to achieve to close critical examination .
The call for equality , development and peace at the World Conference on Women that took place on 15 June 1995 in Beijing is still a concrete statement of our goals today , including in Europe .
We are on our way , with the goal firmly in view .
However , we have to admit that the road is not an easy one , that there are traffic jams , blockages and sometimes even one-way streets along the way .
We constantly need to redefine the route , always keeping the destination firmly in sight .
There is an old German saying : many roads lead to Rome .
During the search for the right common path , I therefore invite us all to find more common ground .
Gender equality policy cannot and must not be a subject for voting on and for narrow , enforced majorities .
My group grants the freedom to decide on this matter , and therefore , Mrs Svensson , we would like a split vote .
Equality needs to become a way of thinking .
This requires sensitivity and it requires the power of persuasion .
In her resolution , Mrs Svensson has touched many open wounds .
There are still many unfinished matters that need to be addressed and they have been mentioned : no stereotypical thinking , equal pay for equal work , poverty among women , violence against women and the ageing society , which affects women in particular .
For us , these are the absolutely key issues in this resolution that we want to address .
Mere declarations of intent are of little help .
The list of the many resolutions , strategies and pacts alone takes up two pages of Mrs Svensson 's report .
It is very important to my group that , whenever we talk about equality , both men and women are mentioned - on equal terms , so to speak - and we hope that the follow-up conference to Beijing will also result in us progressing a step further towards greater equality .
on behalf of the S & D Group . - Mr President , in 2010 , we mark the 15th anniversary of the launch of the Beijing Platform for Action .
This is a moment of reflection where we need not only to evaluate what we have achieved so far but also to think about new ways of attaining the goals set out in 1995 .
The beginning was reassuring : in 1995 , a global consensus was reached according to which women and men were equal from all points of view , including political , economic , legal and social .
However , despite this consensus , the sequel is less stirring .
Many of the goals of the Beijing Platform for Action are still far from being reached .
In many countries , women are still not sufficiently empowered and poverty has a feminine face .
Moreover , even in the 21st century , even in developed countries , we notice again debate on some basic issues , questioning already-established rights such as sexual and reproductive health rights .
I am very happy that the European Parliament is not following such trends but , on the contrary , committing itself to these basic rights .
Nevertheless , the political debates , the conservative attacks on human rights are alarming and they clearly underline the fact that the fight for women 's rights is far from over .
I do not think that human rights can be subject to compromise .
We must not put up with the lowest common denominator .
Therefore , when we go to New York in a few days ' time , we have to make efforts so that all women have the same rights and that these rights are protected .
I will personally do this under the motto ' My body , my right ' , which we have to convey to all the women of the world .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Mr President , looking back at what has been achieved since the adoption of the declaration and Platform for Action in Beijing 15 years ago , one cannot deny that a lot remains to be done .
We are still far from Beijing 's strategic objectives .
Inequality and gender stereotypes persist in all the world 's regions , including the European Union .
If we want to make progress on this agenda it is crucial to have , at national and EU level , reliable and comparable data on the Beijing indicators .
We then also need to make sure these indicators are monitored in a timely fashion in order to update our EU strategy on gender equality accordingly .
Here in Europe we still have a lot to address .
Let us take the situation in the labour market : we need to fill the gender pay gap while also looking at the place and the representation of women in leadership positions in both public and private organisations .
Going more deeply into social considerations , inequalities and discrimination affecting women lead to exclusion and poverty most of the time .
Poverty is the greatest single determinant of health .
The feminisation of poverty has a real impact on the physical and mental health of women .
Minority women are experiencing poverty , exclusion and discrimination .
Their needs are largely unknown and ignored and their voices are not heard .
For Roma women , life expectancy can be up to 10 years less than those of the majority .
Infant mortality is three to four times greater than the majority population .
Discrimination , exclusion and poverty also need to be considered in the light of the ageing population .
The differences in life expectancy between men and women will entail increased economic and social difficulties for single elderly women .
This is the new rising phenomenon and a serious one which has to be closely looked at and properly addressed .
Finally , Madam Commissioner , I would like to strongly encourage you to come up with a directive on violence against women .
All of us will be behind you .
Back in 2006 , the UN acknowledged that the most vulnerable populations and the poorest populations were the main victims of climate change .
The fact is , women form the majority in both categories .
In sub-Saharan Africa , for example , although women are already discriminated against in terms of access to and control of land , the increasing scarcity of cultivable soil due to drought reduces their means of existence even further .
A recent report forecasts that in 2050 , a billion people will have fled from hostile environments .
The loss of security of these climate migrants , forced to take refuge in makeshift camps , raises the level of threat against women .
However , we have to admit that in the last 15 years , not one European legislative text on the environment has included the aspect of gender .
On behalf of the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance , I therefore call on the European Union and its Member States to integrate the perspective of equality between women and men in all impact assessments , legislation and policies regarding the environment .
on behalf of the ECR Group . - Mr President , it is just under 100 years since all women were given the right to vote in the United Kingdom .
Fighting for women 's rights is not a new phenomenon , and I want to pay tribute to all the women 's organisations round the world that are still fighting for equality between men and women .
Women want to be able to make independent choices about their careers or their family aspirations : the choice to work in a traditionally male occupation or , equally , the choice to look after children and work in the home .
What we really need to do is empower women .
We as Conservatives believe in choice and , with choice , flexibility for women and subsequently equality .
Are we unintentionally making women less employable by demanding that businesses offer rights that they cannot deliver in today 's economic climate ?
Equally , do we put women off staying at home with children because we as a society value this less than the workplace ?
The Commissioner rightly said that we need to get women out of the recession and back working .
I say we also need to secure jobs in small businesses , and this will help us achieve this goal .
Through over-legislation , we are risking the demise of small businesses , thus , in turn , limiting the very choices we are fighting to give women and , consequently , the equality they deserve .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , in the Swedish Presidency 's report on Beijing , there is no reference whatsoever to the situation of non-Western women in Europe .
Therefore , either the problem does not exist or we do not want to see it .
However , the situation of Muslim women in the world today , including in Europe , is tragic .
If Western feminism is having an identity crisis , it is because the fashion for multiculturalism has led so many of us to avoid tackling these issues , which are at the heart of the battles faced by so many Muslim women in Europe and the world .
Let us leave multiculturalism and political correctness where we found them and let us rise to the new challenge : European men and women must now , not later , support Muslim women in Europe in their battle for emancipation , and thus also help those movements in the world that speak out against Islamic fundamentalism .
Are we willing to fight to ensure that women in Europe are free from the symbol of spiritual death that is the burkha ?
Are we ready to discuss the deteriorating conditions of women in Muslim communities in Europe ?
If the spirit of debate on these issues prevails over silence , then we will also have the strength to support the cause of liberating women in the world from Islamic oppression .
( HU ) 15 years after the adoption of the Beijing Platform we could and should obviously talk about a lot of things .
Yet I would rather talk about that which is our task .
We have one tool in our hands , and that is lawmaking .
Many things have happened during these 15 years , in Member States as well as at EU level ; great steps have been taken , mainly as a result of the adoption of anti-discriminatory laws .
This represented a significant step forward towards bringing about equal opportunities .
Admittedly , we cannot be satisfied with Community legislation , or often even with that of Member States , as we often see proof of how ineffective these regulations remain .
Often the situation changes very little after the laws come into force .
As an example , we can cite the wage gap between women and men .
For more than 30 years , the law has prohibited gender discrimination , yet these differences have scarcely changed in the last 10 years , occasionally even showing an upward trend .
Access to these rights is a particular problem , since legal redress is often extremely expensive and complicated .
Authorities responsible for enforcing equal treatment , charged with the oversight of anti-discrimination legislation in Member States , are generally poorly equipped and , due to a lack of resources , their competence is often limited to the provision of information and advice .
Hopefully , this year we will also get a chance to look into the effectiveness of the laws we formulate and adopt here .
It is evident that not everything can be solved by legislative means .
Stereotypes are difficult to change , yet we have to recognise that the effectiveness of our laws stand or fall on whether we succeed in doing so .
One sentence by way of conclusion : from time to time , it is certainly worth looking back at the road we have covered , but we also have to see clearly where we are headed .
We pin great hopes on the reformulated 2020 strategy as well as on the reformulation of the equal opportunity strategy .
( PT ) I very much enjoyed listening to you .
You have given us positive messages and confirmed your willingness to act .
Indeed , there needs to be a lot of action because , 15 years after Beijing , we can see that , unfortunately , the results are still of very little significance .
It is not only the face of poverty which continues to be female , but also the face of illiteracy , unemployment and low wage rates .
Discrimination in access to education and health care continue to exist .
Women are the principal victims of trafficking and physical , sexual and psychological violence .
Women are under-represented in politics and on the boards of companies or , put another way , they are excluded from political and economic decision making .
We also know that in order for equality policies to be adequate and effective , diagnosis needs to be reliable , based on comparable statistical data which is disaggregated by gender .
That is what we need in order to be able to make the correct diagnosis and then implement the correct measures .
( ES ) Mr President , I would like to say that I did not come to Parliament to applaud the brand new law in Spain on abortion .
What I am concerned about is human life , and I am particularly concerned about the women - who I am here to defend - whose lives are in danger as a result of gender violence , and I am here to offer them a space in which they can live freely and safely .
Parliament 's Resolution of 2 February 2006 recommended that the Member States adopt an attitude of zero tolerance towards all forms of violence against women , and that they adopt the necessary measures to ensure better protection for victims .
The Stockholm Programme , which was adopted in this House , established an area of freedom , justice and security for all European citizens , and combating gender violence was considered to be a priority in that programme .
This reflected my request for the Spanish Presidency to promote a European protection order for the victims of gender violence during its mandate , to ensure that the victims of these crimes have the same level of protection in all the Member States .
In a Europe without borders , the fight against gender violence should also be without borders , and the Member States should work hard to harmonise their legislation so that the fight against ill-treatment of women overcomes the legislative obstacles in its way and we can finally protect the lives of women and their children , at least within the European Union ,
I therefore ask the Commission and the Council to do everything that is necessary and everything in their power to move forward with the European protection order for victims , which is a very effective instrument for ensuring that those who fail to respect the dignity of women and their right to live freely and safely do not go unpunished .
( ES ) Mr President , ... ( beginning of speech not available for technical reasons ) ...
30 000 women joined their voices , their ideas and their plans for moving forward in a fairer and more equal society .
They came from different places , from a vast number of ideologies and cultures , but they were united in the objective of fighting for the rights of equality and justice to be recognised , for the social and political participation of women , for the sharing of responsibilities , for the rights to sexual and reproductive health .
Today these objectives are more present than ever , and therefore there is still a long way to go .
This resolution therefore raises fundamental questions such as the need for the European Commission to develop its strategy of monitoring the programme of work , solid links with the Beijing Platform , and promoting gender equality policies , not forgetting the gender perspective in the legislative processes .
It is important that we do not forget that today , Europe can be a reference point for the rest of the world in terms of equality policies , but in our work and our efforts , we must also keep in mind all the women outside Europe who have absolutely no fundamental rights .
For them , and for the women of Europe , we need to work hard .
( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to congratulate Mrs Svensson on the drafting of this resolution on the United Nations Platform for Action for Gender Equality .
To this day , inequalities between men and women persist in many areas .
Here I am thinking of employment , where the wage gap is flagrant and where it is still difficult to reconcile family life and a career .
I could list many other cases .
In spite of the efforts made to combat inequality between men and women , none of the goals of the Beijing + 15 Platform for Action have been fully realised .
It is not a question of forever redefining our goals here , as we know them well .
Rather , we must reconsider the measures put in place to achieve them .
It therefore seems to me to be essential that the European Union spell out its strategy within the framework of the goals of the United Nations Platform for Action , focusing on three major areas .
Our strategy must consider the short , medium and long terms .
In the short term , there must be a detailed examination of all sensitive areas , in the context of the economic and financial crisis .
It is a matter of defining precise indicators allowing us to evaluate and measure the impact of the crisis on employment and the economic situation of women .
These indicators must be concentrated on economic , social and environmental aspects .
In the medium term , it is a question at national level of regularly monitoring and of updating the statistical data that we have .
This is why regular revision of the series of indicators already developed within the framework of the Beijing Platform for Action must be conducted as a function of the relevance of the political , economic and social context .
Taking these two aspects into account will provide us with the consistency we need at European level to achieve our common goals .
Finally , in the long term , we must ensure that gender equality policies are integrated , but also encourage the exchange of good practice between the Member States and , of course , ensure that the European Commission 's roadmap matches the progress achieved .
By adopting this structure at three levels , we will markedly increase our chances of finally realising our main goals .
( IT ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , Beijing + 15 is confronted this year with a financial , economic and employment crisis that is having a negative impact on the living and working conditions of millions of women throughout Europe and the world , but which may represent an opportunity to review development models , the organisation of the labour market and social policies .
In strengthening the Beijing + 15 objectives , the European Union must prioritise , on behalf of women , policies for providing access to environmental resources and credit , including by means of micro-finance ; the balance between family life and work life , including by means of the adoption of the directive on parental leave ; training policies and incentives for businesses that employ young people and women ; and the fight against trafficking in human beings with a new directive , which we hope will be based on the resolution approved during the last part-session in Strasbourg .
Above all , we must focus development cooperation support on the empowerment of women in the poorest countries , and in African countries in particular , building a possible Euro-African alliance with the women .
It would be good - I am addressing the Commissioner and the President here - if the European delegation in New York promoted and gained support for the campaign to award the Nobel Peace Prize to the women of Africa , symbolically represented by the leaders of associations active in those countries worst affected by conflicts and poverty .
( FR ) Today , we are debating equality between men and women , 15 years after the Fourth World Conference on Women , which took place in Beijing , and we are also celebrating the European Year for Combating Poverty and Social Exclusion .
I would like to establish a link between the two , as it is certainly true that women remain the main victims of job insecurity .
In France , for example , they represent 80 % of part-time workers , with precarious and poorly paid jobs .
Eighty per cent of women also earn less than the minimum wage , meaning that , in the end , they draw pensions that border on the minimum subsistence income .
Added to that is the fact that the average pay gap between women and men persists at a very high level .
To a degree , therefore , gender equality exists only in theory , and women , who furthermore are still faced with a large number of family responsibilities , are sometimes forced to do several jobs for several employers and yet still end up earning less than men .
That is why we absolutely must introduce public policies that specifically target these inequalities , both in the labour market and in the home , as well as social security systems that actively respond to women 's needs .
Without such measures , the Beijing goals are liable to remain in the realms of utopia .
( LT ) The principle of gender equality is very important to the European Union in striving for the goals of growth , employment and social cohesion .
The European Union has made great progress in implementing the Beijing Platform , but we cannot be entirely satisfied with the current situation .
The report on the implementation of the Beijing Platform has shown that in the European Union , the goals it set out have not yet been achieved .
It is very important that the Beijing indicators are used to develop the gender equality perspective in national reform programmes , as well as in national reports on social security and social inclusion .
There is still a lack of sufficiently reliable and comparable data both at national and EU level determining social indicators , including the poverty of women , violence against women and institutional mechanisms .
One of the tasks of the European Institute for Gender Equality is to handle comparable data .
The aims laid out in the institute 's work programme should particularly help implement the indicators set out in Beijing .
I am convinced that , at the time of the economic recession , it is essential to strengthen institutional mechanisms for gender equality .
Mr President , I thank colleagues for their contributions to this debate .
I recently addressed a high-level group of public service workers , women who had reached the highest level on their jobs , and they were concerned about how they could make more progress .
I want to turn this debate around a little because I think we spend too much time trying to push women up into professions and not looking at why there are professions that men do not get involved in .
The key reason is that they are not paid well enough , and I will be quite basic on this - we do not pay people enough to do the cleaning work , the work that nobody wants to do .
Maybe if we looked at how we distribute payments in these sorts of professions , we would achieve equality at that level as well as at the other end .
I think we need to look at these issues if we are to have genuine gender equality .
I think the Spanish Presidency is very concerned , for example , about the role of women in agriculture .
Again , they have a huge part to play but it is not recognised and it is certainly not counted , and , again , that is an important aspect of our upcoming reforms on agriculture policy .
There are two other issues which I want to mention .
A lot of women are contributing to this debate , but I think we have to be honest about how many of us have dependent children .
Could we be here if we had ?
Yes , but only because we earn a great deal more money than other people who cannot follow suit .
Lastly , let us acknowledge the women of Iran .
Yesterday , we heard from them and I think this House and this debate should recognise their struggle and wish them well .
( RO ) Equal opportunities for men and women is a fundamental principle of the European Union enshrined in Community legislation .
In 2009 , women accounted for 24 % of members of national parliaments , 26 % of members of national governments and 33 % of CEOs of European companies , as well as for 18 % of professors at European public universities .
I also wish to mention that 81.3 % of young women have completed at least secondary education , while 59 % of university graduates in the European Union are women .
The European Union 's strategy for growth and employment aims to ensure that by 2010 , the employment rate among women should be 60 % .
However , the risk of poverty among women is primarily due to the situation of single-parent families headed by women .
I believe that it is important for us to guarantee women equal opportunities for developing and planning their career , as well as conditions supporting a personal , professional and family life balance .
On this point , I want to stress the importance of child care facilities .
We are aiming to ensure that 30 % of children under the age of three are able to register for and benefit from care services for children in this age group .
( PT ) As we approach the celebration of International Women 's Day , the centenary celebrations and 15 years since the approval of the Beijing Platform for Action , we can see that serious problems continue to exist in women 's lives , since they are victims of precarious employment , unemployment , growing inequalities , the crisis of capitalism , and violence in society , in the workplace and within the family .
Poverty has a female face , including here in the European Union , where women make up the majority of the 85 million people who live in poverty .
For these reasons , we do not merely support the resolution which was approved in the Committee on Women 's Rights and Gender Equality , but also hope that it will be approved by a majority of this Parliament , including the paragraph which emphasises that sexual and reproductive health and rights are an integral part of the women 's rights agenda , and that it is essential to step up efforts to improve women 's reproductive rights and health , both in Europe and globally .
It is time to put an end to inequality and stereotypes and prioritise promoting equal rights for women and men in social progress .
( RO ) One of the areas of action specified by the Beijing Platform for Action in 1995 was aimed at combating violence against women .
Fifteen years on from this historic UN conference , the assessment of the efforts made to improve the situation of women in the world is disappointing .
Numerous programmes adopted down the years have sadly remained far from a reality , not to mention the Millennium Development Goals , which include the promotion of gender equality .
Unfortunately , domestic violence , the use of rape as a weapon of war , genital mutilation , forced marriage , human trafficking or sexual slavery remain the nightmare which destroys the lives of millions of women throughout the whole world .
I believe that we cannot talk in terms of success unless the European Union becomes even more heavily involved in this area .
We need a comprehensive strategy aimed at tackling poverty , lack of education and information , impunity , armed conflicts and human trafficking for the purposes of prostitution .
I think that it is important for us not to forget that , before it becomes a cause of evil , violence against women is an effect triggered by a whole set of factors which we must take more united and firm action to eradicate .
( DE ) Mr President , there is a scarlet thread running through the Platform for Action from Beijing , namely non-discrimination .
That is a good thing .
Women should not be given a worse deal than men without good and sound reasons .
However , I do not think that quotas of women - so-called ' positive ' discrimination - is a sensible approach to this .
Skills must be the key criterion , not gender .
I therefore strongly reject the quota of women in the appointment of the European Commission .
Instead of concerning ourselves with quotas , we ought really to be focusing on women who are oppressed and discriminated against .
In Europe , we allow Muslim women to continue to live in a kind of parallel society , where violence against women and other forms of oppression are part of everyday life .
We allow Muslim women in Europe to have no freedom to make decisions over many areas of their lives .
It starts with the mode of dress , continues through education to their choice of career , as well as to their choice of husband .
Women 's rights campaigners from Islamic countries approach us , hoping that something will be done about it here .
Where is the Europe of human rights when we need it ?
I therefore believe that we should stop these artificial discussions about quotas and instead work to combat the massive discrimination that occurs daily in Europe under the guise of the freedom of religion - this truly has no place in our enlightened community of values .
( SK ) Had it not been for the previous speaker , yourself and the Minister , we would have been a women 's group discussing how to improve gender equality .
This is unquestionably one of the most important issues in modern society and in the modern age and I agree with Mrs Svensson that there is an essential need to coordinate activities at all levels .
Besides the actual problem of persistent gender inequality , there is also an absence at the European level of a high quality gender-differentiated resolution of the agreed indicators , for example , in the areas of female poverty , violence against women or the human rights of women .
The Commission should therefore give Eurostat the task of developing links to coordinate the collection of comparative data or data from the Member States , while , at the same time , the Commission should put pressure on the Member States to cooperate actively with Eurostat .
Despite this , the EU is still a world leader in the field of gender equality and I think we should share with the rest of the world the examples of good practice that we already have in the EU .
In the next round of negotiations , we should also talk about the good things we have managed to achieve .
I believe that in five years ' time , when it will be the 20th anniversary of Beijing , we should finally be able to celebrate greater progress in resolving gender inequality worldwide .
( DE ) Mr President , gender equality is a fundamental principle of the EU .
This principle is stated in the treaties , on websites and is happily cited often and in many places .
It should therefore be justified to ask why we are always talking about it .
The answer is , quite simply , because equality is not implemented in many areas .
I look forward to the day when we no longer need to talk about this and the principle of gender equality has finally been realised in the social sphere .

Mr President , I agree with all the speeches that have been made , all of them except for a speech by Mr Obermayr , which , incidentally , I only agree with partially .
I must say that these speeches by female Members are an expression of a new phase that is beginning in the European Union , also in the area of gender equality .
Gender equality does not only benefit women ; it also benefits men .
Gender equality is an essential principle for coexistence .
I therefore thought that both women and men would speak today , because it benefits us all , not only women , and I think that the European Union has made a very intelligent commitment to gender equality .
It has done so in Article 2 of the Treaty on European Union , which mentions the principle of equality between men and women for the first time in primary law ; in Article 3 of that treaty ; in Article 8 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union , which states that all the Union 's policies must be governed by the principle of gender equality .
This means all the policies : in other words , the treaties place the principle of gender equality at the heart of European policies , and it has become a core principle on the political agenda of the European Union .
What we need to do is to put into practice this mandate given to us by the Treaty on European Union .
This is what the Spanish Presidency wants to do and what the Council of the Union wants to do , and we are convinced that we are going to have the cooperation of the Commission .
Only yesterday , we had a meeting with the Commission in Madrid .
Commissioner Reding was there , and we are sure that there is going to be very close cooperation from the Commission to help our ambitions regarding gender equality to become a reality during this Presidency .
To begin with , just to mention something that is coming up soon , 8 March is going to be an important day , as it is International Women 's Day , when the European Parliament in Strasbourg will discuss the Women 's Charter .
On the same day , the Employment , Social Policy , Health and Consumer Affairs Council will also discuss the idea of equality linked to social cohesion , which is another of the Union 's principles , gender equality linked to social cohesion and eradicating violence .
The subject that has been mentioned most frequently in your speeches has probably been the need to eradicate gender violence , which is the greatest scourge on our societies , the worst of our societies : violence against women .
I am sure that the protection order against gender violence is going to be one of the achievements , because we will have to see what happens over the coming months as achievements .
Once again , I will say that we will be counting on the cooperation of the Commission and the European Parliament in this area .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , the equality directives started in the 1970s and since then , many directives have not only changed laws in the Member States - there were no laws in the Member States at that time - but have created the laws in the Member States , the laws of equality between men and women at all levels of our society .
Nevertheless , and you are right in this , we have good laws but practice does not follow .
I believe that the first thing we will have to do is not to create new laws , but see that the laws are de facto applied in society .
I dream of a time when we can have a debate in this House and 50 % of the speakers are men and 50 % are women .
I have a dream where we no longer need International Women 's Day because there is no longer any problem .
It is nice to dream , practice is there , and we have to take things in hand .
That is why I am very grateful to the Spanish Presidency which has put the woman question at the top of the priority list .
I am very dedicated , together with my colleagues in the Commission , to have gender mainstreaming included in all the policies which we are going to present .
Together with my colleague Mr Andor , who is responsible for employment , we will see that this is put into practice in the 2020 programme .
For the other elements I will , as I have already said , work together with the Committee on Women 's Rights and Gender Equality on the new strategy for equality where questions such as the gender pay gap and women in decision making will be high on the agenda because they are real structural problems which we need to solve .
But there are also questions of society which go very deep and which we have to tackle with the help of women 's organisations , with the help of the Ministers in the Member States , with the help of national laws , with the help of European laws , and there is , of course , the terrible question of violence against women .
I believe that this is going to be at the forefront of the work which we are going to lead .
I think nevertheless , ladies , that when your strong delegation goes to New York to celebrate 15 years of the Beijing Platform , we should be proud , because if we look at what we have achieved in the last 15 years , it is a great deal .
All right , we have not yet arrived at where our dreams will lead us , but we have achieved much and , through this experience , we can very much help women on other continents .
That will be the subject of the New York meeting .
It will not only look at what European women are doing , but also at what European women , European policies , the development policies can do for women in other continents .
I also believe in this sense that the Charter of Fundamental Rights , which is a beautiful text which should be read by every child in the European schools and which should be worked on by every student in our universities , really makes the right point : there is no difference between men and women .
They are equal and it is our responsibility to see that we speak up when this fundamental question is not put into practice in our application of laws in the Member States .
It is not only in this place where we should speak up ; we should speak up in our Member States , too , and point to the problems which are arising and which are not solved , and not keep quiet until we have solved the problem .
I make a call to all the men in this Parliament .
Please join your voices to the voices of the women .
I have received one motion for a resolutionto wind up the debate in accordance with Rule 115 ( 5 ) of the Rules of Procedure .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 11.30 .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
The United Nations introduced International Day for the Elimination of Violence against Women , which the whole world celebrates on 25 November every year .
This phenomenon is very widespread , with 45 % of women in Europe victims of different forms of violence .
At a global level , one woman in three has been beaten , forced to have sexual intercourse or been abused in other ways .
This phenomenon is reflected not only in violence in the family against women and girls , but also through exploitation , acts of sexual violence , human trafficking , honour crimes , dangerous traditional practices , such as the burning of brides or early marriages , and other forms of violence against women 's bodies , minds and dignity .
In most cases , the aggressor is the husband or partner , or an acquaintance .
I think that violence against women is one of the most serious human rights violations .
It is also all the more serious as it is present on every continent , in every country and culture , regardless of the level of economic development .
The perpetrators of these acts must be severely punished .
In the case of large-scale offences , the International Criminal Court must play an important role and establish a close correlation with the decisions made by national courts .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the 15th anniversary of the famous World Conference on equal rights for women , organised by the UN in Beijing , is just approaching .
During those 15 years , the 189 countries which signed the UN Platform for Action for Gender Equality have managed to make a certain amount of progress in all 12 areas of concern identified in the document .
However , most of the problems identified then are still current today , in particular , the problem of domestic violence against women and the involvement of women in armed conflicts .
These subjects do not need to be presented in the European Parliament - we discuss them during debates on cases of human rights violations at almost every plenary session .
Therefore , I would like to express my esteem for the UN initiative .
Every five years , a detailed review of the Platform for Action is conducted in a great many countries ( the last time was in 2005 ) , and the most urgent matters are highlighted .
Five years ago , at the conference in New York , the attention of countries which are signatories to the Platform for Action was drawn to the high numbers of rapes committed against women , the rise of HIV / AIDS infections among women and the discrimination which exists against women in employment .
Unfortunately , those observations could be made again , today .
What is needed is a very specific action plan , with the real support of all signatories to the Platform and with the involvement of the European Union , so that at the next review of the programme in five years ' time , clear progress will be evident .
I firmly believe that gender equality must be among the key objectives of any democracy .
While considerable efforts have been made in the European Union to achieve the objectives of the Beijing Platform for Action , it has not been possible to meet them all .
We still face in Europe strong stereotypes associated with women and significant gender pay gaps , while the progress made in terms of attracting more women to take up decision-making positions has been extremely slow .
However , in general , equal opportunities remain , unfortunately , only an aspiration , especially in the countries of Eastern Europe , the new members of the EU .
In order to attain better results in Member States in terms of achieving the objectives of the Beijing Platform for Action , reliable , comparable data on the situation of women is an absolute must , both at European and national level .
There should also be a regular review carried out of the progress made in the critical areas identified by the Platform .
However , I am pleased that the Spanish Presidency has included the problems of gender equality in its list of priorities and has focused particular attention on women working in the agricultural sector .
I would therefore like to take this opportunity to congratulate it on this initiative .
One of the strategic areas defined in the Beijing Platform for Action is that of the rights of women as an inalienable , integral and indivisible part of universal human rights .
The objective is to fully introduce international instruments for the protection of these rights , including the Convention on Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women .
One form of discrimination is violation of the reproductive rights of women .
A report on respect for reproductive rights in Poland in 2007 and the recommendations of the UN Human Rights Committee which are based on this report show clearly that Polish women have difficulties in gaining access to reimbursable contraception , medical care during pregnancy , prenatal tests and even to pain-free labour .
They are denied the possibility of a legal abortion in practically every case , even in cases which are permissible under law .
As a result , 200-400 legal terminations of pregnancy are performed in Poland every year , compared to 100 000 illegal ones .
I propose adoption of a legal abortion rate , calculated as the number of legal terminations of pregnancy per 1 000 live births per year , as a measure of the equality of women in Member States of the EU .
In countries where women have the right to choose abortion , this rate fluctuates at around 200 .
In Poland , it is 1 .
This is an objective measure of the violation of women 's reproductive rights in Poland .
I appeal for more effective cooperation between the EU and the UN over monitoring of women 's rights and the introduction of measurements which quantify violations of women 's rights .
The resolution does not reflect the whole Beijing Platform for Action .
As ever , it is easier to dwell on sexual stereotypes , ' reproductive health ' , not to mention abortion , CEDAW , violence and quotas .
Are there no other problems for the vast majority of women and mothers in Europe and throughout the world ?
Is it not time to tackle other obstacles as well ?
Point 9 of the Beijing Platform for Action , however , declares as its goal the empowerment of all women .
It is essential that all women can identify with public equal opportunities policies , which respect their natural difference and their necessary complementary nature , and do not lose sight of the importance of national and regional identities or historical , cultural and religious diversity .
The implementation of the Platform for Action falls under the sovereign responsibility of each Member State , taking into account and showing strict respect for diverse religious and ethical values , and for the cultural heritage and philosophical convictions of individuals and their communities .
Had the implementation of the Beijing Platform respected these premises , we would not have observed just a slight improvement in the situation of women .
This resolution sends out a biased signal that divides rather than unites .
I fully support Mrs Svensson 's work on the problem of gender equality , and I agree that the issues she has raised have a significant influence on the process of achieving equal rights for women and men .
At the same time , I would like to point out that many women consciously and freely choose to work in the home on behalf of the family .
Sometimes they are forced to give up their career for unforeseen reasons , such as the need to care for an ill or disabled child .
A significant problem in this situation is the lack of appropriate solutions concerning retirement pension entitlements for these women .
In many countries , there are no solutions at all in this area , or those which are in place are not sufficient to ensure women a decent living .
Therefore , it is essential , too , that the debate on gender equality should also include the matter of the entitlement to benefits of women who run the home and care for children .
One-minute speeches on matters of political importance
The next item is one-minute speeches on matters of political importance under Rule 150 .
We are going to give preference to those Members who did not take the floor during the last period of one-minute speeches under Rule 150 over those who did take the floor last time .
( RO ) On 4 February 2010 , Traian Băsescu , the President of Romania , announced the decision confirming the Supreme Council of National Defence 's approval of Romania 's participation in the US anti-missile system .
The agreement is due to be submitted to the Romanian Parliament for approval .
At the same time , the president stated that the agreement is not targeted at Russia .
I believe that this allows Romania to demonstrate its ability to act as a strategic partner of the United States in the Black Sea region and become a net European supplier of security .
In the current context of tough global challenges , the Romanian-US agreement will inextricably consolidate the security system for European allies .
It is my belief that the European Union will welcome this major agreement .
( PL ) Mr President , I would like to express my profound alarm at the rapidly worsening situation of fellow Poles in Lithuania .
Lithuania is a member of the European Union .
In spite of this , the fundamental rights of the Polish national minority are being violated in Lithuania .
There are almost 300 000 Poles in Lithuania , in regions where they make up 60-80 % of the population , but they are not entitled to use their mother tongue as an auxiliary language in official situations .
A court has ordered the removal of bilingual street names .
Court enforcement officers are being sent to enforce this order .
Polish names are being Lithuanianised .
Poles are suffering discrimination during restitution of land .
The right of Polish children to receive education with Polish as the medium of instruction is being curtailed .
The electoral rights of their parents are being restricted .
The future of the Union is currently in the balance .
Do we still want to live in a Europe of illusory values , or of real values ?
Which direction the Union goes in depends , in part , on us .
Are we going to turn a blind eye to overt discrimination against a minority , or are we really going to build a secure Europe in a spirit of respect for human rights ?
( ES ) Mr President , I would like to report something to Parliament and ask for its support .
I want to report that in the south of the Union , in the industrious and enterprising city of Valencia , there is an historic marine quarter called Cabañal , which could be destroyed by a plan that the council wants to implement after abandoning the area for almost 20 years .
The local residents have protested against this plan .
At the request of the Supreme Court , the Ministry of Culture has ruled that the plan will amount to a desecration of heritage , and the Constitutional Court also recently tried to stop it or ruled that it should be stopped .
The response of the public authorities has been to refuse to submit to the institutions , with the resulting risk , danger and lack of political concern .
The plea for support that I am making is for the local residents to receive the help that they ask for from Parliament regarding this desecration of heritage , to ensure that such a major , barbaric aberration cannot take place in a district such as Cabañal in the south of the European Union .
( RO ) Last week , I attended the meeting of the European Union-Moldova Parliamentary Cooperation Committee .
The results of this meeting are extremely encouraging in terms of bilateral relations and the Republic of Moldova moving closer to the European Union .
The pro-European government in Chişinău has made visible progress in the few months since it took power .
I believe that this progress is a clear sign of the sincere desire to embark on a one-way path to Europe .
The political will of the Republic of Moldova 's current government to promote reforms aimed at building a sound democracy and prosperous economy is evident from the discussions last week .
I welcome the start of the negotiations on a new association agreement in January this year .
I believe that the European Parliament must be actively involved in this process and support the conclusion of such an agreement and a visa waiver scheme .
The Republic of Moldova shares the European Union 's values .
This is why I believe that both the European Commission and European Parliament must support this government with financial assistance , which must be granted as quickly as possible , as well as through the expertise the European Union has to offer in the various areas targeted for reform , such as justice or the economy .
( PL ) Mr President , unfortunately , I am having to speak , once again , about the situation of the Polish minority in a Member State of the European Union - Lithuania .
It might seem that if a state does belong to the European Union it should observe all European standards .
However , Vilnius is not doing this .
There is still no agreement in Lithuania over bilingual street names in places where the Polish population is not so much a minority as a majority .
There are significant problems over the operation of education with Polish as the medium of instruction .
As a result of action taken by the Lithuanian education authorities , around 100 Polish school classes are to be closed .
Recently , significant restrictions have been imposed on artistic groups which propagate Polish culture .
There is a strange imbalance here , because Lithuanians in Poland are guaranteed all their rights and receive large subsidies from the Polish state budget .
It is time for an elementary and civilised response .
It is time international organisations , including our own European Parliament , took up the matter of discrimination against Poles in Lithuania .
Mr President , this evening , I attended a reception for the Shen Yun Performing Arts Group in the Members ' Salon .
Last year , I had the pleasure of seeing the Shen Yun Show in London .
Its purpose is to revive interest in and to illustrate traditional Chinese culture , a culture of course that the Chinese Communist Party and government have done their best to destroy over the last 60 years .
I was appalled to learn this evening that a planned performance in Romania in April had been cancelled because of pressure from the Chinese Government .
It is completely unacceptable that Romania , a country that claims to be a democracy , allows itself to be pressurised in this way by a Communist tyranny .
I should also say that Shen Yun promotes the philosophy of truthfulness , tolerance and compassion so it is not surprising that the Chinese Government and Communist Party fear that contrary ideology .
I would like to suggest to the President , Mr Buzek , that we redress the situation by inviting Shen Yun to stage a sample performance in the Parliament at the earliest convenient date .
This would be a clear gesture of support to those incomparably brave Chinese democracy activists .
Mr President , I would like to take this opportunity to condemn in this House the fake use of Irish , British , French and German passports in the recent killing of the Hamas commander .
The chief of the Dubai police said he was 99 % certain that Mossad was behind the killing .
If that is the case , this was a flagrant abuse of EU passports to commit a crime in a third country and particularly a breach of trust where Ireland is concerned because , ever since we got our independence in 1922 , we have been a neutral and friendly country thus allowing our citizens to travel , maybe more freely , in places where other people would not be allowed to travel .
The use of the fake passports in this situation has jeopardised that position , especially in Dubai .
I would call on the High Representative in particular to investigate this matter and , if the government or Mossad were behind it , redress should be given to us and to the other countries involved .
Mr President , we will get over this confusion eventually .
The regional aid map for State aid rules in Europe is in serious need of redrawing .
A major concern is that when I wrote to the previous Commission on this , they were basing their policy on 2006 figures from Eurostat .
Now that the regional aid map is up for review , it is extremely important to recognise that the European economy is in a dramatically different picture .
Taking just one example in my own country , unemployment levels in the mid-west of the country have grown by over 40 % in the last year and this without mentioning the previous years where figures were rising already .
Areas in the mid-west , like Limerick , Clare and Tipperary , need large-scale state funding to stimulate primary job creation , and it is getting to critical levels .
Given the dramatic turnaround in the Irish economy , as in other economies , the years of 2006 and 2007 might as well have been a lifetime ago .
While I recognise that it is partly up to Member States to inform the Commission of any changes in their economic status , the approach of the Commission should not remain the same regardless .
( RO ) Ladies and gentlemen , I think that the most important gift that God has given Man is the dog .
You are familiar with the quotation from Madame Roland , who would be guillotined during the French Revolution : ' The more I see of men , the more I admire dogs , ' while Lord Byron wrote : ' Dogs have all the virtues of man without his vices . '
I represent in this Chamber several millions of animal-lovers from my country who are outraged by the cruelty shown towards stray dogs which are ruthlessly killed .
Foreign visitors to Romania are appalled to see dogs ' dead bodies lying on the roads , a barbaric sight which even children have to witness .
At the moment , the prefect of Bucharest is requesting an amendment to a law amended by the Romanian Parliament , calling for the elimination of stray dogs .
However , dogs are guardian angels .
It is also well known that in days gone by , they helped protect the health of the inhabitants of fortified towns because where there are dogs , there are no rats or snakes .
I ask the European Parliament to request that the Romanian Government complies with the Universal Declaration of Animal Rights issued in Paris in 1978 .
We must put an end to the massacre of stray dogs in Romania .
Anyone who does not love animals does not love people either .
For goodness ' sake , we are , after all , living in the third millennium AD !
Mr President , I would like to denounce the situation of the Catalan and European swine sector .
The price of pigs has continued to decrease for over a year and for several months now , has been clearly below the production cost .
One of the reasons why it is happening is because of pig imports from emerging countries .
In too many cases , these imports enter the European Union without being sufficiently controlled at European customs .
In too many cases , these pig imports do not fulfil several European regulations on quality and food security that the European Union imposes only on European producers .
It seems that the same will happen in the coming years : increasing animal welfare requirements for European producers but with no controls on imports from emerging countries .
This is a clear case of unfair competition .
In this way , Europe will lose its farmers and pig producers and , without them , Europe will lose an important part of its agri-food industry .
These worries I wanted to share with you .
( PL ) Mr President , I would like to refer to the situation of national minorities in Lithuania , where their rights are continually being reduced .
In Lithuania , in areas populated by concentrations of national minorities , there is a general ban on the use of bilingual information signs , which have been used for 20 years .
Schools for national minorities have had their subsidies reduced , and preparations are being made for their closure as part of what is being called a ' reform ' .
The original spelling of foreign names cannot be used in identity documents .
Furthermore , difficulties are being created for Poles in Lithuania who are trying to regain land seized by the Communist system , and recently even the cultural life of minorities has been hit .
Wilia , the oldest traditional Polish song and dance group in Lithuania , has had its government funding reduced to a quarter of its former level , and three full-time positions have been closed , leaving only one .
The rights of national minorities in Lithuania should be respected as the Union requires in its motto : Unity in Diversity .
Mr President , Mr Tremosa i Balcells raised the issue of low-cost production in agriculture and it is an issue which I have huge concerns about , as do many others in this House .
However , I am more concerned about the Commission and how they view agriculture , rural areas and indeed the food industry because , in the EU 2020 strategy , they seem to have almost forgotten about this vital sector of the European Union .
I would urge the Commission not to ignore this important area .
I hope that it does not reflect a view that this sector is not important any more , particularly as we look at reforming the European Union 's budget .
I would remind the Commission that the agriculture and food sector is vital for food security reasons , for environmental protection reasons , and for jobs in rural areas .
I think that this view needs to be reflected in the EU 2020 strategy .
I thank a young farmers ' organisation in Ireland , Macra na Feirme , who represent men and women , for bringing this matter to my attention and I hope the Commission is listening .
( RO ) The unemployment rate hit 10 % in the euro area at the start of the year , compared to 9.6 % in the EU-27 .
The figure for young people is more than 21 % .
Roughly 20 million companies operate in the European Union , excluding the financial sector , with 99 % of these being small and medium-sized enterprises .
Two thirds of the total workforce in the private sector are employed by SMEs .
I call on the Commission and Member States to draw up a package of measures aimed specifically at supporting SMEs to help them out of the economic and financial crisis .
This package of measures should also be targeted at those proposing to set up small or medium-sized businesses .
These measures might include , for example , the suitable adaptation of the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund and the Seventh Framework Programme for research , as well as the simplification of the administrative criteria and procedures to facilitate SMEs ' access to projects carried out using European funds .
Last but not least , as in the case of the farmers , I propose granting government guarantees for loans taken out by SMEs to help them out of the crisis , obviously for a fixed period of time and up to a certain ceiling .
( EL ) Mr President , the problem of illegal immigration in Greece is far worse than in the rest of the European Union , as we all know .
There are various reasons for this , ranging from its geographical location to its long coastal border .
Under these circumstances , the initiative by the Greek Government , which is facilitating the acquisition of Greek nationality by immigrants in an unprecedented manner , is - at best - an improvisation in times such as these and has given rise to the following paradox : the proposal by the government of the country with the most acute problem contains the most lenient regulations , at every level , in the entire European Union .
This is encouraging rather than discouraging illegal immigration , to the detriment of legal immigration .
It is undermining social cohesion and taking a fragmented approach to the issue , by only examining the last link in a chain which includes illegal entry , asylum , deportation and leave to remain and work in the European Union .
It is opening the window to the acquisition of European nationality to an indeterminate number of illegal immigrants .
From this perspective , it is a European question which we should address intensively in the immediate future .
( RO ) Respect for the right to privacy has become a particularly topical subject of late , with the introduction of new information technologies .
In addition to the beneficial impact of these technologies in numerous areas , the issue of intrusion into citizens ' privacy has also arisen and , by extension , the need to regulate access to personal data .
I am referring here to the fact that citizens must be guaranteed the right to verify the collection , storage , use and distribution of their personal data .
Current data protection legislation has been lagging behind and is no longer able to resolve all the problems which have occurred .
A large amount of feedback from public opinion clearly supports the need for tight regulation of the right to privacy .
The European Union 's efforts to create a satisfactory legal database in this area are welcome but , in my view , they are still not sufficient to meet the new challenges .
( Applause )
( CS ) More than six months have passed since Canada took the unprecedented step of re-imposing visa requirements on one of the EU Member States , in this case , for citizens of the Czech Republic .
Canada justified its move on the grounds that , on the other side of the ocean , Czech citizens , particularly Roma , were applying en masse for asylum .
In these circumstances I would like to say that in the Czech Republic , the same conditions apply to everyone , regardless of whether they have Czech , Slovak , Vietnamese or Ukrainian nationality or whether they are of Czech , Afro-American or Roma origin .
The Charter of Fundamental Rights and Freedoms , which is part of our constitutional law , declares equal national and ethnic rights for all citizens .
The fact that Canada explains its actions with reference to the Roma is , in itself , discriminatory , because it is an admission that visa conditions are being changed because of one ethnic group .
Instead of costly and administratively-demanding visas , Canada should , if anything , think hard about these conditions .
( ES ) Mr President , as you know , on 11 February , Parliament said no to the Terrorist Finance Tracking Programme , the SWIFT programme .
Consequently , the agreement has been suspended , and no data is being transferred .
The Commission does , however , have a new mandate to negotiate .
The question that I would like to put to the Presidency of the European Parliament - not to you , but to the actual Presidency - is whether we have an interlocutor , whether the United States is negotiating with the European Union following the collapse , or whether it is negotiating case by case on a bilateral basis with certain Member States .
In any case , Mr President , if these negotiations do take place , I demand that the European Parliament plays a role in the negotiations , a demand that I think all of us share .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , on 23 February in Villasanta , Lombardy , an exceptional discharge of hydrocarbons from a tank in a disused refinery resulted in massive contamination of the nearby River Lambro .
The scale of the environmental disaster , in which thousands of cubic metres of oil were spilt , not only undermines the ecosystem of the River Lambro , with consequences for the fauna too , but is also in danger of spreading - in spite of the action taken - to the River Po , which runs across the entire Po Valley until it meets the Adriatic Sea .
The exceptional and urgent nature of the situation , which has already led the Lombardy region to request that a state of emergency be declared , is nonetheless such as to require intervention from the European Union too - and I call for a signal via the Presidency - both from the point of view of coordinating the environmental initiatives in the areas at risk , which certainly include the Po area , and in respect of the amount of financial resources that will be required for the absolutely crucial restoration of the environmental situation of this vast area affected by a huge environmental disaster .
( PT ) Regional disparities remain a challenge in the context of the European Union .
For this reason , it is essential that cohesion policy continues to support the less developed regions .
I therefore welcome the initiative for an EU strategy for the Baltic Sea Region and the ongoing initiative for the Danube region .
I urge Parliament , for the same reasons , to give some careful consideration to the possibility of new strategies for other regions .
In south-western Europe , for example , Macaronesia ( the Azores , Madeira , the Canary Islands and Cape Verde ) faces various shared challenges , and so a strategy for this region would improve communication systems , preserve the environment , promote growth , scientific exchange , job creation and security , and facilitate the fight against illegal immigration .
This would also be a development for Europe 's Atlantic frontier and would establish another bridge between Europe and Africa .
( PT ) I would like to point out that , in island regions , air transport is sometimes the only means of access and that operating conditions depend on the volume of passengers and cargo carried .
While there are some island regions where these volumes are large enough to attract many air transport operators - bringing competition and low transport prices , and thus improving accessibility - there are other areas , such as the Azores , where these volumes are much lower , and this makes them unattractive to operators .
As a result , air fares are higher , hindering the mobility of people and limiting the area 's attractiveness to tourists , which would allow their enormous potential for development and for diversifying their economic base to flourish and become stronger .
This constraint is particularly harsh in times of crisis such as the period we are experiencing at present .
This means that temporary assistance is crucial for promoting an increase in passenger and cargo volumes so that the market can begin to function .
This would also allow these regions , which have a high potential for tourism , to be included in the objectives of the trans-European networks , which aim at expanding towards the edges of Europe .
( PL ) Despite the fact that many economists and politicians have already announced the end of the crisis in Europe , we are still struggling with its negative consequences .
Monthly data on the level of unemployment in the Union is increasingly depressing .
There are currently over 23 million people in Europe who are without work .
This means the crisis has ruined the efforts which have been made over many years to promote employment .
An exceptionally detrimental phenomenon is the continually rising number of unemployed young people .
Currently , one in five young Europeans is now without work .
It should be assumed that this situation will lead to exceptionally harmful social consequences , such as a rise in crime , alcoholism , drug abuse and problem families .
As for possible ways to get out of the recession quickly , I think we should make good use of our greatest asset - the Community 's internal market .
Greater coordination is needed at European level to make full use of the possibilities of the common economic space .
We need further simplification of the rules for its operation , and we need to develop true economic union .
( RO ) Due to the expiry of its GMP standard in early February , the Cantacuzino National Institute of Research and Development for Microbiology and Immunology , based in Bucharest , has had its licence withdrawn for manufacturing and marketing injectable products , including vaccines .
Following the implementation of the corrective action plan drawn up by the management of the Cantacuzino Institute , along with the National Medicines Agency , and approved by the Ministry of Health , the Cantacuzino Institute is expected to regain authorisation to manufacture vaccines in the second half of April .
However , we should not forget that discontinuation of the operation of an institute of national and European strategic importance , such as the Cantacuzino Institute , entails a high potential hazard .
This is why I believe that it is important for European institutions to exert tighter control , which will prevent the recurrence of such a situation at European level in the future .
( EL ) Mr President , with all due respect to you , I hereby request that you provide us tomorrow with a list of all those who asked to speak for one minute based on two criteria : firstly , that they did not speak during the previous plenary and , secondly , the time at which they filed their request .
With all due respect to both you and the Bureau , I do not think that it is the Bureau 's privilege to allocate time as it so pleases .
There are certain principles and the first principle is the principle of transparency .
We shall await the list tomorrow - and I see that other members agree and approve - with the two criteria , namely : the criterion of the time at which they filed their request and the criterion of whether or not they spoke during the previous plenary .
The criteria that we use , as you know , is equal distribution of the speeches between the different political groups based on the size of the group and also giving preference to those who did not speak during the previous sitting .
Those are the criteria that we use .
( EL ) Mr President , not one person from the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance spoke today , while five or even seven members spoke from other groups .
I ask you .
This is what I explained before , Mr Tremopoulos .
We had three requests to speak from your Group .
All of those Members had spoken in the previous sitting .
We therefore used this criterion to distribute the speeches equally .
( ES ) Are these criteria chosen by you or by the services for the sitting ?
Are they written down anywhere ?
The list of the Members who requested the floor shows which Members took the floor under Rule 150 in the previous sitting .
Based on this information , the Presidency gives the floor to all the political groups .
By chance , the three Members from the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance who asked for the floor had already taken the floor in the previous sitting .
We therefore did not give them preference .
This is what happens .
We try to ensure that everyone can speak , in accordance with the size of the corresponding group and the criterion that I explained to you regarding those who did not speak in the previous sitting .
( ES ) This might be a very reasonable criterion , but is it written down in any rules or in the Rules of Procedure of the plenary or of Parliament ?
The Presidency uses its powers and interprets the correct way to run the sitting in a fair and balanced way for all the groups .
Mr President , I would like to ask whether I am on the list of those who asked to speak today , and whether I am also on the list of those who spoke at the last plenary .
Is it possible to have an answer to this question right now ?
I will inform you right now .
Mrs Paliadeli , you are on the list of speakers from the Socialist Group .
The order of speaking is the order in which you asked for the floor : you are registered in the order in which you asked for the floor .
We have given the floor to six Members of your Group .
Mr President , on what grounds ?
Chronological order - time order .
On this list , you were number nine .
I shall continue with the sitting .
( Intervention from the floor )
I have explained the criteria .
What else do you want to know ?
Mr President , the only problem we have is that it would be good to know in advance who will take the floor .
It is 10 o 'clock in the evening and we are staying for nothing if we do not receive a speaking slot .
I think we should have a rule that we should know at least two hours in advance who will take the floor in the one-minute speeches .
We will take your comments into account .
Mr President , it is not your fault at all but it is an absolute shambles .
We have waited here tonight for many hours to speak .
It is now 10 o 'clock in the evening .
The one-minute speeches come in , we get allocated time but it is pathetic .
If we are going to spend our time here on important issues for our own regions , we should certainly be allowed to have our say .
There must be a set-up within your organisation , within this nonsense of a Parliament , so that we can actually say that we are going to be here and we can be given time to speak .
To think that we spend all this time here waiting and sitting in the hope of getting a speech is nonsense .
Our people back in our country , in the UK , are fed up with this nonsense because we cannot speak up for their rights and their issues .
This is an absolutely travesty .
I say to you take it back to Mr Barroso .
I have mentioned it to him before that this whole thing is a farce .
If I am going to be here at 10 o 'clock at night on a Monday , Tuesday , Wednesday and Thursday night , then we should at least be given a chance to speak on important issues relating to our Member States .
I ask you , Sir , take it back now to your governors because this is not a democracy , it is a dictatorship .
Thank you .
I should remind you that Mr Barroso is the President of the Commission , not of the European Parliament .
( IT ) Mr President , if , instead of all this squabbling , we had had the opportunity to take the floor , we perhaps could have also done our electorate a good turn , since it is 10 o 'clock in the evening and we all knew that we should have taken the floor .
Every one of us comes here to voice the demands of our electorate .
One minute of speaking time is already very little , and shortening the list is , in my view , also rather arrogant .
Ladies and gentlemen , the situation is very clear .
We have half an hour for these speeches , so I have to keep to the half hour .
Those of you who ask for the floor would fill much more than half an hour .
What the Presidency does is to apply rational , fair criteria , and that is part of its powers .
I understand your frustration .
What we will do is , along with the Director of the plenary services , look at a way that we can have an approximate idea - as it will never be exact , but at least an approximate idea - of which of you are going to speak , so that we can minimise the number that are waiting .
We will do this willingly and do the best that we can .
Now , with your permission , we are going to continue the sitting , because otherwise we will be here all night discussing the same thing .
That concludes this item .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
in writing . - This is a period for critical decisions in the EU and Belarus relationship .
The Eastern Partnership programme has offered opportunities for the regime in Belarus to relax its rigid control of society and open the way for democratic reforms .
However , this process needs to be reciprocal .
The EU 's economic assistance and opening of the cooperation projects can result in reliable progress only if each goodwill step by the EU is accompanied by genuine measures toward the re-establishment of an open democratic society in Belarus .
The assessment of the situation by Sakharov prize winner Milinkevich is pessimistic .
As he told us , the human rights situation has not improved .
In fact , it has worsened .
At the same time , bearing in mind that the Lukashenko regime depends more than ever on Western technology , money and markets , the EU has an efficient leverage over the regime 's further behaviour .
But first we need to understand that the Belarus dictator is probing to see how serious his EU partners really are about the importance of democratic reforms .
Therefore , it is so crucial to send a clear message that the EU 's priority is real changes in the human rights situation .
Major natural disaster in the autonomous region of Madeira ( debate )
The next item is the Commission statement on the major natural disaster in the autonomous region of Madeira .
Mr President , honourable Members , the Commission is concerned and saddened by the terrible events in Madeira , especially by the high number of victims .
I would like to extend my sympathy to all of the inhabitants of Madeira affected by the disaster .
The Commission extends its condolences to the families of the victims , in particular .
Yesterday , my colleague , Johannes Hahn , as the competent Member of the Commission , was able to talk to the President of the Autonomous Region of Madeira , Mr Jardim , who said that the situation remains serious .
However , the regional and national emergency services have it under control .
It does not currently require support from the European Civil Protection Mechanism .
That said , the damage is so severe that Madeira is hoping for financial aid from the EU Solidarity Fund .
The Commission is currently examining all possible means for providing EU financial aid to Madeira .
Back in 2003 , following the horrific fire disaster , we were able to grant solidarity aid amounting to more than EUR 48 million to Portugal .
The Solidarity Fund was created in 2002 to be able to provide financial assistance at EU level to Member States affected by serious natural disasters .
However , the mobilisation of the Solidarity Fund is subject to certain criteria being met .
The most important prerequisite is the submission of an application for assistance by the Portuguese Government .
May I remind you that the Regulation establishing the Solidarity Fund normally only permits mobilisation of the fund for large-scale disasters where the cost of the damage exceeds a threshold of 0.6 % of the gross national income of the State affected .
For Portugal , this currently means that the cost of the damage must exceed EUR 958 million .
However , in exceptional circumstances , and if particular criteria are met , assistance may also be granted for smaller , ' regional ' disasters , particularly if one of the outermost regions , like Madeira , is affected .
As the Commission does not yet have sufficient information about the extent of the damage , it is still too early to say whether these conditions will be met .
The authorities in Portugal should now carry out a swift and thorough assessment of the damage and submit an application to the Commission within ten weeks .
My colleague Mr Hahn will meet with Portugal 's Interior Minister , Mr Pereira , this Friday to discuss where to go from here .
On 6 and 7 March , Mr Hahn will visit Madeira in order to see the damage first hand .
The European Commission 's Directorate-General for Regional Policy will be available to provide any support that may be required to help Portugal 's authorities to prepare the application .
I would like to remind you that financial aid from our Solidarity Fund is not paid out straight away .
The Fund is an instrument to help Member States deal with the financial consequences of disasters ; it is not an urgent instrument .
The resources for the Solidarity Fund are provided by means of an additional contribution from the Member States over and above the normal budget .
It therefore requires the approval of the European Parliament , your approval in other words , and that of the Council , by means of an amendment .
The whole process , from the time of the application until the aid is paid out , will take several months .
However , we , the Commission , will make every effort to keep the process as short as possible .
The Structural Funds are not available for immediate emergency measures .
They may be able to provide some help in connection with the long-term reconstruction .
The Commission will discuss the options and possible sensible and necessary programme amendments in the short term with the administrative authorities in Portugal .
I would like to assure you that the Commission will do everything in its power to help the people and authorities of Madeira to cope with this terrible natural disaster .
on behalf of the PPE Group . - ( PT ) I take the floor in this Chamber today with my voice weighed down with the distress of someone who personally experienced and witnessed the tragedy that struck Madeira last Saturday .
Obviously , I join in the feeling of pain and grief that has befallen the families of the 42 victims we now know have died , to whom I offer my condolences and respect for their loss .
The true extent of this disaster has yet to be revealed , given that the search and rescue teams , who have been working without interruption since Saturday in a Herculean effort which I salute , are only now beginning to reach the most isolated populations .
It is feared that the number of victims could increase .
The scene is one of large-scale destruction , involving significant material damage to access routes , with roads and bridges totally destroyed , and to essential services such as water and electricity supplies .
There are more than 600 displaced persons who have lost their homes and personal possessions .
The economic and social impact of this catastrophe is preventing people from returning to a normal way of life .
However , it is now necessary to look forwards .
We also need to send a message of solidarity , hope and confidence to the people affected .
Help needs to be given , and the European Union and Parliament , in particular , have a role to play here , as they are fundamental in the process of mobilising the Solidarity Fund .
Whenever we are called upon to intervene , we have to do so promptly because we cannot ask the people affected to wait , especially when they need us most .
I hereby appeal to the Commission and its President , Mr Barroso , and to Johannes Hahn , Commissioner for Regional Policy , in particular .
I welcome his plan to visit Madeira shortly , and ask him to take this message of hope , assistance and support for reconstruction , because now is the time to rebuild what nature has unfortunately taken from us once again .
I have complete faith that we will do so because , as the anthem of Madeira has taught me , ' the people of Madeira are humble , stoical and brave .
They are the people who ploughed the earth among the hard rocks ; they are heroes of working in the mountain wilderness .
For Madeira , they will honour their history and through their work , they will strive for and attain happiness and glory . '
on behalf of the S & D Group . - ( PT ) On behalf of the Group of the Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats in the European Parliament , I wish to express our condolences to the families of the victims , and show our solidarity with the people affected by the tragedy that struck the Autonomous Region of Madeira , in Portugal , on the 20th of this month .
Torrential rain , strong winds and heavy seas rendered the centre of the tourist city of Funchal unrecognisable and left devastation and death in their wake .
There has also been great damage to public and private infrastructure , as well as the natural environment and cultural heritage .
Initial estimates , Commissioner , suggest that damage will exceed EUR 1 billion , so this will fall within the criteria for the Solidarity Fund .
Unfortunately , there are also dozens of dead to mourn , a considerable number of injured and missing people and hundreds of homeless .
The images of devastation and suffering have been shown all over the world and no one has remained indifferent .
Expressions of solidarity have come from all four corners of the globe .
The European Union and European Commission must also demonstrate their active solidarity with this outermost island region by urgently mobilising the Solidarity Fund , in order to reduce the high social and economic impacts and to help restore normality to the affected area .
I conclude , Commissioner , by asking the following : this Parliament has already approved changes to the Solidarity Fund .
Why are these changes not in force ?
Why are they not being applied ?
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( PT ) We began this plenary session today with a minute 's silence .
This minute 's silence had two meanings : firstly , solidarity with the victims of the catastrophe which struck Madeira and their families , and secondly , a tribute to all the workers who have been tirelessly providing assistance to those victims .
However , a minute 's silence must make us reflect and also lead us to reflect on things that go beyond our immediate concerns here .
What we saw in Madeira is a phenomenon which will occur more and more often .
Climate change is causing these extreme events to take place again and again , and we must find ways of responding to them .
We are not able to avoid natural disasters but , at the same time , we must not simply allow them always to have such tragic effects on the lives of the people .
That is why we must fight for planning and development policies which are directed at the public good .
However , I wish to conclude , Mr President , with something that is more important and which has brought us all here : the European Commission , the European Parliament and the European institutions must have the capacity to provide an urgent response to emergency situations .
Financial resources and the required swiftness of operation are necessary for this purpose .
( PT ) The tragedy in Madeira took many lives , destroyed property and tore through the face of a Portuguese island which was proud of its beauty , which so many visitors from around the world have had the opportunity to see .
I suppose no one , not even in Portugal - much less in Portugal , in fact - could have been prepared for the horror of the images that were broadcast into our homes in successive news reports , of people being washed away by the waters , houses caving in , bridges collapsing and an entire landscape being altered by the force of nature .
As can be seen from the statements being made here , despite everything , this is not simply a tragedy which occurred in a region of Portugal .
It is a tragedy which violently struck part of the European Union which , in solidarity , should provide assistance without reservation .
It should unreservedly help the families of the victims who have died and the people who have suddenly been left with nothing , and it should assist in the reconstruction of the built environment , by restoring to the island of Madeira what nature has stripped away .
This , Mr President , is certain : the message of the anthem of Madeira has been mentioned here , but I have also drawn a lesson from the anthem of Portugal , which proclaims , ' heroes of the sea , noble people , brave nation ' .
These are brave people who , as they have shown on other occasions in their history , have always known how to turn things around during difficult times and how to overcome such misfortunes .
It will happen yet again and , on this occasion , doubtless with the solidarity and help of the whole European Union .
( DE ) Mr President , this is certainly not a nice reason for this debate .
Madeira has been hit by an unbelievable natural disaster and we extend our condolences to the families affected .
The European Union must provide support in this situation .
The solidarity of the whole of the European Union is required here and I can only reiterate what has already been said .
I urge the Commission to mobilise the Solidarity Fund as quickly as possible so that help can be provided .
I would like to ask the Council to ensure that the reform of the Solidarity Fund that Parliament adopted two years ago is finally implemented , because this will make it possible to provide assistance more quickly to the regions affected .
We also need to look to the future .
In recent years , Madeira has received a lot of structural fund resources and will also continue to do so over the next few years .
These resources need to be used to take preventative action so as to be able to reduce the terrible consequences of natural disasters and therefore also the suffering .
This is something that , as the European Union , we need to implement in the regions and therefore also in Madeira .
( PT ) The disaster on the island of Madeira requires emergency measures and calls for extraordinary financial assistance to be given to this Autonomous Region .
Such assistance should be directed towards the reconstruction of the infrastructure and public amenities which have been destroyed or damaged and should also be made available to people affected by the various aspects of the tragedy , whether economic , social or in terms of the family .
Tragedies are not fair ; almost always , those who have the least are those who lose the most .
It is important , therefore , to identify and compensate , as far as possible , all those who have lost family members , their homes and their livelihoods .
What has happened in Madeira has dramatically shown us the importance of strengthening cooperation and solidarity in the European Union as well as in the area of disaster prevention .
It is important at this point to build a suitable financial framework for prevention that strengthens and makes use of mechanisms such as cohesion policy , rural development policy and regional policy , amongst others , in order to assist Member States in the implementation of measures to protect people , the environment and the economy .
Mr President , I would like to express the sorrow felt by all members of the Committee on Regional Development at the terrible loss of life in Madeira and our intention to do all we can to assist Madeira in its hour of need .
Of course , the national and regional authorities are already doing their utmost to relieve the difficulties encountered by the people and especially those who have been left homeless and we urgently await their request for European assistance through the European Solidarity Fund .
I am sure it will be treated with the utmost expediency by all concerned .
We ask the European Commission to mobilise all its resources and review with the Portuguese authorities how the ongoing European programmes can be adjusted to assist the region .
Let me emphasise that the existing Solidarity Fund continues to have well-known limitations .
Back in April 2005 , the Commission adopted a proposal for the revision of the regulation , which was then adopted by the Parliament at first reading in May 2006 .
Despite the undeniable usefulness of a more flexible Solidarity Fund , despite the necessity of extending its ambit of operations to cover unforeseen man-made disasters and criminal acts as well as natural ones , the Council has been unable to reach a common position on the review of the fund since May 2006 .
In the light of the terrible events in Madeira , we see more clearly than ever that we need a Solidarity Fund which could effectively meet the challenges and allow the Union to deliver prompt and effective assistance when Member States suffer a disaster .
I would therefore call on the Spanish Presidency to relaunch the process of amending the Solidarity Fund , proving in this way that the spirit of real European solidarity remains at the heart of the European project .
( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , disasters are , of course , also a consequence of global warming .
We need to endeavour to deal with these developments , which we are faced with on an increasingly frequent basis .
The question therefore arises as to whether assistance should not be provided from the Globalisation Adjustment Fund , particularly to workers in Madeira , because many work places will , of course , have been destroyed , and whether we could not support the small and medium-sized enterprises in the reconstruction work .
We could provide a significant amount of help to craftsmen and the services sector in particular .
I therefore ask the Commission to examine whether resources from the Globalisation Adjustment Fund could not be made available immediately .
( EL ) Mr President , I , too , express my deepest regret at the biblical disaster which has hit Madeira and my undivided support for the Portuguese Government .
I hope that the tragic outcome in terms of human lives lost and missing persons will not get any worse .
The planet is sending us an SOS message .
Climate change , in conjunction with frantic rates of land use and industrial development , demonstrate how vulnerable the environment is .
The catastrophic floods in Germany in the past and in countries in Eastern and Central Europe and the fires in Greece have still left open wounds .
Disasters definitely have no national borders .
I therefore call on the European Commission to respond positively to the calls by the European Parliament for more energetic action at Community level in terms of preventing natural and man-made disasters and their impact .
I also call for immediate support for the victims in Madeira .
It is very important to have an effective Community policy and special emergency funding and a bundle of measures for immediately restoring damage without bureaucratic processes .
My condolences to the victims ' relatives .
( PT ) The families affected by the tragedy which Madeira is undergoing deserve our profound sympathy and all our solidarity as we pay our respects to the scores of dead and injured persons and the hundreds of displaced individuals .
The message of solidarity and hope for the people of the Autonomous Region of Madeira after this terrible disaster requires quick measures and simplified and extraordinary procedures to help those whose lives and property have been destroyed .
It is necessary to mobilise the Solidarity Fund , but it is also necessary to use all other funds possible via emergency measures that must quickly reach the families affected by this catastrophe so that the Autonomous Region of Madeira can quickly rebuild the entire affected area .
At this time , the prime consideration is the need for swift implementation .
( EL ) Mr President , the tragic floods which hit the autonomous region of Madeira remind us that natural disasters caused by climate change , a lack of planning and infrastructures and a lack of information and readiness can develop into a human tragedy , as has happened here .
I would also remind the House that , a few days ago , huge floods hit other areas of Europe , such as Bulgaria and the region of Evros in Greece , causing loss of properties .
I would also remind the House that Directive 2007 / 60 / EC requires the Member States to carry out a preliminary flood risk assessment for each basin and corresponding coastal regions in their territory by 2011 .
We have a duty to put pressure on national governments to ensure that the directive in question is taken up by the Member States .
However , the European Union also has a duty - and I do not believe that anyone will disagree - to develop even more intensive action in the field of natural disaster prevention , in the field of the protection , in the final analysis , of human life .
( ES ) Mr President , sometimes it is due to fires , sometimes it is due to droughts and sometimes it is due to devastating floods such as this , but the south of the Union has become the most obvious and also the most unfortunate demonstration of the terrible consequences of climate change .
If we had a European observatory , it would clearly show that this is the case , which is why combating climate change is so important .
It is , however , also important that we now urgently provide assistance to Madeira in this tragedy , and the Commission is urged to act without delay , with the greatest of urgency .
These are the occasions when the Union has to show that it is effective , that it is supportive and that it is close to its citizens , especially those who need it most .
I , along with the Spanish Members from the Group of the Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats in the European Parliament , will support this resolution to help our dear neighbour Portugal , and Madeira .
We urge the Commission to get alongside the Portuguese Government without delay , unreservedly and without skimping on resources , in order to alleviate the disastrous consequences of this tragedy as far as possible .
Mr President , ever since I was a kid , my favourite cake was madeira cake and when I discovered there was a lovely island called Madeira , I have had an affinity with it ever since .
So when I heard of the devastation last Saturday , my heart went out to the people there , particularly my friend , Nuno Teixeira , and the other Portuguese colleagues , because in my own area , we ourselves suffered from flooding just prior to Christmas .
I was very pleased to hear both the words and the tone of the Commissioner in extending the hand of friendship to the people of Madeira at this terrible time for them , probably to be known from now on as Black Saturday .
But , in the broader sphere , I think that we need to look at the criteria for triggering the Solidarity Fund .
Basing it on 6.6 % of GDP and EUR 985 million is too high because many of these tragedies are very local , although they can be very devastating .
We need to look at that .
However , in the short term , we will do what we can for Madeira and I welcome the Commissioner 's statement to that effect .
( SK ) On behalf of the Europe of Freedom and Democracy Group , I would like to express solidarity with the inhabitants of Madeira and to express the firm belief that European aid for those affected will come more quickly in this case than it did for Haiti .
I would like to believe that both the European Commission and the Portuguese Government will respond more effectively to the natural disaster in Madeira than in previous instances .
I would also like to support my fellow Members who are demanding improvements in the mechanism for providing EU aid in cases of natural disasters so that the aid can be provided effectively and rapidly .
( PT ) I would also like to offer a message of support to the families and friends of the victims of the tragic events of Saturday on the island of Madeira .
As an Azorean , a Portuguese and a European , I must appeal to Parliament and to the Union for a demonstration of active solidarity with the Autonomous Region of Madeira and its people .
It is in the regions that the presence of the EU needs to make itself felt and it is precisely at such times , when solidarity is more necessary than ever , that it is most important that it makes itself felt .
( DE ) Mr President , firstly , allow me to express my heartfelt sympathy for the victims and the families affected .
In Austria , we have a simple saying : he who provides help quickly provides twice as much help .
That should not be an issue .
We need to quickly find the funds from which to make the resources available and get help to those affected without delay .
Analyses will also be necessary .
As someone who lives in a mountainous region , I understand very well what happened here .
Similar mistakes were made here to those made in our country .
We carried out alignment work and hydraulic engineering work without taking nature into account , and out of small streams and channels , great rivers came .
I watched these events , which were also the order of the day in Austria two or three years ago , with horror , in other words , with heartfelt sympathy and understanding .
Immediately after the clean-up , after the damage limitation , we need to work together to rectify these mistakes .
We offer our help in doing this .
We received international help when we suffered our major avalanche disaster in Galtür .
International help was needed to enable us to evacuate a whole village and to rescue the people and fly them out .
This is an appropriate time to send out a positive signal and to show international European solidarity , and I for one am prepared to do what I can to help in this regard .
( PT ) I also wish to express my solidarity with the pain of the people of Madeira and implore the European institutions , particularly the Commission , to release all the available resources and do everything within their power to provide this assistance .
I would also like to emphasise that when misfortunes of this type occur , it is much more difficult to address their consequences if they occur in poor countries and poor regions .
In the case of Madeira , however , we must also take account of the fact that the economic base of Madeira has been affected due its dependence on tourism , so it has suffered a double blow .
Its natural beauty , access routes and quality of life have been completely destroyed .
Therefore , the situation really is different when we have problems of this severity in poor countries and poor regions , especially in mountainous and tourist regions , as in the case of Madeira .
It is therefore absolutely essential that there is no more waiting for all the adjustments to the Solidarity Fund that have been requested and proposed , and which have been brought up again here .
They must enter into operation immediately because , given climate change , these events will unfortunately occur again and again , particularly in the poorest regions of Europe , as they are the ones that experience torrential rain and extreme drought during the summer .
Member of the Commission .
( DE ) Mr President , honourable Members , I would like to thank you for the opportunity to speak to you here in Parliament about the floods in Madeira .
You have made an impressive appeal to the Commission to assist Madeira in its current situation and to show a sign of European solidarity .
The Commission is prepared to do that .
Precisely how it can do that will need to be worked out in the next few days and weeks in close cooperation with the Portuguese authorities .
We must , and will , observe the rules of the Fund .
Where they provide some leeway , the Commission will use that for the benefit of Madeira .
First of all , the damage needs to be assessed and then an application for assistance has to be drawn up and submitted .
That is the order in which things need to be done .
The Directorate-General for Regional Policy and my colleague , Commissioner Hahn , will provide advice and support in this regard .
Mrs Estrela called for the further development of the key directive and the rules of the Fund .
More than four years ago , the Commission presented a proposal in this regard , which Parliament supported .
It is currently still with the Council .
However , by way of qualification , I would like to say that the proposals that we made at that time would not provide any better opportunities for assistance in this particular case .
It is right that prevention must remain an area of focus for our policy .
Cohesion policy is therefore precisely the right instrument to use .
I would like to assure you once again that the Commission will do everything in its power to help the people and the administration in Madeira to cope with this terrible event .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place during the March I part session .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
in writing . - ( PT ) I wish to express my profound sadness and offer my deepest sympathy to the families of the victims of the natural disaster which has struck Madeira .
I wish to express my solidarity with all the people of Madeira , its institutions and regional government .
I am calling for the solidarity of the institutions of the European Union in terms of the swift and flexible application of the Solidarity Fund , especially in assigning the maximum possible amount of funding , bearing in mind Madeira 's special status as an island and an outermost region of the EU .
I call on the European Commission to apply the Structural Funds - the European Regional Development Fund , the European Social Fund and the Cohesion Fund - on the basis of swift and simplified procedures .
I also appeal to the goodwill of the European Commission to negotiate the reallocation of the Structural Fund resources with the competent authorities on the basis of the Community framework , taking this disaster into account .
in writing . - ( PT ) I would like to express my profound sympathy and solidarity with the people of Madeira , their institutions and the regional government in view of the tragedy of force majeure which occurred on 20 February in the Autonomous Region of Madeira and which caused several dozen deaths , disappearances , displaced persons , injuries and huge material damage .
This situation requires rapid and effective measures of solidarity from the EU .
Hence , it requires the greatest possible promptness of all those involved in the allocation of the Solidarity Fund , so that it can be mobilised without delay .
It is also crucial that the various funds of the European Union be mobilised in a flexible manner , through advance payments , simplified procedures and a higher rate of cofinancing in order to meet the needs of the Autonomous Region of Madeira .
We advocate that the Solidarity Fund should be revised in the manner that has already been requested by Parliament .
This fund must function as an emergency fund in which lead times are much reduced and the sums made available are increased .
I would like to offer my condolences to the families of those who have died as a result of the floods and landslides caused by heavy rain on Madeira .
Nature cannot be cheated , and since we cannot prevent natural disasters , we should do everything to prevent their destructive effects and come to the assistance of their victims .
In the face of natural disasters and other crisis situations , the European Union should be able to react rapidly and efficiently by using appropriate resources .
In relation to this , as I have already stressed in amendments submitted relating to the draft report of Mr Danjean on the implementation of the European Security Strategy and the Common Security and Defence Policy , it is essential to ensure the efficient functioning of instruments for reacting to crisis situations by good organisation of command centres , appropriate to the needs of action taken as part of the first and second pillars .
Good planning and efficient management of these centres will allow successful action to be taken on the territories of European Union Member States and of other states which need help .
In particular , better coordination of rescue , police , military and fire-fighting forces is needed in the EU .
Use of specially trained units , like the Polish Search and Rescue Group of the National Fire Service , which holds UN certification , should be taken into account .
Investment projects in energy infrastructure within the European Community ( debate )
The next item is the report by Adina-Ioana Vălean , on behalf of the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy , on the proposal for a Council regulation concerning the notification to the Commission of investment projects in energy infrastructure within the European Community and repealing Regulation ( EC ) No 736 / 96 - C7-0125 / 2009 - .
rapporteur . - Madam President , I fully appreciate your presence in the plenary this evening .
I would like to thank all the shadow rapporteurs for our fruitful discussions and our work on this report .
The entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon is giving the European Union more competence in the field of energy policy .
I believe this is an area where , if Member States work together , Europe can ensure secure , cheaper and more efficient energy for its citizens .
Together , we can minimise the impact of unpredictable events , such as the gas disruption Europe experienced last winter .
Of course , Europe cannot interfere in gas flow outside its borders or solve such disputes , but what we can do is ensure that our infrastructure is able to cope with supply shortages or failures , and make the market more transparent and efficient .
Europe has set this priority very high on its agenda .
Last year , we adopted a third energy package which aims to ensure a more competitive and efficient energy market .
A regulation on the security of gas supplies is currently on the table in Parliament and tomorrow 's vote on the regulation on notification of investments in energy infrastructure will contribute to making the market more transparent and more predictable .
In this context , I think it would be a pity to waste the opportunity this new instrument offers , by not applying the correct legal basis provided by the new Article 194 of the Lisbon Treaty .
It is a very important institutional , political and legal point .
This regulation is not only a tool for collecting information ; it can also give an overall picture of investments in energy infrastructure as a basis for policy making .
So , in the event that the Council adopts this regulation on the wrong legal basis , I consider that Parliament should pursue this matter further at the European Court of Justice , and let me assure you , it will .

On the substance now ; I have said this before to Mr Barroso and I will say it again to you , Commissioner Oettinger : Europe is standing at a turning point and our priority now should be more than ever to support our companies and create a positive environment for competitiveness .
We therefore need strong policies and especially a stronger reliable energy policy .
The aim in the end is to ensure secure and cheap energy for both our citizens and our companies .
In this perceptive , I should hope that gathering data will not become a purpose in itself .
We have to make sure that this regulation will not create yet another bureaucratic burden on companies and that confidentiality of commercially sensitive information will be reinforced .
On another issue , I can only regret that the PPE and S & D Groups introduced an amendment requiring EU companies to provide data on investments in projects in third countries .
I challenge anyone to find the legal basis in the treaties that would allow extra-territoriality in energy policy .
Furthermore , I believe we should first start proving that we know what is planned at European level before looking outside our borders .
I have also noticed the temptation in this House to include everything in this regulation .
I think that this is a mistake .
For this instrument to be efficient , we must focus on real consistent information and keep in mind avoiding too much bureaucracy and confidentiality issues for our companies and the Commission .
I have tried to achieve this balance by , on the one hand , giving the Commission the opportunity of having an overview of possible future developments but also , on the other hand , ensuring that this picture is as accurate as possible .
We also need some certainty about future investments to ensure proper and solid policy making .
I would also need to be reassured , Commissioner Oettinger .
I want to avoid a situation where the Commission , having gathered the data , starts imposing investment plans and ends up telling companies not to invest here but there .
However , it should provide solutions and incentives for companies to make short-term non-profitable investments which may be needed to ensure security of supply , otherwise the loopholes will remain .
I am stopping here .
Thank you for your time and I look forward to hearing your comments .
Madam President , Mrs Vălean , honourable Members , the gas crisis at the beginning of last year showed us how important it is for Europe to have an energy infrastructure in place that not only promotes the functioning of the internal market , but that also enables solidarity between the Member States and the regions affected in the event of a crisis .
It is therefore important for the Commission to get an overview of what new investment projects are planned or are under construction and which old installations are to be permanently taken out of service .
Thus , our proposal is to develop and rework an information instrument that originated at the time of another crisis , namely , the first oil price crisis .
This proposal aims to extend the area of application of the regulation , in particular , in the areas of renewable energies and CCS .
We welcome the proposals that have come from within Parliament to include areas of application such as district heating networks or gas , coal and oil production capacities .
We also want to take account of existing reporting obligations , provided the information available within the context of the analyses that are to be carried out by the Commission is useable .
( Loss of sound )
We would like to try again and see if it works with the German .
Madam President , honourable Members , I raised the issue of how the Commission wants to evaluate the information that it obtains from the Member States in the context of this regulation .
Our analyses will firstly look at the anticipated development of the infrastructure in terms of the expected changes in demand .
We will consider whether the new capacities that are expected will match the forecasts of future demand or whether we can expect shortfalls .
In this regard , unlike in the current regulation , it would seem important for institutional talks on these subject areas to be introduced .
The Commission therefore proposes , firstly , to publish a report every two years on structural developments in energy infrastructure .
This is intended to help to improve transparency for all market operators .
Secondly , we also want a political debate with Parliament and the Member States in order to draw conclusions from this .
I would like to emphasise that last point , because one thing is clear : the regulation itself is an instrument for collecting and gathering information in order to show us if any action needs to be taken .
How we go about this needs to be dealt with in the context of specific energy policy initiatives .
This brings me to the point , Mrs Vălean , that is of interest to you and to the entire House , namely the new Article 194 of the Treaty of Lisbon and its application .
For all of us - Parliament , the Council and the Commission - this article represents both an opportunity and an obligation to shape EU energy policy in close cooperation - in other words , together with the European Parliament in particular .
As the new Commissioner for Energy , I would therefore like to involve this House extensively in all future policy measures as far as possible and at an early stage .
However , the legal act to which today 's debate refers only concerns the collection and evaluation of information in the energy sector and therefore is based , according to the Commission 's interpretation , on Articles 337 and 187 of the Euratom Treaty .
The content of the regulation complies with both of these articles of primary law and , in accordance with case law , the choice of legal basis for secondary law must be linked to measurable criteria relating to content .
No energy policy is established by the collection and evaluation of information alone , which is why , in my view , a decision is needed here .
I beg your indulgence in this regard .
Commissioner , you have attempted to explain the reason why we are not working on a codecision basis .
I , too , remain of the same view as my fellow Member , Mrs Vălean , the rapporteur for this report , that it would have been a good idea for this regulation to be discussed on a codecision basis .
The new regulation is a legislative instrument of paramount importance to the European Union energy market .
This analysis should supplement national and regional strategies and help consolidate energy security by identifying potential loopholes and risks in terms of infrastructure and investment , with a view to ensuring a balance between supply and demand in the energy sector .
I think that the Commission 's proposal contains a number of points that are unclear , but which I believe have been resolved through the amendments tabled , such as the issue of publishing energy data sent by Member States .
This data needs to be aggregated at national and regional level .
This helps prevent the disclosure of commercially sensitive information .
Another issue is the need to clarify what is meant by ' specific body ' or a body entrusted with the preparation and adoption of EU-wide multiannual network development and investment plans in energy infrastructure .
There is also the issue of avoiding the double collection of this data and determining when reports need to be submitted for a certain project , for instance , after the authorities have received the construction permit application .
Another particularly important aspect is the issue of monitoring in third countries European investment which has an impact on the European energy market .
I believe that investments made in third countries by both governments and national companies , which have a significant impact on the energy market , must be reported as part of this regulation .
Madam President , European integration , security and energy solidarity require common management of investment in all Member States as part of a broadly-understood energy infrastructure and , in particular , of the transmission infrastructure .
Optimal solutions for investment in this area require objective information about the condition of the infrastructure in individual national systems , as well as information which is essential to carry out a central EU study of future integration .
What is important is that the element of competition in the common market for products and services , which is influenced mainly by the cost of energy in each Member State , and the need to maintain trade secrets , should not obscure or disrupt integration processes .
Let us keep secret only what must be kept secret - military infrastructure facilities .
This is important , mainly because decisions taken about investments such as this , for example , the construction of a northern or southern gas pipeline , should not be exclusively egoistic measures taken in the interests of just a few EU Member States .
Let us establish a complex , long-term energy infrastructure plan for the entire Union , based on the principles of cooperation , trust and solidarity .
The current Regulation will , unfortunately , serve this end only to a certain degree and , in my opinion , it should , for example , also encompass the priorities of Member States .
Madam President , I am extremely pleased to see the Commission 's commitment to promoting best practice and improving energy efficiency in the European energy market .
Energy efficiency is crucial for both jobs and growth in Europe and is essential if we are to achieve the 2 ° C objective . The two main prerequisites in this context are smart energy grids and a free , well-functioning internal market in energy .
Naturally , both these require the Commission to have a good knowledge of the current infrastructure and market - and that is what this proposal is about .
We also need the bureaucracy that deals with this information to be efficient , however .
We must avoid duplication and the information communicated must be that which is required to achieve the objectives set .
If we are to achieve a functioning market , it is also incredibly important that the information gathered from European enterprises is protected , so as to avoid any disturbance of the market .
I will be supporting the author 's report and I call on the House to reject the incredibly bureaucratic proposals tabled by the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance .
As mentioned previously , the proposal 's objectives are incredibly important - so important that they have been given a separate legal basis in Article 194 of the Treaty of Lisbon , in which they are practically listed word for word .
The full participation of the European Parliament through the ordinary legislative procedure pursuant to this treaty should therefore be a matter of course .
Anything else would not be worthy of us and would be an incredibly unfortunate start to the cooperation that we need between Parliament and the Commission for a functioning internal market in energy .
Commissioner , it is good that you want to debate the result of this tool before the European Parliament , but the main thing to respect with regard to the European Parliament is the ordinary legislative procedure .
We will find this tool useful , but it could be more operational , more effective and more transparent .
More effective , in particular , if it took into account all the decentralised energy sources .
It is not a matter of counting every single solar panel , but at Member State level we have information that you could gather to see what all the plans for decentralised energy add up to .
When we are talking about democracy and transparency , I am surprised to hear our Liberal fellow Member reply ' bureaucracy ' .
This instrument must be transparent , it must be debated , and the Commission must consult all the stakeholders , unions and associations , among others .
Finally , taxpayers are contributing a great deal to the energy transition effort , and it is important that we have information on funding , to know exactly how taxpayers are funding energy transition in Europe .
I hope that the amendments that have been tabled will be adopted by a large number of Members tomorrow , by more than there are here this evening .
The proposal for regular information on investment projects in the area of EU energy infrastructure is questionable .
It will involve EU bodies in the area of competitive relationships between companies that are mostly privately owned .
In my opinion , there are two layers to this proposal .
One layer concerns the content of such mandatory information , particularly regarding its scope and details .
The second layer concerns the level of confidentiality and the ensuing obligations of the Commission to maintain secrecy .
I firmly believe that the information which has to be communicated should be of a more descriptive nature , giving a rough overview of energy networks and their future development .
In this way , the Commission would have a sufficient overview of the links between individual countries and , at the same time , also a sufficient overview of existing networks and the outlook for the future .
It also logically gives rise to the question of what the Commission would do if it was convinced that there was insufficient capacity in a certain area , or if , on the contrary , there was excess capacity .
With a sufficient level of general information , we would also do away with the problem of awkward discussions concerning the maintenance of secrecy in relation to certain strategic plans of the energy companies .
Events in recent years have shown us that the energy security of the EU is more a wish than a reality .
The energy systems of the EU Member States are neither sufficiently compatible nor sufficiently interlinked .
That is why many countries found themselves in a situation without heat and gas at the start of last year , despite all the solidarity and goodwill of the EU .
It will take extensive initiatives from the European Commission to correct this situation , and it is therefore necessary for the European Commission to be informed in its work in a qualified and detailed way , both by Member States and by the private sector .
For these reasons , we may regard the draft Council Regulation concerning the notification of investment projects in energy infrastructure as a natural and necessary step in the extension of EU energy policy , responding to current developments in the field of energy supply in the EU .
The amendment proposals included in the report on this point of the programme improve the wording of the regulation and I therefore consider it right to support them .
( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the excellent report by Mrs Vălean makes some sensible points with which I agree .
Firstly , the requirement to guarantee an optimum level of security with regard to the data and the information requested under the proposal , namely that which economic operators regard as sensitive data .
Secondly , the requirement to provide for the possibility of aggregating data at a broader regional level as well , given that the national level is sometimes of no significance .
Thirdly , notification should have a practical purpose and should complement the analysis of the development of the European gas system .
For this reason , the Commission should be obliged to discuss its analyses with the Member States and with operators in the sectors ; this is a commitment that the Commission made here with us .
We must also successfully avoid a duplication of the work that operators , national regulatory authorities and Member States have to undertake in order to define the national plans aimed at protecting the security of supply , with specific reference to the gas infrastructure , and also guarantee that , if operators decide to change their investment plans , they are not penalised in any way .
I shall conclude by drawing attention to Article 1 ( 2 ) of the proposal , in which the time limits of notification are discussed .
The fact that many projects do not go beyond the planning stage must be taken into account .
The best possible result could therefore be achieved if notification concerned only those projects that have obtained the necessary authorisations and permits or those for which a final investment decision has been taken .
( RO ) I would like to begin by congratulating the rapporteur on the fine job she has done .
The Treaty of Lisbon strengthens the European Union 's powers in the area of energy policy .
EU energy security and solidarity between Member States in energy crisis situations are vital to the European Union 's energy policy .
The present regulation sets out a Community framework for notifying the Commission about data and information on investment projects in the energy infrastructure for oil , gas , electricity and biofuels , as well as on the projects involving the geological storage of carbon emitted in the energy sector .
In fact , the Commission will be able to submit proposals on how to make better use of existing capacities and identify solutions in energy crisis situations .
The regulation must not significantly overload the administrative burden which energy companies have to deal with .
However , I believe that this regulation should also be applied to European companies which invest in energy infrastructure projects in third countries and are directly linked to the energy networks of one or more Member States or have a significant impact on them .
This is why I hope that Amendment 74 will receive majority support tomorrow .
Madam President , some of the amendments that we are considering tonight reflect our manic obsession with renewables .
We continue to talk about the importance of reducing CO2 emissions , even while the theory of man-made global warming is falling apart in front of our eyes .
But if we were serious about reducing CO2 emissions , surely we should be favouring nuclear power stations and not renewables .
We have chosen to put in place incentives that grossly distort the market in favour of renewables and against nuclear power .
Europe needs competitive , reliable , mainstream , base-load , generating capacity which nuclear power can deliver .
In the meantime , the pathetic trickle of intermittent electricity from wind farms cannot be relied upon to power Europe 's industries .
Many countries in the EU , including my own , are facing the prospect of an energy crunch later this decade , partly as a result of the Large Combustion Plant Directive .
Unless we get on and build serious generating capacity , by which I mean nuclear and coal , then we will find ourselves with the lights going out .
( PL ) The question of energy and the energy network is a crucial issue for the future of the European economy .
The significance of energy security is repeated in a variety of documents , debates and meetings .
However , in order for words and declarations to be followed by specific solutions and measurable effects , we should first and foremost ensure an appropriate level of financing for investments which are being planned .
According to a report produced by Exxon Mobil , one of the world 's largest fuel corporations , world demand for energy is going to rise by around 1.2 % annually , so that by the year 2030 , demand will have risen by approximately 35 % .
The requirement for gas , which will be the second most important energy source , is going to rise by 1.8 % annually .
Currently , the world uses a little over 3 billion m3 .
In 2030 , it will need around 4.3 billion m3 .
A consequence of Europe 's growing need for gas will be an increased dependence on imports of this resource , from 45 % in 2005 to 70 % in 2030 .
In view of these figures , financial support from the European Community for the energy network should be treated strategically .
In the present economic and financial situation , it is especially difficult to find investors for many projects .
Only appropriate support from the European Union will enable these projects to be continued .
Priority should be given to those projects which concentrate on cross-border needs and contribute to the development of new technologies which are of fundamental significance for the future energy needs of Europe .
These projects will help eliminate differences in connections between systems in the European Union , and will make possible further optimal use of the European Union 's own sources of energy .



Madam President , this question is a very important for at least three reasons : firstly , we must think about energy security , because the day is going to come when fossil fuels run out ; secondly , our climate change targets for 2020 or , as some people have advocated , 3020 or even 4020 ; and thirdly , and very importantly , we must reduce our reliance on fossil fuels that come from sometimes unstable and dictatorial regimes .
So time is not on our side and one of the areas which requires grave attention is that of research and innovation .
And I am worried about duplication in that area .
I learned recently there were 45 different groups doing research into salmonella bacteria .
Now , if this could happen with salmonella bacteria , you could have 450 groups doing the same research into renewable energies , for example , wind energy , solar energy , tidal energy and wave energy .
So I want to ask the Commission what plans they have to coordinate this research so that the best use is made of resources in terms of getting the technology we need .
( RO ) I wish to congratulate Mrs Vălean for this report .
I would like to highlight some aspects regarding the importance of infrastructure investments .
Continuous development of the energy infrastructure is the only way to cope with an ever-changing society .
The development of existing networks , along with investment in new types of networks adapted to innovative energy resources , is a vital factor intended to facilitate access to new energy sources , both for the population and industry .
At present , regional cooperation occurs de facto in the energy sector .
However , it needs to be reinforced with clear regulations .
Solidarity between Member States must be translated from an idea into reality .
Increasing investment in IT systems for monitoring and reporting on fuel stocks during a crisis is also important .
Finally , I would like to emphasise that investments and the deployment of ICT solutions in the energy sector are key to the development of an energy-efficient , low carbon economy .
( SK ) The Lisbon Treaty , which has strengthened the powers of the EU in the field of energy policy , should be actively exploited in order to overcome difficulties and prevent possible problems on the energy market .
The provision of information on investment projects within the energy infrastructure will help to identify gaps between supply and demand in this sector , and will therefore also contribute to the creation of a better common energy policy in the spirit of solidarity , bringing the Member States closer together on the energy market .
For the aforementioned reasons , I agree with the view that it is necessary to gather precise and adequate information on planned investments , in order that the EU can make informed decisions on energy policy , based on an integrated picture and on the situation prevailing in all of the Member States .
( PL ) A guarantee of stable and uninterrupted energy supplies has become a priority for the governments of Member States of the Union , as it has for the Community as a whole .
Special responsibility for this matter lies with the European Commission which , by its actions , should aim to secure energy supplies for the Community by developing and monitoring the correct functioning of the European energy market .
One of the mechanisms of the Commission 's multi-dimensional energy policy should be support for effective investment projects in the energy sector .
The Commission should carry out regular analyses and research .
The analyses should be based on information about investment projects in the energy infrastructure of individual countries , with an emphasis not only on facilities which are currently in use , but also on analysis of investment projects which aim to increase diversification , both of the sources of the raw materials for energy and the way they are transported and processed .
When the Commission has similar analyses from all the countries of the Union , it will be able to select the strategy which is most advantageous for the European energy market .
( DE ) Madam President , Commissioner Oettinger , one of the key problems in the energy sector is , of course , the storage of energy .
I believe that , in connection with the security of supply , we need to think more about the subject of storage .
In connection with renewable energies in particular , this is an enormous challenge .
On the other hand , we also need to create intelligent networks .
The more renewable energy we have , the more chances we have of making our environment significantly more energy efficient with intelligent networks and , ultimately , also providing households with incentives to use intelligent metering to reduce consumption as well as costs .
The increase in efficiency will play a very important and key role in future , not only in the production of energy , but also , and in particular , in the consumption of energy .
Madam President , honourable Members , I would like to thank you for your valuable suggestions for improvement .
The Commission will take steps to ensure that many of your suggestions are taken into consideration by the Member States in the final version of the regulation .
The Commission is aware of the confidential nature of the information relating to planned projects .
For that reason , we agree with the suggestions of this House to publish only data that has previously been collected at Member State level .
In addition , the data should be aggregated at European level in such a way that no inferences can be made about individual companies and their business policies .
This is important in cases where there is only one company operating at national level in a particular energy sector .
As I have already mentioned , we also welcome the extension of the area of application to cover oil , gas and coal production capacities .
I do not wish to conceal the fact that the Member States are less favourably inclined towards this proposal , but promise to review the inclusion of these capacities within five years .
Irrespective of our different interpretations with regard to the legal basis for the regulation , I can assure you that the Commission 's aim is to have a broad debate in the area of infrastructure .
The new infrastructure and solidarity instrument that is to be developed , which is intended to follow on from the Community financial aid to the trans-European energy networks , will provide the opportunity for this , as will the Commission 's progress reports on the implementation of the economic recovery programme in respect of benefits to energy projects .
rapporteur . - Madam President , I should like to thank the Commissioner and colleagues for their interesting input in the debate .
Just a few words in conclusion - or as my conclusion at least .
First of all , I would like to stress again that policies should certainly abstain from interfering with the market .
Let us not forget that Europe is a market economy and policies are only here to correct the market weaknesses .
Secondly , my opinion remains firmly that we should not use this regulation to verify the correct application of other regulations or include exhaustive information ; it is not an exercise in statistics .
We must definitely keep the information gathered to a certain degree of relevance , otherwise it will lose its purpose under a massive amount of data .
And this regulation is not about devising a policy on renewables or gas .
Finally , I would like to say to my colleague , Lena Ek , that I only hope the aggregated data that we have as a result of this regulation will help us to become smarter in energy issues and will be in our general interest .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Thursday , 25 February 2010 .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
I congratulate the European Commission on having submitted to the Council the amended regulation on investment projects in energy infrastructure within the European Union .
The report enriches the contents in a meaningful and up-to-date way , and does so for two reasons .
The first reason is to provide transparent information on the security and confidentiality of the sensitive data that the Commission will have to receive periodically in order to manage energy policy effectively .
The report is in line with the Treaty of Lisbon , in which particular attention is paid to energy policy by means of the strengthening and coordinating of its methods and of the investments required for the sector .
The Copenhagen Summit 's failure to satisfy the world 's political leaders means that the policies to be pursued require a change of strategy .
The European Parliament is paying particular attention to the problem with the aim of overseeing energy investments in the construction , transport and storage of associated energy products , so as to satisfy the production and distribution industries and hence safeguard consumers ' health .
The second reason is that , since the EU has a shortage of energy products and internal demand - like imports - is growing every day , EU energy policy must focus on diversification , security of supply and energy efficiency .
The principle of solidarity must provide the platform for devising the European Union 's energy policies .
If Member States work together , they can ensure a more secure , cheaper and more efficient supply of energy resources to citizens and companies .
It is of paramount importance for the European Union to have an energy infrastructure which facilitates cooperation between Member States in order to reduce the problems which crop up during energy crises .
This regulation will provide the European Commission with information about energy structures so that it can obtain an overview .
This includes data about oil and natural gas infrastructures , as well as for renewable energy sources .
After collecting this information , it will be possible to highlight deficiencies in the European energy system and then propose measures to rectify them .
Measures taken at European level must supplement national and regional strategies .
I believe that it is extremely important for us to protect the confidential nature of the commercial information which is gathered .
Furthermore , it is also important to monitor those European investments in third countries which have a major impact on the EU energy market .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the proposal for a regulation on investment projects in energy infrastructure within the European Community is an important instrument for promoting an EU-level energy policy effectively .
I support the rationale behind this proposal , namely the need to define a consistent and comprehensive framework for the development of investment in energy infrastructure within the Union that will allow the Commission to monitor the state of development of the investment projects planned in the energy sector .
Monitoring is certainly crucial to ensuring that the policy pursued in support of the projects is transparent , but this is on condition that the administrative burden placed on small and medium-sized enterprises - the driving force behind the EU economy - is reduced to a minimum .
I consider it positive that a compromise has been reached to ensure that the data of operators in the market will be received and processed by the Commission with the necessary confidentiality guaranteed .
Investment projects in energy infrastructure are crucial if a free and therefore competitive energy market is to be established .
For this reason , I call on the Commission to provide periodically , on the basis of the data collected , an analysis of the structural development of the energy sector , with the aim of identifying any areas for improvement in the market and any obstacles that prevent it from functioning optimally .
Not a day goes by without a Member State or big company announcing major investment plans in the energy sector .
Various gas pipelines , off-shore wind parks and power stations by the dozen are at the drawing board stage .
At the same time , coordination between future investments leaves a lot to be desired .
This in itself would be more than sufficient reason to endorse the regulation on the table now , which would consolidate into a unified structure all energy investment notification obligations on the part of Member States .
The regulation to be adopted makes it possible to harmonise regional investment and helps joint planning , thus strengthening the energy market and supply security .
I think it is important for requirements in the proposal regarding notification of investments not to place an excessive administrative burden on the authorities of Member States .
We have to ensure that the method for notification of investments corresponds to previously adopted rules .
It is worth recalling in that regard that even now , the EU directives for the internal electricity and natural gas market call for preparing 10-year investment plans .
The original proposal of the European Commission did not extend to investments in district heating .
For this reason , the amendment including it among the areas of mandatory information provision , proposed by Parliament 's Committee on Industry , Research and Energy , should be endorsed .
We must not forget that in new Member States , district heating plays a significant role in serving the population .
In Hungary , for instance , this form of heating supplies some 2 million people .
District heating investments cannot be left out of consideration during harmonisation of energy investment policies .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , In spite of the great uncertainties regarding the implementation of investment projects for energy industry infrastructures , added to the serious difficulties caused currently by the economic and credit crisis for investment plans in the energy sector , we must see clearly that the key factor in the new European energy policy , which is aimed at guaranteeing a secure supply while alleviating the effects of climate change and maintaining competitiveness , is to invest heavily in the coming years in energy industry infrastructures in the European Union .
This is an important tool for shaping a common energy policy .
Without sufficient information about our energy infrastructure , we cannot give effective support to the European energy policy at EU level .
It is for this reason that I consider our mutual goal in the Community to be the provision of precise and regular information about investment projects in the EU energy infrastructure , the lightening of the burden of information gathering , the improvement of useful analysis based on information submitted to the Commission , while at the same time easing the burden on private sector players who perform an increasing role in investing in infrastructure development .
I would like to offer my sincere thanks to the rapporteur for preparing such a balanced report .
The consolidated efforts of the Member States and the European Commission , which are contained in the report , will ensure an integrated and improved system of energy security for the Union , while at the same time achieving better efficiency and reduced consumption of energy .
As part of Community energy policy , the Commission and the Member States should identify investments which are necessary to meet the EU 's strategic needs in terms of the supply and demand of natural gas and electricity .
The regulation establishes common frameworks , on the basis of which the European Commission receives submissions of data and information on energy infrastructure investment projects in the areas of crude oil , natural gas , electricity , biofuels and low emission investment projects for urban heating and cooling systems .
It is indisputable that one element necessary for maintaining stability in the energy system is , without doubt , coal , which must not be superseded by renewable energy sources , because they will not meet the needs of the continually expanding and developing economic sectors of the new Member States .
In pointing to the advantages of coal as an energy source , it should be pointed out that the use of new technologies will allow us to achieve a greater reduction in pollution and gradual adoption of established CO2 emission limits .
In the context of the new energy policy aimed at guaranteeing the supply of energy , alleviating the impact of climate change and ensuring competitiveness , energy infrastructure investments have a vital role to play .
The new policy requirements such as targets for the fuel mix will alter Member States ' policies so that they will benefit from a new , modernised energy infrastructure .
The proposal from the Commission is to revise the current system of notification on energy investment projects .
The aim is to gather suitable information on planned investments in order to enable the Commission to monitor the situation regarding the infrastructure and anticipate potential problems .
Given that current EU legislation already imposes reporting and notification obligations in relation to investments and infrastructures , the use of this information must be better coordinated so that duplication of obligations such as reporting and confidentiality can be avoided , while also improving citizens ' access to information .
Even though the proposal mainly focuses on administrative matters , it gives an idea of the nature and characteristics envisaged for future investments .
It is therefore important to put further emphasis on the environmental impact of the projects in order to provide guarantees and additional incentives for building and decommissioning energy infrastructures in a sustainable way and with due respect for the environment .
I congratulate the rapporteur .
Coping with the rising demand for energy while at the same time protecting the environment , in particular , in respect of anthropogenic climate change , is one of the major tasks that the EU will have to deal with in the future .
In this connection , it is extremely important for the European Union to be aware of all energy infrastructure projects in the Member States .
This will increase the efficiency of the work to produce a European energy solution .
The present text regarding the exchange of information on investment projects in energy infrastructure will provide a good overview of existing energy infrastructures in Europe .
It goes without saying that this report must not provide an opportunity for data abuse .
I therefore welcome the cross-party compromise , which lays down clear ground rules for the transfer of data .
Central monitoring also enables early establishment of whether Europe is focusing too hard on a single energy source .
Overall , the report represents progress towards a modern energy mix .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , until now , we have discussed the need to quickly draft a common EU energy policy only when a crisis occurs , like the one in the winter of 2009 .
We can say with justified concern that things cannot continue in this manner .
This is why I welcome Mrs Vălean 's report and regard it as an important step towards creating a common European energy policy .
It goes without saying that the adoption of a number of directives and regulations for the energy sector will create the necessary conditions for devising such a common policy .
I think that we are close to the point where we can even start talking about an agreement on creating an EU energy community .
The introduction of a notification system for investment projects in the energy sector in each individual Member State will enable the Commission to obtain the full picture of how the EU 's energy infrastructure is developing , while also guiding the countries towards resolving the weakest , problematic areas .
This will help achieve a satisfactory , reliable infrastructure capable of both supporting the operation of the internal energy market and alleviating the consequences of crises which occur .
The most important fact is that a satisfactory common European energy infrastructure is a prerequisite for a common EU internal energy policy , which the European Parliament has insisted on in a number of its documents .
Amending Budget 1 / 2010 ( Section I , European Parliament ) ( debate )
We all know full well that it is only through joint efforts at the European level that we will manage to meet the greatest challenges of the 21st century , which are climate change , the risks and cost of raw materials and energy , economic globalisation and threats to our security .
If Europe is to confront these problems , it must have effective and complex instruments at its disposal .
The Lisbon Treaty will provide such instruments .
In December , we approved the budget of the European institutions for 2010 .
For reasons connected with the implementation of the Lisbon Treaty , our work on the budget was not completed in December and it will continue into April .
Today we are in the initial stage of the treaty coming into effect , and the EU will need to have adequate funding at its disposal from the outset in order to implement the new policies .
The Lisbon Treaty has an impact on the entire range of services of the European Parliament and other institutions .
As far as the European Parliament is concerned , codecision making will increase dramatically , covering up to 95 % of legislation .
Areas such as freedom , security and justice , agriculture , fisheries , research and structural funds have been added .
There will be greater use of qualified majority voting in the Council and the creation of a number of new legal foundations in areas such as tourism , sport , energy , civil defence , administration and cooperation .
This will all increase the legislative activities of the EU generally , with a significant overall impact on the powers of the European Parliament and its activities , and therefore also on the need to strengthen the administration .
The main priority of the amending budget proposed by the Presidency of the European Parliament in connection with the Lisbon Treaty is to ensure that the European Parliament has sufficient resources to perform its legislative role .
Let us recall that the European Parliament set a limit on its own requirements back in 1988 .
It defined this limit as amounting to 20 % of the overall administrative costs of the institutions .
In 2006 , in negotiations over the multi-year financial framework for 2007-2013 , the European Parliament approved this limit as the maximum of the overall administrative costs of the institutions .
Since 2006 , the costs of the European Parliament have grown in connection with the Statute for Members , entering into effect , even though on the second page of the very same Statute for Members , funding is set aside in Member State budgets .
Today , we also need to cover costs arising from the new role of the European Parliament in connection with the Lisbon Treaty entering into force .
It has to be said that the spending limit of 20 % did not take into account the Statute for Members or the Lisbon Treaty .
In spite of the Statute for Members being in the Lisbon Treaty , we in the Committee on Budgets insisted on the European Parliament budget for 2010 adhering to the 20 % limit from the original multi-year financial framework .
We have also achieved this .
When drafting the 2011 budget , however , we will have to set out the new formula carefully , in order to ensure the sustainability of the budget in the subsequent period .
I would like to emphasise that the best way to ensure budget sustainability is to create a budget based on actual needs and not based on inflation indices .
Only this approach will ensure that the budget reflects only actual needs , thereby increasing its transparency and efficiency .
on behalf of the PPE Group . - ( PT ) This amending budget is a result of the entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon .
Parliament has assumed new competences and new responsibilities , so it must have the means to rise to this new challenge .
I would like to emphasise that European citizens demand excellent legislation from Parliament and , to secure this , it is important to provide its Members , committees and political groups with the necessary means .
Legal and budgetary standards and good financial discipline are fulfilled in this amending budget .
Furthermore , we believe that budgetary discipline and the pursuit of savings are needed more than ever , and European citizens also expect this , in the implementation of this budget .
Therefore , we would like to reaffirm the importance of drawing up a zero-based budget which guarantees more rigour and transparency , and we also request information regarding the real fixed expenses of the European Parliament , as a matter of urgency .
We also insist on the need for long-term planning in buildings policy , with a view to ensuring budgetary sustainability .
We would also point out that we have reduced the buildings reserve by EUR 4 million .
In this way , the total level of the budget now represents 19.99 % of the initial heading , heading 5 , which was adopted at first reading .
We are certain that these measures will help us to be able to deal with the legitimate concerns , expectations and demands of European citizens .
Madam President , this Amending Budget is primarily practical in nature , its purpose being to adapt Parliament 's procedures to the new tasks that it has under the Treaty of Lisbon .
One paragraph , however , is a point of principle ; it concerns the decision that was made 20 years ago now that Parliament should not take more than 20 % of the EU 's administrative budget .
This decision will result in us marginally exceeding this limit - but more as a result of technical changes than as a result of a new policy .
However , this has given rise to debate concerning the 20 % rule .
Unless substantial cuts are made , the limit will be exceeded when today 's decision has its full impact in 2011 .
There is good reason to discuss changing this 20 % rule , since Parliament 's role has changed more than that of other institutions , but we should not abandon this principle without due consideration .
I am thinking mainly of two aspects .
Firstly , we must consider the fact that many Member States are currently under extreme pressure to cut staff and salaries .
In such a situation , we cannot continue expanding the EU administration regardless .
Secondly , we must bear in mind that we allocate the EU 's administration budget jointly with the other institutions and that in the 1988 decision , we promised that if we were considering abandoning the 20 % rule , then this would only take place following dialogue with the Council .
This is especially important in view of the difficult negotiations with the Council that are imminent in respect of the External Action Service , the Financial Regulation , the long-term budget , and so on .
I am voting in favour of the report but , at the same time , I would like to sound a note of warning concerning the future .
( DE ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the Treaty of Lisbon strengthens the EU as a whole .
It strengthens the involvement of European citizens and it also strengthens the European Parliament .
The increase in the status of the European Parliament also brings with it greater legislative obligations .
These must be met by each individual Member to the best of his or her knowledge and belief .
In this context , I would also like to mention the slogan of legislative excellence .
My ' yes ' to the amendment to the Parliamentary budget is conditional .
In view of the ever worsening crisis , we need to manage our finances with greater care .
However , as parliamentarians , we are also obliged to conduct our legislative work in the best way possible .
This dual requirement must be met .
( ES ) Madam President , it is proof of the confidence that the Members of this Parliament have in the Committee on Budgets that we are voting for a substantial increase in Parliament 's budget , including the Members ' parliamentary assistance allowances , and the four or five members of the Committee on Budgets are practically the only people here .
This is a good sign that they have confidence in us .
However , the reason why there are two coordinators here from the Group of the Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats in the European Parliament and the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) is to confirm that we fully agree with this increase in the budget as we consider that it does not infringe the standards of austerity that we have imposed on ourselves .
The European Parliament is a very special institution , as my fellow Member , Mr Färm , is well aware .
In Sweden or Spain , if we were continually increasing the size of our regions , the number of members of parliament we had and our functions , any Member State would need to increase its parliament 's budget .
This is what is happening to the European Parliament , and we therefore need to vote in favour of it .
It is true that in the coming years , we will have to ensure that this expenditure is sustainable , and this will require us to talk seriously about buildings policy and about future policies for staffing and office equipment .
All this will have to be considered in the future in the context of sustainability and effective spending .
The Bureau of Parliament and the Committee on Budgets have adopted some dissenting positions , as the Bureau defends the needs of Members and we in the Committee on Budgets defend austerity and the budgetary reality .
I think , however , that the agreement is a good one and that we will be able to adopt it tomorrow without any problems .
Madam President , I speak on behalf of the S & D Group but most Members will recognise the need for extra resources after the Lisbon Treaty .
However , there are a number of questions on the timing and the funding of these proposals .
Colleagues have raised some of those issues .
There are also other questions .
For example , if we are to have extra staff resources , on what evidence is this based ?
Were figures just plucked from the air ?
Or , if it was based on evidence , I think we should have been given that evidence .
Also , how will the extra staff for the secretariat be allocated ?
I think we should have been given that information as well .
I also think that , if we accept the extra assistance allowance of EUR 1 500 per month , we should also look at other costs , costs for extra office space which may be required .
In fact , we should be given the global costs for that .
This is going to be a difficult decision for Members tomorrow .
It is always controversial when you are asked to give yourselves resources .
If we had been given all the information I and my colleagues have been asking for , the decision tomorrow might have been easier for Members to take .
( NL ) Given the late hour at which we are discussing this , you might think that our own budget does not tolerate daylight .
Madam President , the Treaty of Lisbon obviously gives us more obligations , more powers and more work , but does that also mean that we need more staff across the board for committees , groups and individual members ?
I have my doubts .
I think that , if we want to be more politic and efficient in the way we work , we can best do that within the confines of the current budget .
Finally , Madam President , there seem to be a number of steps that we need to take .
We are not just talking about a one-off increase this year , because it appears that we will increase the budget next year as well , and my group is not in favour of that .
If we now agree to an increase because of the Treaty of Lisbon , then this is the only occasion on which we can use that argument .
As far as we are concerned , this has to be a one-off increase , not a further one next year and another one the year after .
All that would achieve is to mean we would need more buildings .
( RO ) Legislative excellence is a priority for Parliament , and MEPs , committees and political groups need to be offered sufficient resources for achieving this .
The new administrative expenditure incurred by implementing the provisions of the Treaty of Lisbon is now included in Parliament 's budget .
In addition , the report also emphasises the importance of the extended legislative role which Parliament has and , therefore , the need for additional financial resources to satisfy this remit .
Specific actions need to be taken to ensure a stable budget by drafting a zero-based budget policy and long-term planning for meeting Parliament 's requirements in terms of buildings policy .
I think that the overall reference for Parliament 's budget should continue to be the original programming of the multiannual financial framework in order to ensure that its interests are safeguarded while also maintaining budgetary discipline .
At the same time , I believe that the traditional 20 % limit must be maintained and I must welcome that a consensus has been reached on not exceeding this limit in this case .
I also support the idea that actions aiming to secure budgetary sustainability in future years should be taken , while reaffirming the importance of drafting a budget policy that will ensure greater rigour .
I also believe that transparency is required , which therefore means providing clear information about the overall volume of fixed expenses in the European Parliament 's budget .
( DE ) Madam President , at the end of the procedure , I would like to say that the European Parliament has dealt with this matter in a very responsible way .
I would like to thank the Bureau in particular for finding a way to respect the upper limit of 20 % .
During an economic crisis , it is important for all of us to be as careful as possible with taxpayers ' money , but nevertheless to ensure that MEPs are provided with good and efficient resources .
The EUR 4 million savings on buildings should not prevent us from using the existing resources to make our building one of the most modern buildings in the world so that we can work as efficiently as possible for our citizens .
At this point I would like to thank all of you , ladies and gentlemen , for your views and speeches , and also for seeking a solution within the committee .
I would like to say that in the 2010 budget , we have established systemic measures that can bring financial savings and reduce the pressure on our spending limits .
In October last year , we agreed at the conciliation procedure that an administrative audit would be carried out in the European Parliament this year in the INLO Directorate-General and the security service .
The aim is to assess whether resources are being used in the best possible way .
The audit results should be a point of departure for further progress and greater efficiency .
I see further potential savings in the better use of our own resources within the interpreting services or in the area of teleworking .
I am expecting up-to-date information from the European Parliament and the other institutions on how they plan to make use of temporarily unexploited resources , not only in the language services but also in rented office space , copying services , etc .
I firmly believe that savings in the budget will be achieved through the medium-term strategy in the area of assets and buildings , which will contribute to the sustainability of the EP budget .
The European Parliament administration will present the strategy to us in a few days ' time .
Ladies and gentlemen , I would like to express my thanks once again for your cooperation and for your responsible attitude to this issue .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Thursday , 25 February 2010 .
I would like to thank you all .
My thanks also to our technicians and interpreters for eventually getting us through the evening .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
I congratulate Mr Manka on his successful negotiations in view of the very tight framework for the 2010 budget .
In addition to thoroughly justifiable and necessary adjustments to the personnel and building policies of the EP , there is the , in my opinion , thorny issue of the planned increase in the secretarial allowance by EUR 1 500 .
It is unfortunate that , for procedural reasons , it is not possible to vote separately on this , as the increase in the secretarial allowance for MEPs from May 2010 decided on by the Bureau is inappropriate at a time of financial crisis .
It is certainly the case that , under the Treaty of Lisbon , which has recently entered into force , Parliament will , overall , need extra capacity for legislative work , but after the introduction of the assistants statute from the beginning of the current parliamentary term , there is still no proof whatsoever that MEPs actually need more assistants .
Furthermore , the ' purchasing power ' of the additional money is very different in comparison in the individual Member States and this should also be taken into account in a report that is still to be drawn up on the results following the introduction of the new rules for MEPs assistants .
In view of the current very limited space and working facilities in Parliament , it is also to be feared that the increase in the secretarial allowance by EUR 1 500 adopted today will already create the conditions for further increases , demands and future working facilities .
In light of this , the German Liberal Party ( FDP ) in the European Parliament will abstain .
This budgetary amendment provides a response to a real need .
In the wake of the entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon , the European Parliament 's powers have increased substantially in a host of areas .
The direct consequence of this expansion is a much larger volume of work , the quality of which must be to the highest legislative standard .
It is not a case of us asking for money for ourselves , as alleged by the press .
However , we need to provide the institution of the European Parliament with the necessary resources to meet European citizens ' expectations of this forum .
in writing . - ( EL ) I , too , should like to thank the rapporteur for his work .
Without doubt , the increased powers granted to the European Parliament under the Treaty of Lisbon enhance the role of the European Parliament considerably and formulate tangible and effective responses to the expectations of European citizens .
At the same time , however , the increase in its range of activities has created additional requirements in terms of more personnel , both in the administration of the European Parliament and in the political groups and offices of MEPs .
The amendment to the European Parliament 's budget was not only expected , but was also necessary if we want the European Parliament to respond effectively to its new responsibilities , which further strengthen its democratic credentials .
I would remind the House that a similar amendment was made to the Council 's budget in order to meet its administrative requirements when the institution of President of the European Council was created and similar proposals to amend the European Commission 's budget are expected .
Approval of this amendment will allow both the administration of Parliament and the political groups and MEPs to respond better and more efficiently to the new requirements .
Agenda for next sitting : see Minutes
Closure of the sitting : see Minutes
Opening of the sitting
( ES ) Mr President , yesterday , because of the time it took to get through our work here in the House , there was no opportunity to mention the recent death of Orlando Zapata , which the Spanish delegation sincerely laments .
He died after a long hunger strike .
He is the first prisoner of conscience to die in Cuba in 40 years , and we are calling here for the release of all prisoners of conscience in Cuba and in the rest of the world .
We would also like to express our solidarity with his family and with the Cuban people on their path to pluralism and development .
This very sad occasion could act as a catalyst for a discussion aimed at positioning the relations between the European Union and Cuba , within a comprehensive bilateral framework providing for permanent , constructive dialogue on human rights , on an equal footing with the European Union 's agreements with third countries .
Documents received : see Minutes
Situation in Ukraine ( motions for resolutions tabled ) : see Minutes
Green Paper on reform of the common fisheries policy ( debate )
The next item is the report by Maria do Céu Patrão Neves , on behalf of the Committee on Fisheries , on the Green Paper on the reform of the common fisheries policy - .
Permit me to address a few words to the group of 50 fishermen who should be entering the Chamber just now , and who are here to watch this debate and the vote on the report .
I think I can speak for all my colleagues in the Committee on Fisheries , who have worked hard on this report , when I say that I am very happy that this day has arrived , the day on which the report is to be presented to Parliament and put to the vote .
Why ?
Because the common fisheries policy is one of the flagship policies of the European Union .
It had a rather difficult start , having been formally launched in the 80s and undergoing its first reform in 2002 .
Today , we are aware of some of the main problems that were identified back then ( I am referring to overcapacity , overfishing , and overinvestment that , it appears , was not equal across the whole EU ) , because these problems are still largely present today .
This is the starting point for the reform , a reform that has to be broad and intensive , and which has long been awaited by the industry .
Which direction should this reform take , according to the content of our report ?
Firstly , in terms of basic principles , there needs to be a balance between environmental , social and economic aspects .
Environmental aspects are needed to guarantee the conservation of stocks ; social aspects to guarantee the advancement and dignity of the profession ; and economic aspects to guarantee that the industry can generate income .
Without these three aspects , we will not have any fisheries in the European Union , or , at least , there will be none that are sustainable and capable of developing , which is what we all want .
How should these general principles , aimed at reducing fishing , making more profit and conserving stocks better , be implemented ?
The report points out certain fundamental aspects : investment in decentralisation ; promoting the empowerment of fishermen and the entire fishing industry to have decision-making powers ; giving them greater involvement in managing fishing , which will also allow a policy of compliance and responsibility ; the need to draw a distinction between small-scale and industrial fleets , with specific regulations for each ; the need to appraise management models that are better adapted to different fishing areas and different types of fisheries ; the importance of strengthening the market by fishing that is aimed at value-added products and increasing the first-sale price ; linking subsidies with good practice ; regulation of the modernisation of the fleet in terms of safety and hygiene ; decisive development of aquaculture , which is ecologically sustainable within the European Union ; and the development of other sectors involved in catching or processing fish .
We should not forget to draw attention to the growing role of women in fisheries either , and the need to require that fishery products from third countries , which are imported to the EU , be subject to the same requirements as those of our producers .
This means certification , labelling , traceability and , finally , the integration of fisheries into European maritime policy within the broader context of enhancing its capacity .
Let me finish by saying that the work that we present here today is the product of a joint effort by all the members of the Committee on Fisheries , particularly the shadow rapporteurs , with whom we worked very hard , and also with the Commission , the Secretariat of the European Parliament , the advisor to the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and other advisors to other political groups , and , of course , my office and my assistant for fisheries .
The work that we are presenting here today represents a truly joint effort , and we hope that it will be adopted here too .
Mr President , the Presidency also welcomes this debate in the European Parliament as it is an important contribution to the broad consultation procedure on the Green Paper , and the European Parliament 's contributions should therefore be given serious consideration by the Commission when it draws up its legislative proposals .
The Council is also going to examine carefully all of Parliament 's opinions to enable it to subsequently examine and adopt the legislative proposals under the ordinary legislative procedure .
The Green Paper of April 2009 looks at various structural constraints in the common fisheries policy : overcapacity , lack of precise objectives , adoption of short-term decisions , lack of responsibility in the sector and poor compliance in general .
The Green Paper also set out possible ways of combating these structural constraints and looked at important issues such as the differentiated regimes for industrial fleets and small-scale coastal fleets , waste , relative stability , transferable individual rights , greater orientation towards the markets , integration of the common fisheries policy into the broader maritime policy context , public financing and the external dimension of the CFP .
The Member States , both individually and jointly in the Council , are studying in detail all aspects of the questions concerned .
The first consultation phase ended in December 2009 and the Commission has received 1 700 proposals and held more than 125 meetings and seminars to date .
The second phase , which will begin on 1 September of this year , will analyse the contributions made and discuss the main ideas .
In January , the Commission organised seminars on the key elements of the reform and on rights-based fisheries management , and even today there is a seminar on small-scale fishing .
The impact assessment will be conducted in March .
The European Fisheries Fund and the future financial perspective will be dealt with in April , followed by the external dimension in May , and waste and selectivity in June .
On 2 and 3 May , the conference being organised jointly by the Presidency and the Commission will be held in La Coruña .
It will deal with three fundamental elements of the reform , namely governance , stock management and the differentiation between large-scale and small-scale fisheries .
On 4 and 5 May , the ministers will meet in Vigo to examine the results of the conference , and it is possible that the June Council will include in its agenda an informal debate on a working document concerning possible changes .
In the third phase , as I said before , which will begin in the second half of 2010 , the Commission will present a White Paper and , subsequently , four legislative proposals : the basic regulation , the new COM , technical measures and the new regulation on financing .
The objective is for the CFP to enter into force , with the new reform , on 1 January 2013 .
The Council has yet to adopt a position in this respect ; it will only adopt formal decisions on the basis of the legislative proposals it receives from the Commission in 2011 , and it will do so in accordance with the rules on the ordinary legislative procedure .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , since this is my first speech as a Commissioner to the Members of this House , I would like to thank you for giving me the opportunity to address the European Parliament .
I feel very honoured to be here with you and discuss the reform of the common fisheries policy , which is a core issue for the whole sector .
I want to congratulate the rapporteur , Mrs Neves , on her hard work in bringing together different positions into a consistent document .
I could not agree more that we need radical reform to turn around the structural failings of our policy .
As you all know , the last reform in 2002 was not sufficiently successful .
Now we have to tackle all the past deficits , to achieve better results from an environmental , social and economic aspect .
The public consultation has shown clearly that there is broad support for this reform .
Of course , I will not be able to respond today to all issues raised in your report , which is due to be voted on .
However , I bear in mind your compromise amendments on sustainability , over-capacity , small-scale fisheries , horizontal decentralisation , phasing-out of discards , new fisheries agreements and deployment in the fishing sector .
I am very thankful for your constructive input .
I would like to highlight two specific issues : first , public funding .
I believe we have to focus our subsidies to achieve better results by steering them towards the objectives of our policy .
For example , instead of supporting the building of new vessels , we should support innovation for selectivity and greening and help producer organisations respond to the future challenges .
Secondly , I share your views on the social dimension : we want a fishery which creates attractive and safe jobs .
Today I am looking forward to hearing your proposals during this debate .
Let me also inform you of our next steps .
We will prepare a summary report on last year 's consultation which will help us prepare the proposals for the new policy .
We are organising workshops to discuss specific topics with stakeholders , the institutions and the Member States .
Together with the Spanish Presidency , a broad conference of CFP reform will be held in May .
I know , and it has already been mentioned , that there is a technical workshop taking place in the Commission at this very moment , with participants from all over Europe .
I am sorry that you cannot attend this workshop .
This workshop was organised a long time ago .
I will try , if at all possible , to make sure that meetings do not clash in future .
On the basis of this input , in late 2010 , we will start to develop our proposals to be adopted in the Commission in spring 2011 .
This large consultation process will culminate in a very fruitful discussion with you .
You , as colegislators , will then have a major role to play in shaping the new policy together with the Council .
I am really looking forward to cooperating with you .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I am grateful to the Council for its comments , and I would like to thank and wish the best of luck to the new Commissioner - who is making her debut today in this House - for the work that we are preparing to carry out .
I believe that what we are implementing is important , and I hope that this Green Paper , which we are beginning to discuss today and which we will vote on later , does not end up as it did in 2002 .
Today , however , the European Parliament finds itself in a different position .
We have the ordinary legislative procedure and the Treaty of Lisbon , and therefore I believe that we will all have to take advantage of them in order to meet the objectives .
The key points have been described by our rapporteur , Mrs Patrão Neves , to whom we , the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) , express our gratitude for the work she has done , for the summary she has been able to present and for everything she has been able to outline .
I merely wished to take the floor and to take advantage of this opportunity so as to broach the subject of fisheries , but by going beyond the normal Green Paper - and the White Paper that has been announced for June - and addressing the needs that exist in relation to Europe 's seas , and to the Mediterranean in particular .
Today we need to set ourselves rules that we have already been imposing on our economy and on our fishermen for a number of years .
However , coastal states , even those bordering Europe , have wilfully and often , indeed very often , ignored these rules , and we find ourselves in the paradoxical situation in which all this is imposed on our fishermen , while the others can do as they like .
Today , the European Commission has a different and more powerful role ; it has a Minister for Foreign Affairs and a more powerful Parliament .
My hope is that , within the Green Paper , and before embarking on the White Paper , we can work with third countries - those countries that are not part of the Union - in order to come up with shared and common rules to ensure that those who are subject to the rules do not feel betrayed or ignored by the Union and do not view the Union as an enemy rather than as a friend .
Thank you , Mr Martín Fragueiro , welcome , and thank you , Mrs Damanaki .
I , too , am speaking here for the first time on the topic of fisheries , and indeed we are facing a significant challenge in this area .
We are obliged , and it is our responsibility , to define the guidelines that are going to guarantee the sustainability of the seas , fisheries and , in short , the planet itself .
We are also talking about an important element of production in our countries , at our coasts , in our regions - an economic and cultural element that encompasses many values - and as you quite rightly said , Mrs Damanaki , there are problems with the 2002 reform .
We need to revise the principle of relative stability and we need to look for new approaches to management that are more flexible and more adaptable because there have been problems with the TACs and quotas .
There have been problems because of the all-too-familiar discard issue , discards that we cannot allow for the sake of our fishermen or for the sake of our planet .
The future reform of the CFP must ensure a sustainable fishing system and we are in favour of a new management system based on fishing effort .
We have to be more open , we have to think about things and we have to try to make management more flexible .
We need to ensure widespread introduction of environmental criteria and differentiate between coastal fishing and deep sea fishing .
This is important and it is something that the entire sector wants .
We need to reduce the overcapacity of certain fleets .
We also need to finalise the common organisation of the market and work out how to stabilise the market and how to reconcile it with fish imports from third countries .
The fight against illegal fishing , which has been criticised and which has been ineffective to date , needs additional resources , harmonised sanctions and international agreements based on principles of law , principles of human rights and principles of compliance with the agreements .
A financial framework , which you said must produce better results , has to produce better results than the current policy .
Above all , we need to think about the social dimension : we are talking about people and we have to ensure that they have dignity , have a sense of professionalism , are given professional recognition and have the economic capacity to survive .
Of course , we must not forget about the integration of women , who represent the invisible side of the fisheries world .
We must bring them to the forefront and make an extra effort for them .
The reform of the fisheries policies is more than simply drawing up legislation .
It means tackling an important part of the reform , from within the European Union , that is going to guarantee the sustainability of the seas , fishermen and part of the planet .
As a result , we must be courageous in the face of the challenges , and being courageous means tackling a policy without any fear .
We must leave our fears behind .
We must tackle the situation head on and maintain the balance of the state , of the European Union and of the world .
Mr President , for those of us who have worked hard on this Green Paper and the report , it feels extremely good to have now got as far as plenary .
First of all , I would like to thank the rapporteur , who has done an excellent job .
Our common fisheries policy needs to be reformed .
For the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe , it was important for the reform to be based on an ecosystem approach .
The wording in this regard in the report is good .
At the same time , we are facing a situation where serious problems need to be dealt with , like the discards , the enormous overcapacity that exists in some places and many other things besides .
I am therefore pleased that we have been able to agree on measures to tackle these things in particular .
Who really thinks that the EU 's discard policy is justifiable ?
I certainly do not .
Another important issue is the regionalisation of the common fisheries policy .
Where the situation is so different in different places in Europe , it is important that decisions can be made and applied at regional level .
Another welcome reform is the intention to introduce a separate approach for small-scale coastal fisheries .
These are also issues that we brought up in the ALDE Group report .
As a Finn and someone who lives next to the Baltic Sea , I am also pleased about the statement relating to the possibility of taking measures to tackle oversized seal and cormorant populations , as this is one of the greatest threats to fisheries in the Baltic Sea .
Finally , I would like to mention the fisheries agreement with third countries .
It is important for our policy in this regard to go hand in hand with the EU 's human rights policy .
The agreement with Guinea is a good example of where Parliament voted against the agreement , and this points towards the route we should take in the future .
I am very happy to see how far the reform has progressed .
We have a good Green Paper and I am certain that we will have a much better fisheries policy from 2013 onwards .
Mr President , Commissioner Damanaki , ladies and gentlemen , my eyes were opened to the EU 's common fisheries policy and its destructive consequences in 2002 , when , following a majority vote in the Swedish Parliament , Sweden decided on a unilateral ban on cod fishing for a year , but was prevented from implementing it by the European Commission .
Despite the fact the Sweden intended to compensate its commercial fishermen for the ban and the fact that researchers in the International Council for the Exploration of the Sea had recommended a total ban on cod fishing for a number of years and despite the fact that the various cod stocks along the Swedish coast had been wiped out or reduced by between 70 and 90 % , the principle of the common fisheries policy was more important .
If everyone else overfishes , Sweden must overfish too , according to the Commission .
In other words , exploitation was mandatory for EU Member States .
The last reform of the fisheries policy was completed in 2002 and it has not proved capable of tackling the difficult problems that the fisheries industry was already facing ten years ago , namely that far too many vessels that are far too efficient are competing for far too few , and increasingly fewer , fish .
The last vessels to catch bluefin tuna were subsidised by the EU as recently as 2005 in the Mediterranean .
Between 2000 and 2008 , EU taxpayers shelled out EUR 34 million to build and modernise tuna vessels at a time when stocks were on the verge of collapse .
A similar logic is in evidence in the Baltic Sea .
In recent years , the Swedish Board of Fisheries has paid out EUR 5.4 million to scrap some of the largest tuna fishing vessels - the same vessels that were built with the aid of EU money .
A radical reform of the fisheries policy is needed .
We believe that all types of harmful subsidies must be stopped .
EU vessels with tax-free fuel and access agreements provided by taxpayers are currently emptying African seas of vital food supplies and competing unfairly with African fishermen , while at the same time destroying ecosystems .
Ahead of today 's vote on the report on the Green Paper , I would call on all of my fellow Members to at least remove one bad paragraph from an otherwise largely excellent report .
I am referring to paragraph 121 , which states that the EU 's external fisheries policy should defend European fisheries interests .
I do not think that it befits the EU to pursue such a policy in 2010 .
Mr President , Mrs Damanaki , at the outset , I would like to express my sincere thanks to Mrs Patrão Neves for the effort she has put into the preparation of this report .
Great determination is needed , as well as a sense of compromise , to create such a coherent document .
This report is , however , only the basis for building future common fisheries policy , which requires thorough reconstruction and fundamental changes so that care for the natural environment can be reconciled with development of the historical heritage of fishing .
The policy must be based on regionalisation , which will , itself , be based on the conditions prevailing in different regions .
This will enable correct assessment based on opinions from within the fishing industry as well as scientific opinions , and the compromise which is adopted will ensure the fair and equal management of fishing .
The new fisheries policy must stimulate development of the industry in a Europe which is engulfed in the crisis , but it is also necessary to pay attention to the predatory industrial fishing being carried out particularly in the Baltic Sea , where healthy and valuable fish are being turned into fish meal for use on poultry and cattle farms , and , in exchange , the toxic Far East panga arrives on the tables of Europeans .
This is a blow aimed at sustainable European coastal fishing , an industry which should be accorded particular care .
It also shows the necessity of establishing a rational and fair system of catches to replace the easily manipulated quota system .
This is to give an equal chance to all fishermen in all countries of the European Union .
The European Conservatives and Reformists endorse the report , in the hope that the current system will change .
In its Green Paper , the Commission tries to establish a phased or unphased Community system of transferable fishing rights , or private property rights for access to the use of a public good , namely fish stocks .
This proposal was rejected when the last reform was carried out , but ten years on , the Commission is back in charge , and it is the one predicting the inevitable consequences of privatising stocks : the concentration of activity by groups with greater economic and financial power and the destruction of a substantial number of small-scale , coastal fisheries .
It is revealing that the countries that opted for this route , such as Iceland , now want to withdraw , as they are confronted with the adverse consequences and perversities of this system .
Parliament should take a clear stance by rejecting this proposal .
Incidentally , this solution is not any kind of guarantee that the sustainability of fish stocks will be protected , since the reduction and concentration of rights among a handful of operators does not necessarily mean a reduction in fishing effort , but simply the concentration of the exploitation of resources .
Protecting the sustainability of resources requires other measures , such as guaranteeing a fair return within the sector .
This in turn requires intervention in the market and improved marketing in the sector , improving the first-sale price , increasing pay for work by fishermen , reducing the margins of middlemen and promoting fair distribution of added value throughout the value chain of this sector .
The reality of fisheries in the EU is complex and diverse .
In these circumstances , the widely recognised importance of local government directly contradicts the institutional framework created by the Treaty of Lisbon , which sets out the conservation of marine biological resources as the sole remit of the European Union .
We need management that is supported by scientific knowledge , and which takes account of the reality and specific features of each country , each fishing zone , each fleet , and the resources themselves .
This means involving the fishermen in finding solutions and implementing them .
This is very different from the mere decentralised implementation of a centrally defined policy .
on behalf of the EFD Group . - Mr President , I want to appeal to Commissioner Damanaki for sensitivity to Britain in the reworking of the common fisheries policy which seeks to include recreational sea angling in the regulation and control of sea fishing .
I thought the whole point of quotas was to prevent diminishing stocks .
European fisheries policy has been so unsuccessful in achieving sustainability that 91 % of fisheries are on course to be classified as overfished by 2015 .
But the problem is how waters are being fished , not by whom .
Indiscriminate trawling and longline fishing empty our seas of marine life .
But throwing back into the sea dead fish that have already been caught and are good for the table is surely the opposite of sustainability .
What is sustainable fishing , however , is recreational sea angling , which is enjoyed by around a million people in the UK and which supports business thought to be worth around EUR 2 billion in tackle trade alone across the continent .
Some 19 000 people are employed in some 1 300 businesses in England and Wales as a result of the recreational angling industry .
Recreational sea anglers catch and remove from the sea only what they intend to eat , leaving small young fish to develop and breed , and throwing back what they do not strictly need .
In some cases , they tag the fish first , contributing to conservation programmes .
If the Commission gets its way , they will be forced to land everything they catch and count their quota against the national one .
Recreational sea angling supports ecologically sound self-sufficiency which , if practised by more people , would lessen the demand that currently fuels indiscriminate commercial fishing and puts whole species of marine life under threat .
The common fisheries policy has always been prejudiced against the British fleet , which is currently permitted to fish only 7 % of the Channel cod quota and only one fifth of the quota in our own territorial waters .
Perhaps the Commissioner will see fit to favour the needs of harmless recreational fishermen in the UK in the same way as her predecessor showed open sensitivity to the needs of his own country 's fishermen when he opposed a ban on the sale of bluefin tuna , an industry that earned EUR 100 million a year for his country , Malta .
The CFP has already wiped out most of what ought to have been a great renewable resource .
Recreational sea anglers account for perhaps 1 % of the total catch that remains .
The Commission hesitates to protect a nearly endangered species , but sees fit to regulate fishing as a hobby .
It just goes to show where the Commission 's interests lie .
Mr President , for me and my constituents in Northern Ireland , the fishing industry and 27 years of the common fisheries policy is summed up in paragraph 138 of this report which reiterates that one of the few areas in which the CFP has been relatively successful is where Member States have had control .
The ideal for us would be the scrapping of the CFP or the United Kingdom 's withdrawal from it , thus allowing Member States to take back control of their waters .
Regretfully , we are not living in this ideal world .
The reform of the CFP will inevitably result in another second best for Northern Ireland 's fishermen , a second best that has , for the past three decades , been marked by an unjustified decline of our fishing industry , and unanswered questions surrounding the state of those fish stocks on which our industry depends .
And this was absolutely demonstrated by the debacle around the December Fishing Council and the decisions on quotas .
Whilst it is very much a second best , I strongly support the regionalisation of the CFP as set out by the rapporteur .
I support the view that the CFP should be based on three core principles of environmental , social and economic dimensions .
And my most honest hope is that we can deliver a policy that will reverse the disastrous consequences of the CFP .
However , I fear that radical change promised by some in this review will result in another lost opportunity for our fishing industry and our fish stocks .
( ES ) Mr President , everything is at stake in this reform .
If we are not courageous now , there will not be another opportunity to create a genuine fisheries policy and we will be partly responsible for its failure .
The CFP has , for years , suffered increasingly justified criticism and it would be disheartening if , when we are being offered one last opportunity , this Parliament were to prove incapable of proposing alternatives to what we have criticised so many times , in particular , the obvious failure of the conservation and management system , as demonstrated by both the state of resources and the decline in the sector .
I simply cannot understand any reluctance to clearly suggest alternatives , as discussed in this House in 1996 , such as transferable quota systems or effort-based management , which have had such positive results and which could help to maintain the more industrial fleets at least .
The report says that there cannot be a one-size-fits-all solution , but at the same time , it closes the door on the possibility that there might be other solutions .
I do not understand the contradiction , nor do I understand why , if someone does not want to use an instrument , the solution must be to prohibit it for everyone .
That is not protection of the weakest ; it is fear on the part of some sectors that only see permanent subsidies as solutions .
The CFP should also guarantee competitiveness in a globalised world of fisheries products .
The market for these products will undoubtedly continue to grow but it seems that it will grow without us .
The policies within the Union should be coherent and we must ensure that the trade policy and rules on origin , such as those that appeared in the new economic partnership agreements , do not destroy the competitiveness of Community fisheries without being anything other than mere gestures to third countries ; otherwise , it is our fisheries sector that will suffer .
Mr President , consensus is a good thing when it results in progress , but not when we remain motionless in the face of problems , and we have many problems to solve .
( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , a warm welcome to all the fishermen and -women in the Chamber !
Today 's vote represents a milestone for the European Parliament .
For the first time since the ratification of the Treaty of Lisbon , we have the opportunity to express our opinions on the reform of the common fisheries policy ( CFP ) .
In the next few years , our power and our responsibilities will increase significantly .
This report is acceptable and I would like to thank Mrs Patrão Neves and Mrs Andrés Barea for their hard work .
We have succeeded in incorporating important social democratic concerns into the report . These include specific support for small-scale fisheries .
Those affected will now be included in the decision-making process .
Support must be given in particular to small family businesses .
Their presence in the coastal regions not only provides jobs , but also increases the attractiveness of many of these regions for tourists .
Some parts of this report still need improvement and we have tabled amendments for that purpose .
We social democrats want to make it clear that one of the central problems is the outstanding overcapacity .
It is a fact that environmental sustainability is a fundamental prerequisite for the economic survival of fishermen .
Therefore , the environment must take priority .
A third important point concerns the external aspects of the CFP and the partnership agreements with third countries .
We move that paragraph 121 , which puts undue emphasis on the interests of European fisheries , should be deleted .
We should behave outside European waters in just the same way as we do at home .
This means promoting sustainability , human rights and democracy throughout the world and ensuring that the income from partnership agreements does not disappear into the coffers of corrupt dictatorships .
Finally , I would like to make one more fundamental point .
European fisheries policy is a hot potato , because it involves so many powerful national interests .
It will come as no surprise that these have led to heated debates within the groups in recent weeks .
Fortunately , we have all succeeded in finding effective compromises .
However , when it comes to the legislative process , we must focus more closely on this issue than we have today and come up with some common European solutions .
We must leave the trivial problems of national greed to the Council .
Mr President , first of all let me welcome the Commissioner to the House in her first address to Parliament and wish her well during her term of office .
Let me also congratulate our colleague , Mrs Neves for the preparation of this report .
( GA ) The new common fisheries policy must have clearer , better objectives that accept ecological , economic and social principles .
A radical rethink must be carried out and , of course , all stakeholders must take part .
We must manage fish stocks in a sustainable way .
At the same time , however , it is important to ensure a viable and sustainable way of life for Europe 's fishermen .
I am particularly concerned about fishermen operating inshore and from small coastal islands .
Such small-scale fisheries are of extreme importance to the peripheral areas where there is no alternative social employment and I am heartened this morning when I listen to the Commissioner make reference to such fisheries .
The majority of boats fishing in these areas are less than 15 metres , catching fish and catching quantities that have no significant impact on the fish stocks and , of course , many of them are fishing non-quota species .
Most importantly , there is no alternative source of employment for many of those people .
This is why I have tabled an amendment which calls on the Commission to specifically recognise these remote communities .
Regionalisation and the introduction of the RACs ( Regional Advisory Councils ) have been successful so regionalisation management structures should create many positive effects , including increased responsibility on the part of the stakeholders and the establishment of a new common fisheries policy that will be more sensitive to local concerns .
With the operation of the Lisbon Treaty following the referendum in my own country last year , the European Parliament now has greater legislative responsibility .
Again , the Commissioner has recognised this and I look forward to working with her .
In conclusion , I would hope that the key provisions of this report will be included in the substantial reforms in the future .
Mr President , our rapporteur said of the CFP that its original problems are still largely present .
Well , I agree , and the 27 years of experience in Scotland of the CFP has been a bad experience .
If we want to move to a system of fisheries management which works , and I think that is what we all want to do , then we must be prepared to embrace a radically different approach .
The over-centralised , inflexible CFP has failed miserably and we must accept that .
But we must do something about it .
Conversely the Commission acknowledges that , up to now , local management within the 12-mile zone has generally been successful ; there is a lesson there .
I have tabled amendments for which I seek support from colleagues .
I seek in these amendments to delegate real powers to Europe 's fishing nations ; to encourage cooperation between fishing nations and stakeholders on a logical basis by sea basin ; to encourage the incentivisation of sustainable management measures taken at national and local level and to recognise and maintain the historic rights and benefits accrued from the principle of relative stability .
I firmly believe that those who have most to gain from the successful conservation of fish stocks , that is , our fishing communities and fishing nations themselves , are best placed to make real decisions about management plans and to implement them for their fisheries , working together on a regional basis .
More than just failing the fishing industry and the fish stocks , the CFP has actually contributed substantially to a downturn in public opinion about the EU as a whole , and that is also at stake .
If we do not get this CFP reform right ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
Mr President , first of all , let me congratulate the rapporteur , Mrs Patrão Neves , for the very hard work that she has done on this report .
We have an opportunity today to make a difference and to change the direction of a policy that everyone agrees has been a dismal failure .
But to effect that radical change , we must not repeat past mistakes .
No more micro-management from the centre , no more top-down regulation , no more one-size-fits-all approach to policy .
Any reform of the CFP must include an end to the debacle of discards .
It must involve the stakeholders in the day-to-day management of stocks .
It must ensure fleet capacities brought into line with stock levels .
We have to put sustainability and conservation at the heart of our agenda .
We must end IUU fishing and ensure a decent livelihood for all of those working in the sector .
If we can give real substance to the core values of the CFP to maintain jobs and to maintain fish stocks , we will have made real progress .
( DA ) Mr President , a reform of our fisheries policy is long overdue .
However , I would have liked it to be more ambitious - particularly as it concerns the future existence of viable fish stocks in our seas .
It is extremely rare for me to say that I fully agree with the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance , but in this case , I have to admit that I do .
In fact , their amendments are both responsible and necessary for the future of our fishing industry .
My question to the Council and the Commission is one that our guests here today will surely not like , but it will be of crucial importance for the future .
My question is how can we introduce an EU-wide ban on catching any fish and shellfish during their respective breeding periods ?
Everyone knows that every time just one cod is caught that is full of roe ( in other words , fish eggs ) , we are catching all of the future generations of cod .
This makes safeguarding stable cod stocks almost impossible , to name just one topical example .
I am pleased that the new Green Paper intends to focus to a much greater extent on coastal fisheries .
This will not only benefit the environment , but will also help to safeguard local jobs .
It is also good that the Green Paper attaches importance to sustainable aquaculture to enable us to avoid depleting the seas around the coasts of third countries .
We should , likewise , stop fishing for exotic and endangered fish species simply because sushi has become fashionable .
Mr President , our party believes that preservation of fish stocks should be the responsibility of each Member State , whose fishermen would have sole access to its own country 's waters .
However , we recognise that there is a Europe-wide , indeed worldwide , problem with overfishing and unsustainable fish stocks .
There must be a revision of the present policy under which fishermen must return excess and even undersized fish to the sea , even though they are dead or dying as the result of swim bladder damage by being brought too quickly to the surface .
New technology must come to the rescue .
For example , one of my constituents , Jeff Stockdale from Hull , a former fishermen , has invented a revolutionary pot trap that would encourage fish to enter it in order to escape from the tidal flow , but it would allow small fish to escape and larger ones to be released before being brought to the surface , if that should be necessary to avoid exceeding one 's quota .
I commend this invention to the Commission and indeed the whole world for consideration .
( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , unlike some , I believe that the European Parliament 's report on the Green Paper is a significant , indeed even essential , contribution to the development of the future common fisheries policy .
It is a comprehensive report that addresses all aspects of this policy and , in particular , the protection of resources , a global approach to the management of fish stocks and decentralised governance .
All of that seems to me to be both very relevant and very purposeful .
I wish to express , today in this House , France 's satisfaction with regard to this contribution by Parliament , on which we have worked together , and I thank Mrs Patrão Neves for the work she has done .
This report points out the need to increase scientific expertise in the fisheries sector so that the decisions that are taken are beyond dispute .
Yes , we must conserve resources and promote sustainable fishing , but let us be careful not to stigmatise a profession that has long understood that its survival depends on its compliance with the rules .
Yes , we must evolve into a market economy . However , that does not mean that we have to abandon organised means of regulation .
I especially welcome the compromises that have been reached as a result of our debates in committee .
Indeed , no explicit reference is made to transferable individual rights .
This type of management is regarded by some as a management tool that fulfils the environmental , economic and social objectives of the sector .
That is not a view I share .
A European market that enjoys rights to unregulated production is not desirable today .
It would give rise to uncontrollable speculation and a concentration of individual rights .
Indeed , while it will certainly be crucial to implement new management methods for industrial fisheries - I agree with my colleague , Mrs Fraga Estévez , in that regard - I remain convinced that too broad an application of this system would sound the death knell for our small-scale fisheries , to which we are very committed .
Mrs Damanaki , we are counting on you .
( EL ) Mr President , Commissioner , Mr Martín Fragueiro , the current common fisheries policy has failed .
Most fish stocks are collapsing .
Eighty-eight per cent of fish stocks are being fished beyond the maximum sustainable yield .
Thirty per cent of fish stocks are outside safe biological limits , meaning that they have little chance of recovery .
Cod in the North Sea , which is being fished even before its reproductive age , is a typical example .
The reform under discussion is therefore absolutely necessary .
Protection of fishermen depends on protection of catches .
If we are to prevent European fisheries from collapsing , we must reduce fishing effort and the European fishing fleet .
The ecological approach must be the driving force behind a new common fisheries policy and must be accompanied by long-term planning , participatory procedures and the application of the principle of prevention .
This long-term approach to species conservation must also be applied in all our international fisheries agreements .
I call on you to adopt these basic principles , so that we can develop a decentralised and participatory system , in which decisions are taken at the lowest possible level , with the participation of fishermen and respect for the needs of marine ecosystems .
( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , this is only one step on the long road to the reform of the common fisheries policy .
I would like to thank the rapporteur for the report and our coordinator for doing such an efficient job .
I am in favour of fundamental reform of the common fisheries policy .
However , if we lack the courage to do this , it is important to me that we retain the principle of relative stability .
Furthermore , I would like to mention specifically the major problem represented by the greedy cormorants and the management plan that Parliament has already called for .
The fishing industry is of fundamental economic and cultural importance to our coastal regions .
Therefore , achieving a balance between the economy and the environment is of great significance for me in the context of the forthcoming reform of the common fisheries policy .

( NL ) Mr President , sustainability is a key concept in the Green Paper , and rightly so : sustainable in the sense of being both future-proof for fisheries and good for the environment .
The objectives set by the European Commission are not new but , to date , Europe has not managed to achieve them .
This further increases the urgency of the need for reform .
I support the drift of the Commission 's solution : regionalisation .
More scope must be given to the fisheries sector itself , whilst paying attention to environmental aspects .
Current policy goes too far , is too detailed and is ineffective .
In addition , compliance with the rules is poor at present .
The good are the victims of the bad .
I am proud of the Dutch fishermen : they and their Danish counterparts are the only ones with their catch quotas in order .
We must encourage the European fisheries sector to become more involved and to take more responsibility , in line with the Dutch model .
I was pleased to find this in the Green Paper ; it is the only way to a sustainable future for the fisheries sector .
( NL ) The current fisheries policy is not working well enough ; a dramatic change is needed to reverse the situation .
This is the fairly strong wording with which the European Commission opens its Green Paper .
This is remarkable .
Not that I wish to argue with it ; on the contrary .
Some say the main reason for the failure of the common fisheries policy ( CFP ) is not that the policy as such is wrong but that it is so poorly implemented and enforced .
There are important lessons to be learned in this regard .
Policy must lend itself to implementation , and so simplification is in order .
That is why I am pleased with the direction the Commission is indicating : regionalisation , more involvement by the sector and , in particular , compliance with the rules .
The report on this Green Paper by my fellow Portuguese Member points out the large variations between the various fleets and fisheries ; and rightly so .
We cannot talk in generalised terms about the overcapacity or the overfishing or the lack of compliance .
A regional , sector-specific approach calls for nuanced language in this respect .
Last Saturday , in fact , I held intensive discussions with representatives of the sector , who told me that fishermen and scientists are cooperating more and more successfully .
Indeed , this strikes me as an example of how things can be done .
When fishermen are able to contribute their know-how and to help shape policy , this broadens the basis for the policy considerably , and will put us on the right track .
Finally , I should like to offer the rapporteur sincere thanks for this excellent report .
( EL ) Mr President , I , too , should like to welcome Commissioner Damanaki and , in particular , to thank Mrs Maria do Céu Patrão Neves for her exhaustive and exceptional work .
All the important things have already been said .
I shall turn my attention to three points : firstly , overfishing .
Overfishing is an undisputed fact .
In fact , as Mr Arsenis said , it is currently estimated that 88 % of stocks in European seas are threatened by overfishing , meaning that they are being fished at a level which prevents their recovery .
Chronic overfishing has resulted in smaller and smaller catches for European fisheries and lost jobs .
Smaller and smaller fish are being caught , often before they reach reproductive age , and they are becoming more and more difficult to locate .
Secondly , Europe catches far fewer fish today than it did 15 years ago , approximately 25 % less , while fishing effort and the cost of fishing have risen .
However , when taking measures , we must not overreact , as this may bring about adverse results , given that , according to the specialists , although we have overfishing , we are not talking about collapsing stocks .
What we must not forget is that viability has three dimensions , which are also highlighted in the Neves report : the social dimension , the economic dimension and the ecological dimension .
A fisheries policy which targets viable development must not revolve solely around fish ; it must also focus on man .
Fish , man , cormorants and seals are competing systems in the same ecological environment .
Finally , I must emphasise that I , like numerous other fellow Members , are insisting on more research into fisheries .
It is not my insistence ; it is a reality which we must address within the framework of everything said by Mr Cadec .
( FR ) Presidents , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , firstly , may I thank all the rapporteurs for their excellent cooperation and for the huge task accomplished in spite of what were at times conflicting interests .
The first result of our efforts is that Parliament can now state the direction in which it intends to steer the future common fisheries policy .
The second result is that , during the negotiations , our priority was to ensure that this text responds to the concerns expressed by fishermen .
We have succeeded in this : the provisions relating to transferable individual quotas have been withdrawn , and support for small-scale and coastal fishing has been maintained .
The third anticipated result is that the forthcoming document must result in a participative and bottom-up approach , that is to say , in consultation with all those involved in the sector .
It must also incorporate those elements that are essential to the Group of the Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats in the European Parliament , notably , the human and social dimension of the entire sector , which must be combined effectively with the promotion of sustainable fishing practices and with the conservation of the fish stock as part of an ecosystemic approach .
I would like to add that , if we want to succeed in an ambitious reform of the common fisheries policy , then we must devote a budget to it that matches our stated ambitions .
Our political commitment will be judged according to the resources that we grant it .
We expect the Commission ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
( ES ) Mr Martín Fragueiro , Mrs Damanaki , we need clear objectives , we need to be courageous and we need to avoid another failure ; participation is therefore essential .
The fishing sector and the processing industry are those most interested in seeing sustainable fisheries , which is why they are involved in the preparation of the reform or are participating in it , for example , in the revision of a control regulation in 2009 , which should have been drawn up in a more open manner .
In order to fulfil the objectives of the reform , the answer is simple : ensure a sustainable and profitable sector and guarantee supply .
The other key words are regionalisation , responsibility , stability and justice : regionalisation , examining the special characteristics of each zone and type of fishing , differentiating between small-scale and industrial fishing ; responsibility , focusing on good practices and previous efforts to reduce fishing capacity ; stability , through long-term management plans based on increasingly reliable scientific activity ; and justice , revising the COM and offering inspections and controls of third countries to promote sustainable behaviour in the sector .
Justice , too , for the women of the sea , the eternal forgotten of this sector ; without their contribution , fishing would be impossible in many areas .
( CS ) I welcome the submission of the Green Paper on the reform of the common fisheries policy .
Just like the Czech Republic in the Council of Ministers , I support the endeavour to improve , simplify and make more effective the legislative framework regulating this area .
The Commission 's effort to adopt a multi-year approach towards the strategy for preserving fish stocks and to place greater emphasis on finding an appropriate compromise between fishing and the environment is particularly valuable .
We must regard the Green Paper as the first step towards reform in this area .
I would be even more pleased to see a stronger emphasis on the area of aquaculture in future proposals .
A revitalisation of both marine and freshwater aquaculture will help to support the development of coastal and rural areas and will also bring benefits to consumers in the form of environmentally friendly food products .
From this perspective , I support all of the proposed amendments .
( PL ) Mr President , the fishing sector is of fundamental significance as a source of livelihood in European coastal regions and as a source of food for the citizens of Europe .
Unfortunately , the common fisheries policy , in its present form , does not meet the challenges associated with the emergence of a number of problems , such as the uncontrolled exploitation of fishing grounds or excessive fishing capacity .
A complete transformation of maritime policy is essential .
We are at the beginning of this process , and it should end with thorough changes to the current , ineffective European fisheries policy .
Thank you , Mrs Patrão Neves , for your comprehensive report , which determines the essential measures on which this reform should be based . Firstly , a reduction in excess fishing capacity .
This is a fundamental problem , which should be solved by the introduction and monitoring of appropriate market mechanisms .
I am talking here about a system of individual transferable quotas , or ITQs .
I think this is a kind of economic medicine for adapting the size of the fleet to available resources and ensuring profitability of the fishing sector .
Secondly , decentralisation and a broader inclusion of interested parties and advisory bodies in the process .
The aim of this is to increase the involvement of fishermen and to develop detailed regulations , which would increase the trust between fishermen and the bodies which govern fishing .
The Green Paper rightly evaluates current fisheries policy , highlighting its many imperfections .
Mrs Patrão Neves ' report analyses the possibilities for solving the adverse situation of the fishing industry in Europe .
However , the proposals do require further discussion .
If this does not take place , our Community risks voting through another version of a reform , which will not solve the problems being faced by the European fishing industry .
( BG ) This is the first time we are discussing the common fisheries policy since the adoption of the Treaty of Lisbon , fully aware of the great responsibilities we have as a result of Parliament 's increased powers .
There was a very heated debate on the Green Paper , and I sincerely wish to thank the rapporteurs for the work they have done .
I want to emphasis one particular aspect of the proposed reform which is of paramount importance to the whole sector 's development .
It must take into account how the situation has changed following the enlargement of the European Union in 2004 and 2007 , as well as the new Member States .
The existing system for carrying out research and analysis and for making decisions must take into account the new waterways and their specific features .
I would like to emphasise on this point the need to focus particular attention on the Black Sea and create dedicated bodies for managing it .
We must take into consideration the interests of the people living in these coastal areas , the ecological issues and the fishing industry .
I am also mentioning this in connection with the forthcoming 2014-2020 financial framework during which this reform must be funded .
Finally , I do not think we should support the proposal to reduce fleet overcapacity , which could have adverse consequences on fisheries in the context of a severe financial and economic crisis .
Mr President , I hope the Commissioner will take heart from the vote we had this month on bluefin tuna .
I think it gave a good indication of the strength of feeling in the House and perhaps an indication also that you can count on many Members here to vote for quite radical reform .
Yesterday , many Members attended a seminar I organised , a presentation by the Marine Stewardship Council .
I have always been rather fond of this organisation .
It was set up about 10 years ago by a partnership between business and environmentalists , which , I think , is always good .
It had a slow start , but by the end of this year , they reckon about 10 % of the world 's fisheries will be MSE-certified .
I think this gives credibility to the retailers who support the MSE .
I think it gives confidence to consumers and I think that it not only puts more money in the pockets of fishermen who have got their fisheries sustainably certified , but it also gives them a sense of pride .
They have a piece of paper that they can hold up to their families and their communities which demonstrates that their hard work of today is not damaging the prospects of fish stocks ' survival in the future .
This is entirely complementary to everything the Commission does and I hope that the Commissioner will support its work during her period in office . It is setting a gold standard .
Mr President , can I thank the rapporteur for her very diligent and detailed work on this dossier .
Since the Lisbon Treaty has been passed , this House will face two major reforms on two policies : agriculture and fishing .
The issues are similar .
We all want the best for the sectors and we are trying to reform them in a way which will deliver the best possible outcomes .
I am a little concerned , and the rapporteur points to it in her explanatory statement , that in 2002 , we were also full of good intentions but that reform failed the fishing sector and failed the sustainability criteria as well .
However , I am very heartened by her very practical approach to the problems : the three principles that we need to look at - the environmental , the social and the economic - and then the practices that are needed to implement those principles .
It is about local and regional concerns and being conscious of the people who are affected .
I like , in particular , the idea that we could fish less and earn more .
If we achieve that , we can perhaps do the same for agriculture .
( PT ) As various speakers have already said , the objective which we have been trying to achieve with the common fisheries policy , without success so far , is environmentally sustainable , economically viable and socially worthwhile fishing .
The Commission 's Green Paper makes a good diagnosis of the situation in the sector and poses many questions , but it falls short when it comes to offering solutions .
The report also lays out a large number of principles and jointly agreed routes .
These will now need to be translated into concrete measures so that this objective can be achieved as soon as possible .
The efforts of the rapporteur need to be emphasised , namely her attempt to come up with measures , and particularly her willingness to accept compromises , which involved taking the most controversial issues out of her initial report .
The Commission now has the enormous responsibility of presenting us with concrete steps in its legislative proposal that will allow the implementation of the principles contained in this report .
I am certain that we will adopt the report by a large majority .
( ES ) Mr President , an important part of the future of Europe is at stake in the reform of the common fisheries policy .
The fishing sector is a resource and a way of life in our coastal areas , and forms the basis of our canning industry and marine research .
It is crucial for safety , quality and price in the supply of food to our consumers .
It is also crucial for external relations and development .
The reform must focus on responsible , sustainable and competitive fisheries .
It must accentuate the social dimension , give priority to the ecosystem and be integrated in the marine policy .
It is important to ensure the conservation and recovery of stocks and to revise the principle of relative stability .
The management policy based on TACs and quotas must leave room for effort-based management .
It is also essential to step up controls and put an end to unfair competition .
The small-scale fishing fleet and the areas that are highly dependent on fisheries need to be treated differently and need greater socio-economic support .
Shellfishing activities must be completely integrated into the common fisheries policy .
I support the report and I congratulate the rapporteur and shadow rapporteurs on the compromises reached .
I call on the Commission and on the Council Presidency to give the report serious consideration in their future work .
( DA ) Mr President , I think that the European common fisheries policy is important .
However , it is also important for the fisheries policy to be supported by the citizens of Europe and by all of the interested parties within the fisheries sector .
There is therefore no other option than to have greater regionalisation so that the responsibility for complying with the European framework and objectives is decentralised .
The discarding of fish must be reduced to a minimum , but for this to be possible , the policy behind the discards must be changed .
Illegal fishing must be stopped - it is very detrimental to law-abiding fishermen .
There must be more stringent and uniform control in the Member States .
Coastal fisheries must be enhanced to give smaller boats a special status .
Out and back again the same day results in fresh fish , the fish get a good price and it is easy on the environment and on fish stocks .
I hope that these elements will have a firm place in the final reform .
That is what is needed .
( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to commend the rapporteur 's comments on this Green Paper , which are along the right lines .
The new strategy must promote fishing at local level , and I should like to point out that aquaculture is a significant part of this , as it accounts for a considerable amount of resources and tens of thousands of jobs .
Europe needs an aquaculture that is strong , sustainable and of a high quality .
I should like , in particular , to draw your attention to shellfish breeding , which is subject to specific constraints requiring pragmatic and appropriate solutions .
This type of breeding is often carried out by small-sized enterprises , which have been hit hard by the crisis .
Pollution and environmental changes are resulting in an increasingly fragile and more unstable form of production .
Producers are expecting Europe to provide them with substantial aid , that is to say , in the short term , with temporary financial assistance that will enable them to continue to earn a living from their production ; in the medium term , with transitional aid to ensure that the species have the biological time they need to reproduce ; and , in the long term ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
( PT ) I should like to congratulate the rapporteur and the Azorean fishermen present here today .
I also welcome this report as it represents an important change in relation to the current common fisheries policy and includes measures that are particularly relevant to the outermost regions , such as the distinction between small-scale and industrial fleets and the creation of bio-geographical regions .
I also see the introduction of the amendments made by the Group of the Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats in the European Parliament as positive , as they have moderated the rapporteur 's initial position on the protection of individually transferable quotas , as advocated by the Azorean fishing organisations .
Similarly , we observed the amendments made by the S & D Group , advocating the principle of relative stability .
We believe that for the outermost regions , further efforts should be made in creating bio-geographical regions , using them as a preferred management model , in line with the existing resources .
In addition , in order to maintain good environmental conditions in marine areas and respect the precautionary principle , it is necessary to reassess the limit of 100 nautical miles around islands , as it is vital to reclaim 200 miles so that ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
Mr President , I , too , would like to begin by adding my congratulations to the rapporteur .
The common fisheries policy is a discredited policy and this reform gives us an opportunity for a fresh start .
It seems to me that , if the CFP is going to regain its credibility , it must first of all have at its heart sustainability ; if there is no fish , there is no future for the industry .
Secondly , stability and predictability for our fishing communities and our fishermen .
Thirdly , tackling over-capacity ; we must find a solution to over-capacity .
Fourthly , recognising past efforts - most important .
We also need a policy that comes up with a real solution to the problem of discards .
Fundamentally the reform of the CFP needs to provide a future for our fishing communities and our fishermen .
Fundamentally it seems to me that the key in terms of the CFP ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
( ES ) Mr President , I , too , would like to take this opportunity to emphasise the points that some of us believe should be fundamental in the final report on which we are going to vote .
These points include : the precautionary principle , which is fundamental and essential ; reducing capacity , which is absolutely urgent ; limiting the public subsidy policy ; and improving controls and prosecuting , relentlessly and with a clear conscience , crimes committed by those who do things the wrong way and encourage others to do the same .
However , we also need to promote sustainable gear and sustainable fishing , which means that we have to make progress on the definition of small-scale fishing , which is something that undoubtedly needs greater clarification .
I want to mention , too , the role of women and the recognition that their work deserves , an aspect on which we have also tabled amendments .
Finally , I believe that it is important to stress and call for greater coherence and responsibility in the fisheries agreements with third countries ; the agreements with Morocco and Guinea , for example , demand this .
( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , firstly , I would like to wish the Commissioner , Mrs Damanaki , every success .
We look forward to working with her .
I would also like to thank Mrs Patrão Neves , who has done an excellent job of conducting the negotiations .
It is important that the countries with small fishing industries are also represented .
As has already been mentioned , relative stability plays a decisive role for Germany .
Of course , we are all convinced of the importance of protecting fish stocks and ensuring that they remain sustainable so that they stay at a level which will guarantee the existence of our fisheries in future .
However , we must not only discuss the environmental and economic aspects .
We must also consider the excessive protection given to some species , as has already been mentioned , such as cormorants and seals .
Europe 's coastline is thousands of kilometres in length and has traditional small-scale fisheries in many areas .
Many families depend on these fisheries for their livelihoods .
Tourism also plays an important role in this respect .
We must take all of this into account .
I believe that the Green Paper is a very good solution which will enable us to take things further with the Commission ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
( PL ) The common fisheries policy has to reconcile ecological and environmental objectives with catch sizes , and also with matters of employment and the standard of living of fishing families .
Fishing capacity should be adapted to the level of resources , levels which are established in accordance with the latest scientific and expert knowledge .
Arriving at sustainable fishing quotas must take place in connection with the process of support for the fishing community in a variety of areas , such as investment , modernisation and social issues , including from a long-term perspective .
The common fisheries policy should take account of the specific conditions of different regions and seas .
Therefore , it is necessary to increase the competences of the Regional Advisory Councils , which should work closely with the fisheries administrations of Member States and the European Commission .
Finally , it is necessary to strengthen the organisation of fishermen and to improve the chain from catch to sale , with a view to quality and high standards of fish products .
Mr President , during my seven months as an MEP , I have never met more angry people than the fishermen and fisherwomen I have met in my constituency .
Clearly for them , the common fisheries policy has not worked .
Therefore , the reform is most welcome .
I think we all agree that we need to preserve fish stocks but we also need to preserve coastal communities , and the two are not necessarily mutually exclusive .
There has to be a voice in favour of the small fisherman and small fisherwoman .
Also , as pointed out by Mr Brons , new technologies have to be brought on board , particularly the ones he referred to which can help with dispersals .
That would make a huge difference .
And finally , the whole question of research has to be looked at .
There is a tendency , once we hear about research or scientific evidence , to take it at face value .
As Mr Cadec said , it must be incontestable , it must be objective and it must be up to date .
Mr President , I , too , would like to thank Mrs Patrão Neves for her work .
As regards the debates in the Council up to now , I should say that the ministers have unanimously supported the need for the reform , involving simplifying the rules , enhancing the role of the regions and decentralising decision making , except on strategic elements and principles , and they agree that it is essential to reduce discards , overcapacity and overfishing .
The specific points on which there is agreement so far are the following : maintaining the current rules on access to the 12 nautical mile zone ; long-term resource management ; greater involvement of fisheries professionals ; market incentives - such as labelling and certificates - to stimulate fishermen 's overall revenue share ; use of subsidies solely as exceptional measures to reduce overcapacity ; the importance of research in the fisheries policy ; integration of aquaculture ; the relationship between the CFP and the integrated maritime policy ; and the need to maintain and enhance the European Union 's action at international level .
To date , the debates have revealed differing positions on the following aspects : relative stability ; the current system of TACs and quotas and the use of transferable quotas ; limiting effort as a management tool ; the methods to reduce discards , overcapacity and overfishing ; global financing and its allocation ; and the increase in support for small-scale fishing and coastal communities .
As I said in my initial speech , the Council has not yet adopted a position and it does not intend to adopt any formal decisions until next year , when the Commission has formally submitted its legislative proposals .
Finally , I , too , would like to welcome the representatives of the fisheries sector who are here with us today .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , I would like to thank all the Members for their contributions .
Having so many speeches is very encouraging .
I understood that the word mentioned most was sustainability , so sustainability is a general agreement , a framework for general agreement .
I cannot answer all the points that were raised but I would like to underline some priorities .
Small-scale fisheries and coastal regions are a priority .
I would like to reassure all of you that I will take your contributions on this issue very seriously .
I would also like to reassure you that I have no intention of introducing heavy measures and rules on hobby anglers .
Second priority : regionalisation .
I would very much like to discuss with you in further detail exactly what we are doing to implement this principle , because here , we have a lot to talk about .
Transferable fishery rights : this is , I understand already , a very engaged debate with a lot of arguments .
I do not know what will happen during the vote , but we cannot ignore this issue .
A lot of Member States are implementing this system already .
So what I propose is having a clear discussion , maybe within the Committee on Fisheries .
Since this is not the end of the dialogue , we can have a clear discussion about ITQs - I see Mrs Fraga is here - we can organise a good discussion to understand the whole issue .
Just to mention some other priorities : a clear level playing field for the Mediterranean and the other areas as regards fishermen from other countries - this is correct ; we have to do it to secure fair competition for our fishermen and fisherwomen ; phasing out discards ; labelling .
These are our priorities .
I would like to end by underlining the need for a new form for fisheries agreements ; a new form that will include a human rights clause .
Thank you for your contributions .
I think that this is not the end of the dialogue ; this is the start of a very good debate between us .
I would like to thank all those who were present here today in Parliament , and who continue to give their valued support to this process , which is dragging on , and which , as the Commissioner has just said , we must pursue if our objectives are to be met .
In all honesty , we realise that it is impossible for a report to please everyone .
Many will say that it did not go far enough in terms of certain aspects , while others will say that it has gone too far in other respects , or even the same ones .
I think that right now , it is important to stress that with this report , we have succeeded in striking a good balance between the main issues , a broad consensus , and that overall , the report has the capacity and potential to make an adequate response to the needs , or should I say demands , of the sector .
Just as we worked in the Committee on Fisheries , chaired by Mrs Fraga Estévez , I hope that we can now carry on with this work within the committee and , on a wider scale , with the Council and the European Commission , so that we can make progress towards the work for the legislative proposals , which will be just as intensive .
I believe that if we continue to work in this way , with a sense of team spirit and the understanding that we need to consider all the issues that are important in different parts of the broad European Union , and if we try to respond effectively to all the needs of the fisheries sector across the large exclusive economic area , we will effectively be working for the sector .
Given this , we commit ourselves to establishing the conditions whereby the fisheries sector is effectively sustainable and can develop in the long term .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place today at 11.30 .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
First and foremost , we congratulate the rapporteur , Mrs Patrão Neves , on the excellent work she has done up to now and on the positive outcome of the vote .
We hope that the Green Paper , which will arrive shortly in committee , is the prelude to the swift arrival in plenary of the White Paper .
Europe has always taken an interest in the fisheries sector .
We believe , however , that it is essential to provide for greater investment in scientific research , especially in the fisheries sector , including within the next framework programme .
We also believe it is essential to improve knowledge in the sector of the rules through greater flexibility of the quota system and increased responsibility in relation to control and stocks .
We also want stronger partnerships with third countries in order to combat illegal fishing , and a greater degree of cooperation with the countries of the Mediterranean , so that we may regulate more decisively fishing in a sea such as the Mediterranean , which has always been the cradle of different civilisations and cultures .
Lastly , we agree with the provisions of paragraph 23 on modernisation , especially of the small-scale fleet , although we would like more details on this matter .
With regard to paragraphs 62 and 63 on professional qualifications for operators in the sector , we would like further clarification , especially as regards small-scale fishing , which would end up being penalised the most if the rules on fleet management were made tougher .
in writing . - While recreational angling constitutes just a small catch percentage of Europe 's fishing industry , it is an integral economic and social element of many parts of the EU , particularly Ireland East .
Angling has a long and important heritage in the east of Ireland , with scenes of anglers at rivers such as the Slaney or on the shores of the east coast a popular depiction of Irish culture .
This reputation for angling also has a vital impact on tourism in many parts of Ireland , both from within Ireland and internationally , with Tiger Woods one famous regular patron of the Liffey in County Kildare .
As a result of falling stocks of fish , there is a move to impose controls on shore angling and to deduct these catches from the quotas of the commercial fishing industry .
These proposals could have a serious effect on tourist earnings from angling , and also have a negative cultural impact on many parts of Ireland .
It is therefore necessary for this House to recognise recreational angling in all its forms as an important stakeholder in the fishing industry , and for the reformed common fisheries policy to take its economic and social benefits into account in its White Paper .
The report on the Green Paper on the reform of the common fisheries policy has the aim of initiating a public debate in EU and Member State institutions .
The fisheries policy , just like the common agricultural policy , is a strategic agenda which directly influences all citizens of the EU , and which must be resolved in accordance with the three core principles , which are the economic profitability of fishing , the preservation and maintenance of fish stocks and the maintenance of an acceptable standard of living for persons engaged in fishing .
Unless there is a balance between all of these principles in the draft legislation , there will be a risk of economic decline in the coastal regions , of certain fish species being fished out or of increases in illegal fishing above the limits .
In view of the fact that 88 % of the fish population is fished beyond maximum sustainable levels and that up to 80 % of the total catch is discarded , there is a need to set limits that will allow fish populations to regenerate , thereby increasing fish catches dramatically in the future , while maintaining sustainability .
The rapporteur correctly points out that , as a result of the equilibrium between producers and buyers being disrupted through the entry of an intermediary - the retail chains - fish prices are falling , which puts the situation in the fishing sector even more at risk .
The submitted report takes account of all three previously mentioned core principles of fishing and puts forward specific solutions for sustainability , and it is therefore a good start to the preservation of fishing for all of us .
I would like to congratulate Mrs Patrão Neves on her work and on the report that has now been voted upon .
The topic of fisheries is obviously a sensitive issue for the Portuguese , as we have several fishing communities , and it is an absolutely crucial issue for the Democratic and Social Centre - People 's Party ( CDS-PP ) .
I believe that we need a new common fisheries policy ( CFP ) regulation that is more efficient and better tailored to the situation in the respective territories .
I therefore welcome the intention to focus on the principles of regionalisation and subsidiarity , thus giving greater autonomy to the Member States and allowing more flexibility for the CFP .
At the same time , given that environmental challenges cause serious problems for fishery resources , I believe that it is crucial for the new CFP to allow ecologically sustainable and economically viable fishing .
We are not indifferent to the problems faced by fishermen , and we recommend that the new CFP provides adequate protection for the fishing capacity of communities that are dependent on fishing .
I also think it is vital that the new CFP ensures the quality of fish , and in sufficient quantities for people to maintain a fish-rich diet , which we now know to be well balanced and beneficial for a healthy life .
I will be following the future reform of the CFP with interest and particular attention , and I will always defend Portuguese interests in this strategic sector .
in writing . - On a practical level I welcome the proposed developments for the long-term protection of marine resources , for both environmental and economic purposes ; the updating of fishing technologies , and the emphasis it places on the need for professional qualifications within the sector .
In particular , I am pleased with the recommendation that any mandatory changes be introduced gradually and requiring an initial transitional period , in order to allow sufficient time for the industry , and especially individual fishermen , to cope with the extra expense in an already difficult industry .
However , although I acknowledge that the report outlines the difference in treatment to be afforded to high-sea fisheries and smaller-scale fisheries , it is lamentable that any more expense be imposed upon the latter particularly .
Fishing is not just an economic activity , it is both social and cultural , and the way of life of the small fisherman needs to be preserved .
Their livelihood has , up until now , depended on the historic claim his local community held on its coast 's fishing rights .
In light of this , we should not lose sight of the promise made in the report , ' to guarantee ( people living from fishing ) an equitable standard of living . '
in writing . - It is now widely accepted that the 2002 reform of the common fisheries policy has failed miserably and the situation in the fishing industry continues to deteriorate rather than get better .
The CFP has become a bureaucratic nightmare with over regulation and micro-management plaguing the industry while achieving little in the way of positive outcomes .
The imminent reform of the CFP presents an opportunity to take the policy in a new direction , away from excessive bureaucracy , and deliver on all the aspects which it should - environmentally , socially and economically .
The core goal of a reformed CFP must be to ensure that fishermen can earn a decent livelihood while also achieving environmental sustainability .
The challenge is to formulate a common fisheries policy which maintains jobs and fish stocks at the same time .
A reformed CFP should do away with centralised overregulation from Brussels and instead focus on ideas such as how stakeholders can deal with the day to day management of stocks locally .
The Green Paper on the common fisheries policy tears to shreds both the European Commission and the Member States .
It is emphatic proof that not all projects and reforms carried out within the Union are successful .
We should , therefore , draw the right conclusions with regard to both institutional and practical solutions .
One of the fundamental mistakes of the 2002 reform was excessive centralisation .
The diversity and specific nature of different regions of the European Union should oblige us to regionalise .
The European Commission must not treat the Baltic Sea on a par with the Atlantic or the Mediterranean Sea .
Regionalisation of fisheries policy should go hand in hand with specific measures relating to social and economic matters .
From the point of view of the people who live in areas which are dependent on fishing , the most important course of action is economic and social diversification and restructuring , including the creation of new jobs outwith the fishing sector .
The fact that it is not possible to increase catches and employment in the Baltic fishing sector should lead to the above measures being put into effect .
This is something which meets social expectations and needs .
Research shows that two-thirds of European fish stocks are under threat , including very well-known species such as sole , plaice and cod .
Analyses carried out by the WWF say openly that if specific changes are not introduced , the breeding population of Mediterranean tuna and many other species will disappear by 2012 .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , for decades now , the European Union 's common fisheries policy has controlled fishing within the Community and in the territorial waters of third countries .
Unfortunately , it is one of the EU 's most unsuccessful policy areas , and has led to a situation that could be described as a crisis , and for good reason .
The situation regarding fish stocks is extremely worrying : two thirds of the EU 's commercially exploitable fish stocks have plummeted .
Falling profitability and hugely depleted shoals mean that the fishing industry is in big trouble .
Excessive fishing quotas and illegal fishing are wiping out fish stocks at an alarming rate .
The crisis is due to the fact that , for a long time now , there has been complete indifference to the problems that have accumulated owing to overfishing and illegal fishing .
Furthermore , destructive fishing methods are also devastating the rest of the marine environment .
Bottom trawling is one of the most harmful methods .
The EU must take the crisis in fish stocks seriously .
There is also a close link here to the external perspective , because the Union imports almost a third of the fish it sells from outside .
A crucial component of the new common fisheries policy will be to put the agreements we have with our fishing partners on a more sustainable basis .
The key reforms must be to tackle overcapacity with respect to fishing vessels and more effective monitoring to root out illegal fishing .
The main building blocks of the reform of the fisheries policy , as proposed by the Commission in its Green Paper , must be making the ecosystem the starting point , and the precautionary principle .
The main focus of the policy must be the genuinely sustainable fishing of each fish species , and to accomplish this , each nation needs to have its own management and protection strategy .
If necessary , the Union must also be prepared to adopt solutions to ensure the recovery of stocks by introducing a complete ban on fishing and the trade in fish .
The Green Paper on the reform of the common fisheries policy ( CFP ) is an opportunity to review this European policy in its various aspects ( economic , social and environmental ) , redefining new approaches aimed at resolving the problems that persist in this sector .
The reform of the CFP has particular emphasis on the outermost regions , where fisheries are extremely important to local development and people 's livelihoods .
The report on the Green Paper insists on reforms that I believe to be necessary for better implementation of this policy on a regional level , particularly decentralisation of fisheries management to take account of the specific features of each region and to link in the sustainability of the sector through the preservation of species .
In Madeira , there is an urgent need to modernise boats and to promote measures to ensure the economic viability of fishing .
I would reiterate that greater efficiency in the management of fishery resources and a financial support strategy for workers in this sector are essential priorities within this reform , and they must be implemented at a regional level .
The reform of the common fisheries policy marks a new stage in the development of the sector , with more active participation by all those involved at a national , regional and industry level .
Railway safety , including the European signalling system ( debate )
The next item is the Commission statement on railway safety , including the European signalling system .
Vice-President of the Commission . - Mr President , the train accident in Buizingen on Monday , 15 February 2010 was a shocking tragedy .
I understand that in the aftermath of this serious accident , several technical and political questions concerning rail safety can be asked .
First of all , my thoughts are with the victims of this tragedy and their relatives .
It is always difficult to find words of consolation for these sad occasions and silence is sometimes more telling .
The causes of the accident are not yet fully known and the technical investigation has been launched in accordance with the provisions of the EU Safety Directive .
It is the responsibility of the Belgian investigation body to carry this out .
It should be accomplished independently of any judicial inquiry .
The objective of the technical investigation is not to apportion blame and liability , but rather to identify causes with a view to improving railway safety and the prevention of accidents .
The Belgian investigation body has asked the European Railway Agency to support it in its investigation .
Two investigators from the agency joined the Belgian team in charge of the investigation just a few hours after the accident occurred .
I would like to stress that , since the causes of the accident have not yet been clarified , it is inappropriate to draw conclusions .
Of course , I am prepared to clarify some issues , which were raised in the aftermath of this tragedy , and I will share with you my understanding of the situation .
As is too often the case when rail accidents happen , remarks alleging a link between European rules or regulations and the accident are made .
I would first like to be very clear on the opening-up of the market .
Alongside the opening-up of the rail freight sector to competition and the establishment of requirements to separate the activities of infrastructure managers and railway undertakings , a stringent regulatory framework has been introduced governing rail safety and interoperability .
We want to ensure that the high level of rail safety is maintained , while recognising the procedures and methods specific to each Member State in this area .
The European Railway Agency produces reports at regular intervals on the safety of the European network and monitors the development of the situation in the Member States .
Indicators demonstrate that the opening up of the rail sector to competition has in no way had a negative impact on railway safety .
Let me say very clearly that any proposition linking rail safety levels to the opening-up of the rail market is , in my view , just an excuse to steer the debate away from the true causes of the accident .
The question of the coexistence of national and European train control systems can be put in these terms .
More than 20 different national systems are used in Europe today to ensure the safe movement of trains .
These systems developed at national level consist of a trackside component and an onboard component .
The trackside component sends information to a computer in the train , and the computer applies the brakes when a dangerous situation is detected .
For the systems to work , trains and lines must therefore be equipped with a compatible system .
Levels of safety and performance of the various national automatic train protection systems are different , as are the rules concerning equipment of lines and locomotives in these national systems .
The incompatibility of the different national systems poses a major problem for international trains because either locomotives have to be changed at each border or they have to be equipped with as many onboard systems as there are systems on the tracks that they will run on .
There are even cases where different national systems coexist in one single country .
The Thalys , for example , has to be equipped with seven different national systems to run in four countries .
For this reason , a single system for use at European level has been designed and developed and is currently being installed on major international lines and trains in Europe .
The system is known as ERTMS - European Rail Traffic Management System .
As regards the timing , we can say that most of the national systems were developed in the early 1980s but their deployment is a long and costly process .
In most countries , only part of the national networks and locomotives are equipped today and this partial equipment took approximately 20 years .
The ERTMS specifications have been available since 2000 .
A number of pilot projects were carried out between 2000 and 2005 .
Since 2005 , several ERTMS-equipped lines have been put into service .
At present , 10 Member States have lines with ERTMS and there are ongoing projects in almost all Member States .
In Belgium , for example , the line between Aachen and Liège is equipped , and ICT trains running on this line are equipped as well .
ERTMS was created primarily with a view to promoting interoperability . That means the possibility for locomotives to cross borders , but it is also recognised as a system offering an advantage in terms of increased safety .
The system is fully operational today but , due to the long time needed to install it on board trains and the long lines , existing national systems will continue to coexist with ERTMS along the lines .
Third countries like Taiwan , to give just one example , have also chosen ERTMS , and not just for operability reasons .
Taiwan invested in ERTMS simply because the system is the best system available on the market today .
Several questions were asked about comparing the situation between Member States .
It is quite difficult and not very useful to establish a ranking of the Member States and make meaningful comparisons .
It all depends on the choice of indicators , the reference period and the quality of the data reported .
One or two serious accidents can also have a significant impact on whatever type of ranking we may have .
Overall data show that the Belgian performance is average .
It is true , however , that Belgium lags behind the European average in terms of tracks equipped with an automatic train protection system , be it the national or the European one .
Mr President , Mr Kallas , I would like to thank you for your explanations .
Against the background of the accident in Buizingen it is , of course , important for us to show respect towards the victims and also towards the investigation .
For this reason , we must not jump to conclusions about the accident and , more significantly , we must not begin assigning blame .
I felt that the Commission acted correctly in strongly rejecting the accusation by the Belgian National Railways that the European Rail Traffic Management System has taken too long to develop .
We know that safety remains a national priority and that this will continue to be the case .
At a European level , we - and this includes both the Commission and Parliament - have always regretted the fact that the rail companies do not give higher priority to safety and to interoperability between the different systems in Europe .
After accidents have occurred , new proposals are often made in a political context .
I must say that in this case , everything was in place , both the legislation and the technology .
The only thing which perhaps was lacking was the will to make the technology a high priority .
Since the middle of the 1990s , the technology has been available to enable the safe transition between the European system and the advanced Belgian system , in other words , the so-called TBL 1 + system .
There has been no lack of time or of technical facilities .
The future is what is important to me and I would like to emphasise the following points .
Firstly , we must not , under any circumstances , cut back on training in the rail industry .
That has not been , nor will it be , one of the EU 's obligations .
The railways have highly skilled staff and this must remain the case in future .
Secondly , we need definite , binding conversion plans from the rail companies and the countries .
Leaving everything to goodwill is no longer sufficient .
We need a precise timetable and we will soon have the opportunity in Parliament to find out about specific objectives .
My third proposal is that passengers should also have the right to know whether the stretch of track and the rolling stock that they travel on meet the highest safety standards .
This is the minimum level of information which must be made available to passengers in future .
We also need to investigate how we can put in place a mandatory requirement to do this .
To begin with , speaking on behalf of the Group of the Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats in the European Parliament , I , too , wish to express my heartfelt sympathy for the victims of the Buizingen rail disaster and their families and friends .
We do have to await the results of the investigation before drawing real , detailed conclusions , of course , but that does not change the fact that railway safety must remain a permanent area of attention at all levels , including the European level , and that we must therefore evaluate , improve , supplement and adjust safety policy on a regular basis .
I should like to join my fellow Member and also you , Commissioner , in making quite clear our regret that a number of individuals with significant responsibilities in Belgium have sought to pass responsibility for the accident on to Europe or have at least given that impression .
The delay in the development of the European Rail Traffic Management System ( ERTMS ) has been cited in particular as a reason why now , in 2010 , only a handful of locomotives in Belgium are equipped with the automatic stop system .
Ladies and gentlemen , on the other hand , let us make one thing clear , and let us be frank about this : the development of this good idea - a single signalling system to replace the 20 separate systems - has taken longer than hoped or expected .
This , of course , is attributable to the technical complexity and to the fact that agreement on a standard has to be reached among a very large number of countries , namely 27 , although at the time , there were a couple fewer .
Of course , there are also associated budgetary consequences .
Yet , as you rightly said , this has not stopped a single Member State from developing its own system or starting to use a kind of embryonic version of ERTMS at an early stage .
I take the view that we do need to look ahead now and ask ourselves how we can contribute to safer railways .
I believe we can make this contribution on several fronts at European level , too .
We can do so , firstly , thanks to the further development of ERTMS .
Such a development plan exists .
In 2009 , we earmarked EUR 240 million from the budget for trans-European transport networks ( TEN-T ) in order to help Member States out with this .
Secondly , however , and I think that this is an important task for the Commission and the European Railway Agency , we must also monitor whether existing European safety legislation is being implemented in practice in the field .
I would cite the example of Directive 2004 / 49 / EC on safety on the Community 's railways .
This lays down , among other things , that a safety authority is to be established in each Member State , which must be independent from the railway undertakings and the infrastructure manager , and whose tasks include monitoring , encouraging and enforcing railway safety and developing a regulatory framework .
I have the feeling , ladies and gentlemen , that this is not working particularly well in Belgium , and I think that you should organise a kind of audit to look into whether Member States do indeed have the capacity to guarantee this safety proactively in their national rail systems .
That is a task I should like to entrust to you .
I , too , wish to express my sympathy for the victims on behalf of my group , and I , too , wish to await the results of the investigation , of course .
I hope this is carried out as quickly as possible , but also as thoroughly as possible .
In my country , a number of questions have been raised as to the nature of Europe 's approach to the railways .
I have to be honest with you : I am shocked that some people have accused us of neglecting safety .
I was Parliament 's rapporteur on the Railway Safety Directive to which Mr El Khadraoui has just referred , and I am proud of the work we did back then .
We told ourselves that we needed to be very demanding as regards safety in all Member States and we needed to establish a European framework for this and to lay down requirements .
We got this past the Member States with very great difficulty .
I note - and Mr El Khadraoui rightly mentioned this - that in some countries , unfortunately , including my own , the implementation of this directive at national level is in fact poorly organised .
I hope you take another good look at this , Commissioner .
Perhaps this House , too , should take another look at the directive and tighten up the framework , as Mr Grosch said .
It is not true that we are neglecting safety , therefore ; the reverse is true .
Secondly , the Regulation on passengers ' rights contains a paragraph we hoped would never be needed : it concerns advance payments for people killed or injured in rail accidents .
I welcome the announcement by the National Railway Company of Belgium ( SNCB ) that it will be using this system and making advance payments .
Indeed , there was a time when this would not have been so .
Some people have said that opening up the market has made the railways unsafe .
I wish to contradict this in the strongest terms .
It is not true , as a look at the latest European Railway Agency data , from 2008 , will demonstrate .
The best-performing countries in 2008 were the United Kingdom and the Netherlands , two countries that have opened up their markets .
I also think attention should be paid to the people , to the railway workers on the ground : train drivers , station staff , administrators .
We should be taking another look at their situation and ensuring that safety is the prime consideration in not only their training but also the organisation of their work and the whole corporate culture .
By way of conclusion , Mr President , I should like to say that we must not lose sight of the fact that the railways are still among the safest means of transport around .
Mr President , Commissioner , I , too , believe that last week 's tragic accident is the worst rail disaster to have hit Belgium since 2001 , when I myself held the post of Minister for Mobility and Transport .
Once again , of course , my thoughts are with our colleague , Claudia Candeago , and also with all the other victims of this tragedy , their loved ones , and all the grieving railway workers .
I shall refrain from drawing any conclusions , just as those who have spoken before me have done .
The investigation is under way , and we shall not speculate on its results .
However , it is clear that , in Belgium 's case , it is regrettable that the railways should have taken so long to equip themselves with an automatic train protection system , as some have already mentioned .
When I heard , in the wake of the disaster , that , whilst budgetary reasons could not be cited , the delays in the development of European interoperability standards were being called into question as a means of explaining this accident , I found it unacceptable and I immediately felt that Europe was at the centre of groundless accusations .
The European Rail Traffic Management System ( ERTMS ) does , in fact , offer companies an opportunity to invest in safety in a coordinated and interoperable manner .
We must rid ourselves of the countless national standards that curb development and competitiveness , at a time when the European Train Control System ( ETCS ) is evolving .
It is , of course , evolving , and it will continue to evolve .
This is what it takes to preserve a very high level of technology .
Moreover , I have no doubt that , in the next five or 10 years , there will be many more developments to come .
It must be said that such accidents , however exceptional , remind us that there is always room for improvement where safety is concerned , and I would like to make some proposals in this regard .
Firstly , as you know , Commissioner , we are currently discussing trans-European transport networks , their conditions and their criteria .
I believe that , when it comes to the European networks , deployment of the ERTMS throughout Europe could actually become a priority .
I also believe that , in this context , we should set deadlines concerning , in particular , the resources with which every single country and network will have to be equipped .
Lastly , I believe that we must prioritise safety over liberalisation of the markets by obliging new operators running trains on various national networks to adapt a while longer to the automatic protection system that exists on these networks and thus to equip their trains with the relevant receivers and cabin equipment .
To conclude , I believe that the European Railway Agency could , for its part , also provide invaluable support for a more effective integration of the national safety authorities .
Such integration would make it possible , for example , for the equipment to be type-approved .
( The President cut off the speaker )
The investigation into the causes of the rail accident in Buizingen has yet to be completed , and so I cannot comment on it , but I have come to the following conclusion .
When there is a train crash in the United Kingdom , people are quick to attribute it to the privatisation of the railways .
The Belgian railways ( SNCB ) receive relatively the highest subsidy in the whole of the European Union .
Belgium gives 32 euro cents per passenger / kilometre to its railways .
France comes second with 24 euro cents .
The Netherlands gives 15 euro cents and the UK 4 euro cents .
Despite all these subsidies , the SNCB still has debts of EUR 10 billion .
Where does the money go ?
When I look at the infrastructure of the SNCB , the neglect is striking .
Everything is old and worn out .
Could it be that the safety system is also neglected from time to time ?
Perhaps too much money is being channelled to staff pay owing to the power of the trade unions .
In Belgium , the railways are a socialist domain and are badly run .
Indeed , these are questions that need to be asked , as the SNCB can hardly use lack of money as an excuse !

Mr President , when , in November , Mr Simpson declared in this House : ' even though the European rail system is very safe and progress has been made over the last few years thanks to the liberalisation of the market ' , I nearly choked .
Nevertheless , he followed this up with : ' recent fatal accidents have raised questions with regard to safety ' .
Since the Buizingen accident , its terrible human death toll and the serious physical and psychological suffering that it has caused have served as a powerful reminder that it is high time we launched a serious debate on rail safety .
Let us dismiss straight away the idea that all accidents are , by nature , unforeseeable .
The main factor in the lack of safety across Europe 's rail networks is a direct consequence of the separation between the management of our rail infrastructure and the management of our rolling stock .
This separation - it must be said forcefully here - has been imposed by the Commission against the better judgment of railway workers so that the rail sector can be opened up to competition .
It greatly increases the likelihood of accidents .
Because of this separation , the maintenance of the European rail network is being sacrificed for the sake of the highest profits .
You may try to buy some time by proposing the use of the best modern-day techniques as the only option for solving the problems .
Ultimately , however , it is a different rail policy that we need in Europe .
If , each year , there are fewer railway workers , less maintenance , less investment and less training , it is inevitable that we will have to address the issue of accidents once again and pay mournful tributes .
In order to ensure genuine rail safety , the Union has to turn the page on competition so as to open that of cooperation .
To conclude , ladies and gentlemen , upon leaving this debate , none of us will be able to ignore our responsibilities any longer .
For my part , I refuse to be a party to malicious intent .
Without change ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
( NL ) I should like to start by simply noting that the Belgian tax burden is one of the world 's highest , yet in that ungovernable country , the taxpayers - particularly those in Flanders - obtain very little in return for their money .
The rail system is a perfect illustration of this .
It is hopelessly outdated and is characterised by frequent and long delays and by overcrowded carriages during peak hours .
The management of the Belgian railways ( SNCB ) is highly politicised and inefficient , and a typical feature of Belgian politics is that , when something goes wrong , no one is ever responsible for anything at all .
In 2001 , a train crash occurred in Pécrot that was similar to last week 's in Buizingen .
Nine years ago , everyone thought serious action would be taken to improve the safety system ; yet this did not happen .
Pending the introduction of the European Train Control System ( ETCS ) , Belgium developed its own system , but this came far too late and was extremely inadequate .
The lesson we must learn from this is that more needs to be invested in safety and that the various existing systems need to be better geared to one another .
Then , if effective interoperability proves impossible to achieve , maximum encouragement must be given to the changeover to the European ETCS , as it is not healthy for a Thalys train running between Paris and Amsterdam , for example , to have no less than seven different safety systems .
( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the collision between two commuter trains in Brussels , which resulted in this dreadful accident , has deeply shocked all of us .
Our thoughts are with the families and friends of the victims .
After disasters of this kind , people 's first response is often to find someone to blame .
However , the European Union , the Commission and the safety provisions which we introduced in Directive 2004 / 49 must not be made into the scapegoat in this case .
On the other hand , the important question is , of course , whether we should tighten up the safety provisions .
The investigations into this rail accident have not yet been completed and , therefore , we cannot yet expect any clear results .
The major question that we must ask ourselves is whether it would have been possible to avoid this accident .
We cannot exclude human error or technical failures and therefore both of these things play a role in rail safety .
All rail operators , both state-owned and private , have an obligation to provide the necessary level of safety .
The national rail companies must ensure that they are complying with the appropriate safety standards .
I do not want to give any lectures from a German point of view in this situation .
I simply want to say that in Germany , we have attempted to implement the directive in its entirety .
Wherever there is the possibility of human error , technical systems must be able to intervene .
I remember the dead man 's handle which automatically applied the brakes if the handle was not pressed for a minute .
If a train passes a red stop signal , the brakes are also automatically applied .
We must have systems of this kind in place .
The European Train Control System must be implemented so that we have some influence over these things from the outside .
The members of the Committee on Transport and Tourism will work together to carry out the necessary evaluations and also to draw the necessary conclusions with regard to the safety provisions .
( FR ) Mr President , the rail disaster in Buizingen , near Brussels , has claimed 18 victims and left more than 160 injured .
Obviously , our thoughts are first and foremost with the families .
The causes of the accident are still unknown - an investigation is under way - and we must think about undertaking an assessment of rail safety in Europe , on a Member State-by-Member State basis .
This assessment must focus , of course , on the safety systems , on the state of their application , on their interoperability and on their effectiveness .
However , this assessment of the level of safety of the European rail networks must be understood in a broad sense and , in particular , must incorporate an assessment of the working conditions of railway employees , since the latter are the best guarantors of safety .
I therefore call on the Commission to undertake an assessment of the safety of Europe 's rail networks by means of a global approach that takes the launch of the rail liberalisation process as its starting point .
One thing is clear : the time has come to carry out a taboo-free assessment of the practical results of these policies aimed at liberalising and dismantling public services .
What added value have they brought ?
Who has benefited from them ?
Who has suffered because of them ?
The aim is to compare the implementation of the European safety and signalling standards with working conditions from the moment when this liberalisation of the rail sector within each Member States came into effect .
The Commission must therefore consider the role of public services in more general terms .
The Parti Socialiste - the party to which I belong - has long been calling for positive action from the European Union to protect and develop public services .
This is the idea behind the introduction of a framework directive on services of general interest .
The latter would guarantee public services a stable legislative framework and adequate funding in compliance with the principles of universality and equality of access .
( NL ) I should like to put a question to Mr Tarabella , whom I otherwise hold in high personal regard .
Surely he cannot disregard the fact that the Belgian railways ( SNCB ) receive the highest subsidy in Europe ?
He cannot blame liberalisation , therefore , as passenger transport has not been liberalised , nor can he come up with all kinds of other excuses .
I should also point out that he speaks on behalf of the Belgian francophone Socialist Party ( PS ) , the party that has a good deal of control over the SNCB via the trade unions .
If the politicised rail system ran the railways better , these things would not happen .
( FR ) Mr President , all I would say in response to Mr Eppink is that this is not an electoral platform .
A disaster has occurred and has claimed victims - others have occurred in the past - and it is only natural that one should question its causes .
The investigations are under way ; they must be allowed to run their course .
However , there is one factor that must never be ignored , and that is the human factor .
In any liberalisation - I know that you support liberalisation , I support it far less , and indeed I oppose it where public services are concerned - the human factor is overlooked .
Terrible pressure is put on members of staff , who work for hours on end or , in any case , for longer periods of time and without rest .
As a train driver , one is responsible for passenger safety .
Therefore , I believe it is important to ask about working conditions and any changes in those conditions .
I believe that this is an important point .
Mr President , the appalling train crash near Halle was a dreadful tragedy for the victims , their families , work colleagues and friends .
The important thing now is to draw the necessary lessons from this tragedy , to avoid future casualties .
In this , it is crucial that the voice of railway workers is clearly heard and heeded in making rail travel safe for both workers and passengers .
It is indeed outrageous to hear a British Tory , I take it , a Member of this Parliament , malign and slander Belgian railway workers in the course of his contribution when it is quite clear that the policies of neoliberalisation and deregulation have done enormous damage to our railway system as a public facility .
There is , in fact , enormous frustration among Belgian railway workers .
This was clear from spontaneous strikes among those workers in the days after this tragedy , in response to it .
This is the third serious incident in Belgium in nine months .
After a previous tragedy in Belgium in 2001 , comprehensive safety measures were promised but have not been implemented .
The reality is that workers on the Belgian railways are under continuous pressure to work longer , with journeys being extended and fewer breaks , which means less safety .
Of course , the perfidious policy of the EU Commission of liberalisation and privatisation will threaten safety further .
It means that the profits of major transport companies come first .
It is clear that the best structure to guarantee safety is to maintain the rail infrastructure in public ownership with democratic control and necessary investment .
( DE ) Mr President , I would also like to express my condolences to the families involved .
However , it will be of little consolation to those affected - the mourning families and the seriously injured - if we continue to emphasise that the railway is the safest form of transport and that the number of accidents is very low compared with those on the roads .
Of course , the question of the circumstances arises .
How could a disaster of this kind occur ?
However , as has already been said , this question must be dealt with by the technical experts and later by the courts .
The question we have to answer is as follows : what has gone wrong in the process of creating a common European rail market ?
And secondly , how can we prevent further accidents using all the means available to us ?
Every accident is one too many .
As a former railway employee , I have experienced the changes myself .
I would like to mention some of the problems which , to a certain extent , have an impact on safety .
At the beginning of the 1990s , instead of introducing competition on the railways , we should first have started a process of technical harmonisation .
We should have overcome all the problems that Mr Kallas mentioned in the 1990s .
We should only have opened up the market to competition on the basis of technical harmonisation .
The fragmentation of the companies has resulted in many players being involved in the rail system and this is a system which only functions properly when it is operated as a single entity .
Therefore , in my opinion , the Member States , the rail companies , the infrastructure operators and also the Commission , which , as has already been said , introduced directives and regulations without carrying out an interim evaluation , share the responsibility for the most recent accidents .
The evaluation was only completed a short time ago .
The rail companies have made the mistake of choosing the wrong strategy and of waiting too long for a European system .
They have constantly attempted to reduce costs , have employed staff without the necessary level of skills , as already mentioned , and they have also invested too little .
There are three points that I would like to highlight .
The funding must be increased immediately in order to speed up the planned modernisation programme .
( The President cut off the speaker )
( RO ) In general , rail transport is safer , faster and causes less pollution than road transport .
However , in 2007 , roughly 2 600 people were victims of rail accidents , while last year , more rail accidents occurred involving passenger and freight trains .
The recent rail accident in Belgium , with a casualty list of 20 dead and more than 120 injured , refocuses our attention in a shocking way on the importance of rail transport safety .
Unfortunately , the economic and financial crisis has exacerbated the financial difficulties facing both operators and administrators involved in the rail transport infrastructure .
It is a major concern that the lack of specialist staff and financial resources for implementing the ERTMS is one of the possible causes of the accident , while thousands of rail workers are losing their jobs .
I call on Member States and the Commission to take the necessary measures in order to :
1. modernise the rail infrastructure and existing rolling stock to guarantee efficient and safe rail transport ,
2. give priority to the investments required for rail transport safety and security , and
3. develop new rail transport infrastructures and implement the ERTMS .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the recent rail disasters that have rocked Europe - in Belgium today , in Italy yesterday - oblige us to consider the flaws in the system and the measures suitable for improving the services in safety terms .
For example , it is astonishing to think that the European Union launched an appropriate system for monitoring rail traffic - the ERTMS - back in 2000 , and that , in spite of this , 10 years later , the system has been adopted by only a very few Member States .
Even today , there are more than 20 different rail safety systems on EU territory , and it is clear how this can cause problems , particularly on international stretches of line .
It is true that adapting the rail infrastructure and the rolling stock of the European system will involve technical and economic assessments and tasks , which will inevitably have to be managed by companies in the sector .
However , we cannot fail to observe that European legislation does not set a date by which the national lines must be adapted to the ERTMS system and that it gives the Member States the power to determine the equipment needs of their rolling stock .
It would be better to impose and to set dates , to incentivise by means of investments or , better still , to withdraw investment from those who fail to adapt to the infrastructure projects or who purchase rolling stock that does not use these systems .
The other argument is that interoperability and the completion of the internal market should not be slowed down .
Today , we have an independent national safety agency , which should verify the adoption of the appropriate safety systems .
Well , it should be stipulated that safety certificates must be obtained before operating licences can be granted .
Furthermore , I would stress that , looking ahead to the prospect of a free common rail market , the European Railway Agency 's inspection powers must be strengthened at central level .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , following the recent rail accident in Brussels , which many Members have mentioned , the spotlight has once again been on the safety of the railways .
Directive 2004 / 49 / EC on safety of the railways in general stipulates that railway undertakings and infrastructure managers should bear the full responsibility for the safety of the system , each for their own part .
In the specific case of the accident that occurred in Belgium , human error seems to have been the cause .
We shall , of course , await the investigations .
It would appear , however , that the train was not fitted with an automatic braking system .
Is the Commission aware of which networks and which trains within the Member States are not fitted with this safety device ?
Moreover , does it intend to draft a legislative proposal so as to ensure that the Union 's entire network is fitted with this system ?
( PL ) Mr President , first of all , I would like to express my sympathy to the victims ' families .
I would like to talk about something which seems to me to be very important , and which has not been said here .
There is a debate here which , in many ways , is justified .
I , too , have my own very clear views on the matter .
I think a deregulated market is significantly better than a market dominated by state-owned firms , but I would like to talk about something which is important in the context of this discussion .
This dispute is not only about whether a firm is state-owned or privately-owned ; it is also about whether the market is a free market or a restricted , regulated market , which often means , in fact , that in many Member States , there is a monopoly held by a single state-owned firm .
There are so many railway systems , and they are not only different in each Member State , but in many cases , different systems are in use in a single Member State , and the systems we are talking about are often a protectionist administrative barrier put up only to protect the monopoly firm in the national market .
In many cases , certain equipment and locomotives are not allowed , simply to limit the possibility of a competitor from another country or a private competitor from entering the market .
The consequence of this is the establishment of so many different systems and the emergence of safety problems .
If you looked at the allocation of structural funds for infrastructure projects in new Member States , you would see that in those countries , there is practically no money for railway infrastructure .
The administrators who are supposed to fill in applications and apply for money are not in the least interested in this .
We are dealing with a model in which many Member States do not want anything to change in their railways , so that competition coming from other countries or the private market , for example , will not be in a good position .
It is then safety and competitiveness which suffer because of this .
( NL ) The tragic accident in Buizingen obliges all of us - Europe included - to open an investigation .
This tragedy cost the lives of 18 people , and we owe it to those victims to learn lessons from the disaster in the short term and to ensure that safety is guaranteed on Belgian and European railway lines .
As we know , and you have already said , it is not Europe 's fault that the automatic stop system has yet to be fully introduced in Belgium .
Yet this does not mean that Europe is not now required to act ; quite the reverse .
We expressly call for the European Commission , too , to now carry out an evaluation , which must provide the answers to several very specific questions .
For example , as you know , we have obliged railway companies - including private firms - to fully equip their trains with the new European Train Control System ( ETCS ) as of 2013 , yet we already know that Europe 's railway lines will not have been equipped with that system by then .
I wish to cite two figures .
At the present time , Commissioner , only 2 800 kilometres of railway in the whole of Europe has been equipped with this new European safety system .
The Belgian rail network alone , with its 3 400 kilometres , is larger than that .
It is clear , therefore , that we in Europe are not ready for this and that therefore our trains will be unable , or insufficiently able , to communicate with these new signalling installations .
This necessitates a thorough evaluation .
Commissioner , we must also dare to investigate whether the forthcoming competition between railway companies has maybe increased the pressure on staff .
Should we perhaps consider introducing driving hours and rest periods for train drivers at European level , as we did for lorry drivers ?
In short , this accident obliges the European Union to do some soul-searching and carry out an evaluation , and there must also be the readiness and political will to make adjustments if necessary .
( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , two locomotives were involved in this dreadful accident which were operated by the SNCB , the Belgian National Railways , on a state rail network .
There is no competition on the rail passenger transport market in Belgium .
Therefore , this has nothing to do with competition or with the opening up of the network .
It is all about unsatisfactory safety standards .
Mr Grosch has already pointed out that the technology for stopping a train automatically when it passes a red signal has been in existence for more than 20 years .
The question is : why was it not installed ?
This also has nothing to do with the European Rail Traffic Management System ( ERTMS ) .
I was the rapporteur for the ERTMS .
It represents a vision of the future , but it does not absolve the Member States from the responsibility of putting in place safety measures which are already available on a national level .
That is a task for the individual countries .
Therefore , the question we must ask is why Belgium did not invest in this safety system over the last 20 years .
If they had built a motorway that was shorter by one or two kilometres , they would have had twice or three times the money needed to install these safety systems and avoid accidents like this one .
This was not the first time that a train has passed a red signal .
It was simply the first time that this has led to such a dreadful accident .
Vice-President of the Commission . - Mr President , of course , this discussion , now initiated by the tragic accident in Belgium , will be part of our overall discussion on railway safety and the development of transport in Europe .
The Commission is preparing a White Paper on the future of transport which takes serious consideration of all safety and security aspects of all modes of transport , including railways - which is , as was mentioned many times , still one of the safest modes of transport .
It is also important that we now discuss the railway package - the ' first recast ' of the railway package - and we will definitely work on this and consider it .
But I would just like to make some factual remarks .
The European Rail Traffic Management System ( ERTMS ) has been designed with the intention to have interoperability of railways .
It is obviously a good system which has very serious safety elements .
However , safety still remains the responsibility of Member States , whatever system is used .
But the ERTMS is progressing very well .
Transport TEN-T Networks : again we will discuss it soon .
This particular project deals with the deployment of the traffic management system .
By 2020 , 20 000 kilometres of railways will use this system in Europe , including Belgium .
This is ongoing ; but in railways , things take time and investments are large and 85 % of the TEN-T Network money is used especially to improve the railways , including the ERTMS .
Of course , I would be very happy if , with the support of the European Parliament , we could increase the funding of investments to transport networks .
That will be very important .
But again , of course , the human factor is always relevant .
And as we are talking about safety standards , there is one standard - which is the red light - that means that you must stop .
That standard has existed since the 19th century .
So if we are now saying that there will be a 100 % sure braking system which avoids human error - it is not true .
There is always some small possibility for human error .
And human responsibility is very important .
I would like to make one more remark about liberalisation and public services : these are two different things .
Nobody is stopping states from offering good public services , even in the framework of liberalisation .
It is allowed by European rules to provide support - it is allowed by states - and this liberalisation does not exclude good public services .
The debate is closed .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
in writing . - ( DE ) The tragic train accident in Belgium has attracted public attention to safety on the railways .
The safety of the rolling stock must be improved , as well as the safety of the signalling systems .
There are many completely outdated goods wagons , in particular , on the railways in Europe .
The accident in Italy last year demonstrated the possible consequences of this .
Unfortunately the EU has so far done very little to oblige freight operators to bring their rolling stock up to an acceptable safety standard .
It is important to remember that hazardous goods are also transported by rail , which could have devastating consequences in the event of an accident .
Against this background , I am calling for higher safety standards on the railways .
The tragedy that plunged Belgium into its present state of mourning undoubtedly occurred for reasons to do with the specific characteristics of that country , as many of our Flemish fellow Members have emphasised today .
It will be up to the investigation to determine the extent to which those characteristics were responsible for the tragedy .
However , it did have one particular , fundamental cause : the liberalisation of rail transport and the separation of the management of the network from that of rail transport itself .
Therefore , the network , its quality and its safety have been sacrificed for the sake of the profit of transport operators , which are finding the tolls imposed on them to be too high , just as the replacement and the modernisation of trains is being sacrificed .
The timetables and frequency of services today respond to the logic of profit making , and no longer to the needs of users .
Even though they are used regularly , some lines are being taken out of service because they are not profitable enough .
Others are still in service when common sense suggests that they should not be .
Delays are becoming the norm , including in the case of TGV services .
In your liberal system , citizens who take the train have not become much-valued customers ; they are still user-taxpayers who can be treated like cattle .
As is the case with all the activities that you have liberalised , today we are paying more and more for a service that is becoming increasingly worse , not to say , unfortunately , dangerous .
In view of the tragic accident in Brussels , we are once again faced with the issue that Member States have not yet fully harmonised their rail safety systems , even though Directive 2004 / 49 / EC clearly establishes common standards for safety indicators and fully meets safety requirements overall , including for infrastructure and traffic management .
The major problem is actually a strictly financial issue : the service life of the railway infrastructures and rolling stock , including the signalling systems , is extremely long .
In these circumstances , it would be desirable for Member States to look beyond this financial issue , in spite of the crisis , and to consider accelerating the implementation of interoperable systems , as well as invest more in the railway infrastructure and signalling systems for both the infrastructure and rolling stock .
The savings made by delaying the refurbishment and modernisation of the rolling stock and railway infrastructures can , as in this case , unfortunately result in tragic accidents where not only huge economic and financial losses were sustained , but also the loss of human lives , which is unacceptable .
I would like to convey my every sympathy to the affected families during this difficult time and I hope that this kind of tragedy will never happen again .
( The sitting was suspended at 11.25 and resumed at 11.30 )

Approval of the minutes of the previous sitting
( FR ) Mr President , I shall not go back over a regrettable incident that took place yesterday in this House , an incident unworthy of this Parliament , in which Mr Van Rompuy was insulted .
The President of the European Council is perfectly capable of defending himself , but I will not tolerate someone saying , in this House , that my country is a non-country .
It is a founding country of the European Union and one that will very soon take up the Presidency .
I do not understand how , in this House , one can stoop so low as to say such things , and I demand an apology , Mr President .
( Applause )
Mr President , on a point of order , I would like to speak under the same rule that the lady spoke under , in which she referred to my colleague Nigel Farage .
It is called politics .
You have foisted the Lisbon Treaty on our countries without consulting the people , and when my colleague says something about it and people do not like it , they complain .
It is called politics .
That is what we had in our country before the European Union destroyed our democracy , so get used to listening to opposition in this place .
Mr Batten , the previous statement was a statement made in reply to something said yesterday in Parliament .
That was the rule under which it was made .
It was not a point of order .
Therefore , your point of order was out of place .
1 .
Investment projects in energy infrastructure within the European Community (
2 .
Situation in Ukraine (
Mr President , I would like to table the following amendment : ' calls on the Ukrainian authorities , while recognising that Ukraine has ratified the Council of Europe Framework Convention for the Protection of National Minorities and the European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages , to make greater efforts to reach out to minority communities in Ukraine by further integrating these communities in the political developments of the country and promoting adequately the right to education in minority languages ; ' .
The reason is very simple : we must use the post-electoral context to point out that the Union 's external policy is based on respect for human rights , including minority rights .
Mr President , if my oral amendment is accepted , we do not need a split vote .
It reads as follows :
' calls on the Commission to align closely the National Indicative Programme 2011-13 with the Association Agenda ' .
( DE ) In the original text as it stands at the moment , it is exactly the reverse and that is incorrect .
Mr President , this is only a factual correction .
The new wording is correct .
In the original text , the reference is wrong .
I do not need to read it out , as you have the motion in front of you in writing .
3 .
Parliament 's priorities for the UN Human Rights Council ( Geneva , 1-26 March 2010 ) (
( ES ) Mr President , yesterday , during the debate on the motion for a resolution on which we are about to vote , we expressed our sorrow at the death of Orlando Zapata Tamayo , a 42-year-old builder and Cuban political prisoner , who died after a hunger strike and many years of arbitrary , unjust , inhumane and cruel imprisonment .
In this House yesterday , Commissioner Georgieva strongly and forcefully condemned this event .
I am calling on you , Mr President , on behalf of Parliament , to send your condolences to Mr Zapata 's family , which is being harassed at his funeral .
I would ask you to communicate to the Cuban authorities your strongest condemnation of this completely avoidable death , which the head of the Cuban Commission for Human Rights and Reconciliation , Elizardo Sánchez , described as a murder dressed up as justice .
I hope , Mr President , that this death will lead to reflection among those who , out of good faith or naivety , want to change the Council 's common position , an honourable position that merely serves to link any improvement in relations with the island to human rights and fundamental freedoms , which , as we have seen , continue to be violated .
( Applause )
( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I propose an oral amendment for a split vote on paragraph 10 , concerning the following passage : ' considers that the inclusion of this concept in the Protocol on complementary standards on racism , racial discrimination , xenophobia and all forms of discrimination is not appropriate ' .
A split vote must be held on this central part , because I do not understand why we are combining these things and not making it clear that we must combat discrimination against religious minorities just as vigorously as all other types of discrimination .
It is not acceptable for the measures to combat discrimination against religious minorities to be less strict .
Therefore , we should have the possibility of a split vote .
( DE ) Mr President , I would also like to request a split vote concerning the deletion of the words ' EU positions ' from the last sentence .
The text would then read : ' calls for the recommendations and related observations to be included in EU dialogues with both sides , as well as in multilateral fora ' .
The words ' EU positions ' would be deleted .
I would like to ask for a split vote in this case .
4 .
Beijing + 15 - UN Platform for Action for Gender Equality
5 .
Estimates of revenue and expenditure for Amending Budget 1 / 2010 ( Section I , European Parliament ) (
6 .
Green Paper on reform of the common fisheries policy (
Voting time
Τhe next item is the vote .
( For details of the outcome of the vote : see Minutes )
Communication of Council common positions : see Minutes
Explanations of vote
Τhe next item is the oral explanations of vote .
Mr President , can I ask you for a two-minute break while people are leaving the Chamber ?
Or a one-minute break ?
( HU ) The aim of the regulation is a positive one : to collect information from Member States relating to energy infrastructure , organise it and make it accessible at Community level to economic actors .
It thus - rightly - intervenes in the functioning of the market .
Parliament has , however , accepted an initiative that is diametrically opposed to this , and even goes so far as to regard that as being the political aim of the regulation .
I quote : Any measures proposed or taken at Union level should be neutral and should not amount to interventions in the functioning of the market .
The majority of those sitting in this Parliament have learnt nothing from the global financial and economic crisis .
It continues to stand up for neoliberal dogmas and even in this strategic area , it trusts in the self-regulation of the market .
This is unacceptable , and hence I have voted against the resolution .
( DE ) Mr President , a functioning infrastructure in the European Union is a decisive factor in the reasonable growth of prosperity .
Alongside food security and a common foreign and security policy , energy policy plays a crucial role .
For this reason alone , it is essential for the European Parliament not only to take part in this discussion , but also to have the right of codecision .
Therefore , I call on the Commission to bring an end to its blockade policy and to grant Parliament the right of codecision .
( PL ) Mr President , I will speak very briefly .
The whole idea is quite right .
I particularly like the emphasis on the ecological aspect .
Since we are talking about this , let us be consistent .
It was precisely matters relating to ecology and environment protection which were the significant , factual arguments on which opposition to the idea of the Northern Gas Pipeline was based .
Those very justified , practical and scientifically substantiated arguments were thrown away because political reasons had triumphed .
I think that when supporting this project , we should remember not to be hypocritical in politics .
With the Northern Gas Pipeline , this was forgotten by many Member States of the European Union and by many of the political groups .
( SK ) At the beginning of 2009 , it was apparent that the European Union and the Member States were incapable of helping each other in the event of supply breakdowns involving either electricity or gas .
It was apparent that the power grids in the west and in the east are not interlinked , have different parameters and are not compatible .
It is therefore a good thing that states and grid operators will provide essential information on their energy delivery capacities to the European Commission , which will then be able to assess the shortcomings of the networks and of EU energy security policy and will be able to inform individual countries about the reserve capacity in their energy systems .
From this perspective , I believe we should support the initiative of the Council and the Commission on the supply and collection of information in the field of energy for the benefit of the European Union .
Motion for a resolution
( LT ) I would particularly like to stress my support for Ukraine for holding democratic elections and giving people the opportunity to express their free will .
Knowing Ukraine well , I can see that not just the government , but society itself , is actively following the path to democracy and establishing democratic institutions .
I also have the hope that these elections will bring Ukraine even closer to the European Union , and may even build a stronger bridge in EU-Russia cooperation .
I am also delighted that perhaps even a post-Soviet country will soon enter a visa-free regime with the European Union .
( PL ) Mr President , the resolution on the situation in Ukraine is balanced and gives an objective view of reality .
It only remains to wish Ukraine success in overcoming its economic problems and the very deep division in society over Ukraine 's geopolitical future .
I would also like to draw attention to the decision of outgoing President Yushchenko to confer the title of ' National Hero of Ukraine ' on Stefan Bandera , and the decree recognising two nationalist organisations , the Organisation of Ukrainian Nationalists and the Ukrainian Insurgent Army , as participants in the fight for Ukraine 's independence .
Both Stefan Bandera and these two organisations were responsible for ethnic cleansing and atrocities committed against the Polish population in the 1940s in parts of what is , today , western Ukraine .
The nationalists murdered 120 000 Poles .
In wishing the very best for Ukraine , I do hope that the glorification of extreme , criminal nationalism will be condemned .
( PL ) Mr President , I had the pleasure of being a European Parliament observer during the first round of the presidential elections in Ukraine .
I must say that the Ukrainian people passed the exam .
The elections were very transparent and democratic , despite the last-minute changes which were made to the electoral regulations .
Today , Ukraine needs political , administrative and economic stability .
Therefore , while respecting the democratic choice of the Ukrainian people , we should support and accelerate those measures which will help Ukraine overcome existing problems .
The European Union should give a clear signal that the door is open for Ukraine 's accession to the European Union .
If the European Union is truly interested in Ukraine , the first step towards this should be lifting the visa requirement for Ukrainians .
I hope that adoption of today 's resolution will accelerate work on bringing these ideas into being .
This is why I voted for adoption of the resolution .
( PL ) Mr President , I had the pleasure of being an observer during the presidential elections in Ukraine , at both the first and second rounds , as , indeed , I had several years ago .
I would like to say that we should treat Ukraine as a partner , and not interfere with the sympathies of the Ukrainian electorate .
I consider as absolutely unnecessary the statement made in this House yesterday by one of the leaders of the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe , a liberal , who said that the new President will be pro-Moscow .
The new President of Ukraine , on his first foreign visit since taking office , is coming to Brussels .
We should assess Ukrainian politicians by what they do , and not by whatever declarations they might have made .
Ukraine should be our political partner , and we should open the way for Ukraine to join the European Union .
I am pleased by the statement of the new President that he will annul the decree which Mr Kalinowski spoke about , the scandalous decree which recognises as a national hero of Ukraine a man who has the blood of many thousands of Poles on his hands .
( EL ) Mr President , I voted against the motion for a resolution because I consider , first of all , that it is an attempt to interfere in the internal affairs of Ukraine and that it contains contradictory references .
It is unacceptable from that point of view .
Secondly , because I consider that the Ukrainian people will only suffer from participation in the European Union .
This particular motion for a resolution is paving the way for these prospects and , of course , there will also be restructurings during that process , as in so many other countries .
Thirdly , one of the basic reasons why I voted against the motion is the reference to Bandera .
The motion is quite right to refer to him .
However , this House and the European Union have a huge responsibility where we have such phenomena , not only in Ukraine , but also in other countries , in the Baltic States , as you well know , and the European Union and the European Parliament have a truly huge responsibility for the fact that we have arrived at a point where war crimes are restored .
( SK ) There has been a change of political leadership in Ukraine but there has been no change for the general population of Ukraine .
It is a population which may be impoverished , but which lives in a country that is extremely rich and has enormous potential .
From this perspective , I believe that the European Union should continue the dialogue with Ukraine and press for a more intensive and more effective dialogue .
Ukraine genuinely needs help from the EU , and it is , above all , the people that need it , not the politicians , but the people of Ukraine , and cooperation between Ukraine and the EU could result in a very strong partnership , as well as very strong collaboration and a very strong boost to the economy .
I would like us to show greater initiative in this area .
Mr President , Soviet Communism was the most murderous ideology devised by our species .
In empirical terms , it murdered more people than any other political system , and disproportionately , those casualties were suffered by Ukraine .
And this tragedy continues .
The name of Ukraine , as I understand it , means ' frontier ' , or ' edge ' , and here it is as an edge between two large blocs , the division between Slavophiles and Westernisers within that country being mirrored by the rival ambitions of its neighbouring powers .
What could we most usefully do to help that country ?
We could offer to open our markets .
Ukrainians are an educated and industrious people , but they enjoy relatively cheap costs and relatively competitive exports .
If we simply admitted them fully into a European Customs Union , we would substantially improve their quality of life .
Instead , what we are doing is urging more bureaucracy on them , building capacity , trying to draw them into the cooperative structures of the European Union .
They are not asking for that !
They do not want our hand-outs .
All they want is the opportunity to sell .
Report : Adina-Ioana Vălean
Mr President , it is human nature when something unexpected happens that we try and fit the facts into our existing Weltanschauung .
The psychiatrists have a fancy phrase for it , an even fancier phrase than Weltanschauung : they call it ' cognitive dissonance ' .
Thus , for example , when there is a ' no ' vote in a referendum , the reaction of this House is to say that the people wanted more Europe .
They were voting ' no ' because this did not go in a sufficiently federalist direction .
And so it is with the current economic crisis .
We are in a crisis because we have run out of money .
We have spent everything , we have exhausted our treasuries , we have exhausted our credit , and now the House comes along and says that we need to spend more .
We need more European infrastructure projects , we need a higher budget .
Mr President , that is another dose of the medicine that caused the illness in the first place .
We have seen since the 1970s where that process leads .
It leads to a reduction of GDP , it leads to unemployment , it leads to stagnation and it leads to this part of the world falling further and further behind its rivals .
Motion for a resolution
Mr President , I supported the resolution and , as one of the draftsmen of this document , I would like to make a few points on the Goldstone report , the issue which is addressed in the resolution .
The Goldstone report has once again showed that investigations carried out by the warring parties themselves are hardly ever impartial and objective .
The report is rather explicit that neither side has conducted adequate and effective investigations of alleged violations of the laws of war by its forces .
Also , we should welcome the fact that the report has been revised recently and made less controversial , with less bitter language , and is therefore more acceptable .
And the main lesson we should learn from this is that we should put effort into making the European Union more involved in the process , not only when it comes to the investigation of alleged crimes , but in a pro-active , preventive way as a party to the Middle East Quartet .
( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to say on behalf of part of the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and , above all , on behalf of my colleague , Elmar Brok , that we are shocked that the House has today rejected the amendment which would have included Christians and other religious minorities in this report .
I think it is truly outrageous that , although we are constantly making statements on human rights issues , we do not believe it is worth protecting parts of the population who are being persecuted because of their religious background .
It is a great pity that we could not accept the amendment which concerns a subject that is of great importance for the future of the world .
If we are not able to protect minorities for whatever reason , we no longer have the right to claim that the European Parliament is the home of human rights , of fundamental rights and of this struggle throughout the world .
I have voted against this , because religious minorities should not be excluded .

( FI ) Mr President , as Mr Kastler said before , our group would have very much liked to vote separately on this point regarding religious minorities , but , unfortunately , the majority in Parliament did not agree .
We have to realise that defending the rights of religious minorities is in every way just as important as defending any other minority groups .
The EU should intervene in the work of the UN Commission on Human Rights , because at present it is totally paralysed and biased , and no longer enjoys universal confidence .
The Goldstone report is only one example of how the UN 's Human Rights Court has been hijacked to serve the interests of various antiSemitic elements .
Currently , 21 of the 25 reports on individual countries that the Court has produced concern Israel , as if Israel were the world 's most oppressive country in the area of human rights .
The European Union needs to intervene in the work of the UN Human Rights Council .
Mr President , since the end of the Cold War , a revolutionary new doctrine has imposed itself on the 200 states that comprise the United Nations .
The idea has arisen that laws should not emerge from national legislatures which are in some sense connected to their populations but rather should be imposed by an international technocracy of jurists who answer only to their own consciences .
We are reversing 300 years of democratic development .
We are getting away from the idea that the people who pass the laws must answer in some way through the ballot box to the rest of their populations and we are reverting to the pre-modern idea that lawmakers should be accountable only to their creator or to themselves .
Through these instruments of human rights codes , these international bureaucracies have the ability to reach behind the borders of Member States and to impose their own wishes at odds with those of the local populations .
Let me finish with a quotation from Judge Bork in the United States , the quashed Supreme Court nominee under Reagan , who gave his name to the language when he said : ' What we have wrought is a coup d 'état : slow-moving and genteel , but a coup d 'état none the less . '
Motion for a resolution
( EL ) Mr President , the question of gender equality faces yet another challenge at the present stage .
The progress achieved over recent years in the equality sector by the European Union is in danger of slowing down , or even of reversing , as a result of the current recession .
However , effective gender equality policies can form part of the solution to the problem of how to get out of this crisis , support recovery and strengthen the economy .
Consequently , investment in policies that promote equality between men and women must be our basic ambition and must be robustly supported by all of us , even more , even more strongly , in this difficult economic climate .
Report : Vladimír Maňka
( NL ) In my view , Parliament should be a little ashamed of the de facto budget amendment it has just adopted in this report .
After all , more or less all European countries are suffering a huge financial and economic crisis and masses of people are losing their jobs , and the best we can come up with is to allocate ourselves substantially more resources , more staff and more costs at the taxpayer 's expense .
Besides , everyone knows that these additional resources and staff members are , in fact , mainly intended to ensure that the various socialists who lost their mandates in recent elections are well looked after financially .
In the past , too , this has led to other substantial increases in subsidies , including to European political parties and European political foundations .
It is striking that , time and again , we are finding nice-sounding arguments for delving even further into the tax coffers for this institution ; an unacceptable practice in these times of crisis .
I would like to say that the amending budget that we have just approved , to the sum of EUR 13 400 000 , with effect only from 1 May , thus covering half a year , is very unwise .
The part of it that relates to increasing human resources for Parliamentary committees and groups to the sum of EUR 4 million can be justified because the Treaty of Lisbon is making new legislative demands of Parliament .
Increasing MEPs ' funds for hiring assistants by EUR 8 million , however , means that next year , it will not be 8 million , but 16 million , and this is clearly excessive , as in the coming year , a new increase of EUR 1 500 per month is planned for Members , which amounts to not 16 , but EUR 32 million .
At a time when we are seeing massive unemployment and social crisis in all our countries , moving towards increases in resources for Members is not sustainable unless , at the same time , we have the courage to cut down on the expenses and allowances to which we are entitled as Members , and which are by no means all completely justified .
I fail to understand how , for a day of travelling , an MEP can receive EUR 300 in allowances , plus a subsidy for the distance travelled and a subsidy for the time taken , provisions that are entirely tax-free .
We can cut undue expenses and then debate how we can increase our means for law making .
Not doing this at the same time simply shows a disregard for the difficulties that our constituents are experiencing .
We have a duty to set a good example , but today we are setting a bad one .
Mr President , I am delighted to agree with Mr Portas and the Communist Group on this issue .
All across Europe , from Ireland to Latvia , governments are struggling to respond to the financial crisis , to the credit crunch , by reducing their costs but we in this House , uniquely in this House , are massively increasing our expenditure in both relative and absolute terms .
We are increasing the perks and the budgets available to Members and to staff .
The justification which is given in this report is a very interesting one because the reason that we are told we need all of this extra spending is because of the additional responsibilities created by the Lisbon Treaty .
In a way , that is true , but I think not in the way that the authors intended it .
What we see is that the bureaucracy is expanding to service the needs of the bureaucracy .
The primary function of the Lisbon Treaty is to provide additional work and additional revenue for all the tens of thousands who are now directly or indirectly dependent on the European Union for their livelihoods .
The one lot of people that we have not consulted about this are the electorates and I would love to see issues like this put before our voters to see whether they approve of our voting ourselves additional resources at such a time , when now all of them are tightening their own belts .
Report : Maria do Céu Patrão Neves
( LT ) I greatly welcome the decision adopted on new rules in the fishing sector .
Fish , like other animals , cannot be restricted to certain territories , so assessing whether one country cares more than another would be the subject of endless arguments .
If we take into account new scientific research proving that today , many fish species are bordering on extinction , the need for a common decision becomes even more obvious , not just on an EU scale , but on a global scale .
Therefore , this step by the European Union is welcomed as a good example to other third countries .
I hope that this decision which is also responsible for joint analysis will help both companies working in the fishing sector and countries , irrespective of their size .
I also hope that this decision will help save disappearing fish species .
I would like to express my wholehearted support .
Mr President , it gave me no pleasure today to vote against a report that contains many potentially positive aspects for the future of our fisheries .
Yet the fact remains that for my fishing industry , the common fisheries policy continues to wreak havoc .
The Hague Preference regime annually discriminates against Northern Ireland 's fishermen by deducting quotas from their allocations .
Eleven years of temporary closures in the Irish Sea have reduced our whitefish fleet from over 40 trawlers to six , and yet we still talk about over-capacity .
Then there is the question of applying rules developed for fisheries in the North Sea to the Irish Sea : a consistent or common approach that is out of touch with reality on the ground .
Consider only the net gauges , which were agreed for admirable reasons , but which Europe imposed upon the fishing industry with a wholesale failure to communicate the implications of the change to the new method .
That is why , while I am encouraged by some aspects of the report , I voted against it .
( LT ) I voted in favour of the resolution on the Green Paper on the guidelines for the reform of the common fisheries policy .
I hope that with today 's vote , the European Parliament contributed at least a little to the conservation of fish stocks and a healthy marine environment , and also to reform of the common fisheries policy .
As we in the European Parliament know , 27 % of fish species are on the brink of extinction and unless fishing is restricted , they will disappear .
We also know that it would be possible to increase fish stocks by 86 % if fish were not caught in such a drastic way .
We know too that the stocks of 18 % of fish species are in a poor condition and scientists recommend that we should stop fishing them immediately .
I hope and pray that the European Union will have sufficient political will to not just draft the reform , but implement it as well .
( FI ) Mr President , I would first like to say that I voted for the Green Paper on the reform of the fisheries policy , as our group were advised to by our shadow rapporteur , Carl Haglund .
I nevertheless wish to say that it is very important to give more attention to fishing in the European Union and the state of the waters .
That is a huge challenge at present .
I am particularly worried that the situation has got out of hand with overfishing in the EU - which is tantamount to theft , in fact - and that quantity is taking priority over quality .
We should now start to think more seriously about how we could build up fish stocks sustainably and ensure that we are also able to fish in the future .
The focus here mainly needs to be on wild salmon and stocks of wild fish .
We need to draw up a special programme for the recovery of wild salmon .
I come from Finnish Lapland .
We need salmon back in our spawning rivers , and we need a programme to ensure that wild salmon stocks in particular can be retained and strengthened and that they can also be fished sustainably in the future .

Mr President , for 11 years in this House , I have been protesting about the common fisheries policy 's negative impacts on my home country : under international law , the United Kingdom had 65 % of the fish stocks in North Sea waters covered by the CFP but we were allocated 25 % by volume or 15 % by value under the quota system .
That argument is becoming academic because the fish have effectively disappeared .
Even in the time that I have been in this House , there has been a calamitous decline in what ought to have been a renewable resource .
In other countries which found a way to incentivise ownership , to give the fishermen a reason to treat the seas as a renewable harvest , they managed to sustain their fish levels : in Iceland , in Norway , in New Zealand , in the Falkland Islands .
But in Europe , we had the tragedy of ' the commons ' , where we said it was a common resource to which all vessels had equal access .
You cannot persuade a skipper to tie up his boat when he knows that the waters are being plundered by someone else .
As I said , the argument is now effectively academic .
It is over .
Our boats are grounded .
Our fishing ports are sterile .
Our oceans are empty .
Written explanations of vote
I voted for this report because it makes some improvements to the current system which will support better reporting of information about the investment projects involving the EU 's energy infrastructure .
The need to improve the reporting system stems from the change in the energy situation at a time when energy interdependency between states has increased and we have an internal market .
This has therefore made it necessary for us to have instruments at EU level as well , to help us make decisions about the energy sector .
I support the change to the legal basis proposed by the Commission so that the regulation can be based on Article 194 of the Treaty of Lisbon .
The aim is to strengthen the role that EU institutions can play in energy policy , especially in the operation of the energy market and resource security , the promotion of energy efficiency and development of new forms of renewable energy , as well as in supporting the interconnection of energy networks .
I voted in favour of the report on investment in energy infrastructure , which is aimed at ensuring energy supply and competitive potential , and strengthening the fight against climate change .
This report compels the governments of the European Union to give information to the Commission in relation to the investment being made in energy infrastructure , in modernisation , or in efficient energy production , which will help with efficiency , cooperation and energy planning in the European Union .
Combating climate change , ensuring energy supply and using renewable energy : these are very important issues in the European Union and greater efforts must be made to encourage and ensure effective , focussed investment , and it must be ensured that these issues remain at the heart of the European Union 's energy policy .
in writing . - I supported this report .
The European Union has gained new powers on the basis of the Lisbon Treaty and must ensure that those powers are fully and effectively used .
The EU competence is strengthened in the field of energy policy , and the creation of a common energy market is a priority task for the European Commission .
However , the European energy policy cannot be effectively promoted without having adequate and clear information about existing and planned energy infrastructure and projects in the European Union .
The new regulation is a very important piece of legislation in the EU energy policy and I very much hope that it can work in practice .
The European energy policy cannot be effectively promoted without having adequate and clear information about existing and planned energy infrastructure in the European Union .
As we know , under the old regulation , many Member States did not comply with the reporting obligations and this should not be the case with the new regulation .
The European Commission , as the guardian of the EU Treaty , must ensure that all Member States comply with the provisions of the regulation and timely submit all necessary information on the expected developments in energy infrastructure .
in writing . - ( RO ) A coherent EU energy policy is a complete non-starter unless the 27 Member States can provide accurate , comprehensive reporting on the energy investments which have been made separately in each of their countries .
However , it is important for the European Union 's executive to bear in mind the need to protect the confidentiality of the information supplied by national agencies , as we are dealing with sensitive information from a very important market .
Europe 's energy security is an important issue , but the Commission must be aware that the information received from each state separately cannot be disclosed , especially where it is of a purely commercial nature .
Reporting on energy investment projects once every two years will allow the European Commission to prepare a regular analysis which will define the subsequent development of the European Union 's energy system .
This will therefore make it possible to intervene in time when any gaps or problems appear .
A mechanism needs to be found for complying with the reporting conditions requested by the European Commission in circumstances where the provisions of the previous regulation on informing the Commission about investment projects in energy infrastructure within the European Community were not complied with by all Member States .
We are today voting in favour of this regulation , bolstered by the increased authority that the Treaty of Lisbon confers on Parliament within the context of defining energy policies .
It is definitely beneficial to pursue interinstitutional cooperation aimed at planning the EU 's contribution to the design and implementation of energy infrastructure in a systematic , rational and far-sighted manner : I am thinking of the possible advantages for the programming of the TEN-E and the launch of pilot projects for CO2 storage , which represent the future of energy .
However , the information obligations imposed by the regulation could mean that the policy interferes too much in the economy and that competition is undermined , as a result of news being spread about the projects .
It is therefore important to ensure that the data that is gathered and managed safeguards the confidentiality and the activities of businesses .
Analysis of this data will certainly help to ensure that best use is made of the investments .
However , the analysis must be accompanied by concrete financial measures to support those works and to provide an incentive for private investment in the sector .
The Marguerite Fund for infrastructure , energy and climate change must be strengthened .
The initiative is valid and necessary , but this fund needs to be swelled with the EU resources that are already available in the budget and linked to forms of financing guaranteed by the European Investment Bank and / or other financial institutions , so that it can have an adequate share in the equity of the individual public-private partnerships that are in operation .
The Treaty of Lisbon has given the European Union greater powers in the area of energy policy .
It is essential that the Member States work together to guarantee an energy policy that is more efficient , safer and less expensive for their citizens .
Bringing about the stability necessary to reduce the risk of another crisis over gas between Ukraine and Russia is crucial .
This would ensure the security of supplies , as expected by the Member States of the EU and its consumers .
One of the EU 's biggest priorities is establishing an energy area .
The climate and energy package aims to increase the competitiveness of EU industry in a world where there are ever more restrictions on carbon emissions .
This regulation on investment projects related to energy infrastructure within the European Union will help to make the market more transparent and predictable , supporting our businesses and creating a positive environment for competitiveness .
in writing . - In order for the European Commission to be able to effectively perform its tasks with regard to the European energy policy , it must necessarily be kept well informed of any developments in the relevant sector .
This is one of the reasons for which I have decided to vote in favour of this report .
I voted in favour of the report on the proposal for a Council Regulation concerning the notification to the Commission of investment projects in energy infrastructure within the European Community and repealing Regulation ( EC ) No 736 / 96 , as this will allow the Commission to monitor this infrastructure and anticipate potential problems , especially environmental problems .
It is therefore worth stressing the importance of assessing the environmental impact of energy infrastructure projects , so that their construction and decommissioning can be done in a sustainable way .
Given the importance of an integrated energy policy , not only in combating climate change and reducing CO2 emissions , but also in ensuring efficiency and less energy dependence within Europe , communication and transmission of information about investments and energy infrastructure projects is crucial .
It is vital for European energy policy that the Commission has a current view of trends in energy investments within the Member States so as to be able to develop integrated policies to promote greater energy efficiency and investment in cleaner technologies , thus ensuring progressive energy independence in the face of external suppliers and fossil fuels .
In view of this , I support the proposal for a regulation , particularly with regard to its necessary implementation , which did not happen with the regulation that it seeks to replace .
This proposal for a regulation contributes to establishing a European energy policy that aims at efficiency , reliability and security .
Energy efficiency is a priority policy for the European Union given the need to preserve and maximise resources and fulfil the commitments that it has made in combating climate change .
I would remind you that before moving on to new projects , the EU 's objective of achieving the target of 20 % for energy efficiency must be taken into account .
This means that investment projects in energy infrastructures must be compatible with the aim of achieving a minimum of 20 % of energy from sustainable , renewable sources by 2020 .
The energy policy that is being advocated must ensure low carbon emissions and be based on solidarity and sustainability .
The reliability of the system is important , as operation must be continuous .
It must take account of the deterioration of the energy sector in terms of supply , which can be seen both inside and outside the EU .
It is also worth paying attention to crucial investment in infrastructure that manages to avoid security problems in terms of energy supply .
The rapporteur considers that this is indeed an important piece of the puzzle in the EU energy policy , reasoning that we cannot effectively promote a European energy policy at EU level without having adequate information about our energy infrastructure .
Yet , beyond our fundamental disagreement about European energy policy , this report can also be placed within a legal context , or within the framework of the internal market .
However , some positive aspects are also considered here , particularly when it states that it is essential that the confidentiality of information is ensured and that any resulting proposals are neutral and do not amount to market intervention on a political level .
Furthermore , the reporting requirements should be easy to fulfil , so as to avoid any unnecessary administrative burden on undertakings , and the administration of Member States or of the Commission .
Hence our final decision to abstain .
I voted in favour of the Vălean report on the proposal for a Council regulation concerning the notification to the Commission of investment projects in energy infrastructure within the European Community .
Indeed , it is crucial to have a sufficiently detailed overview in order to strike a better balance between the supply and demand of energy at European level and to decide on the shrewdest investments in terms of infrastructure .
This will also make it possible to increase transparency on the markets ( while protecting corporate data ) and to prevent the phenomena of energy dependence with regard to one particular source or site of supply .
in writing . - Despite the disappointment of Copenhagen , the EU cannot allow the lack of international consensus to slow down our own efforts in effecting a sustainable energy policy .
The Scottish Government is continuing to pioneer in the field of renewable energy and the EU has an important role , too , in driving forward the agenda .
The effective promotion of our energy policy requires adequate information on infrastructure and I voted accordingly today .
in writing . - The necessity for a comprehensive collection of data on investment in energy infrastructure within the EU is clear - an outline of the major trends occurring in the industry will be needed to allow for proper forward planning and to highlight any potential difficulties .
Energy infrastructure will be the foundation of our future economic growth .
So where Europe can act together on this , it should be encouraged .
The proposal shows the effects of the emergency gas supply situation that emerged in January 2009 , when the Commission realised that the Union 's energy infrastructure was not fit for purpose .
The European Commission 's aim , which Parliament fully supported , was to have a constantly updated picture of the energy infrastructure system .
Today , there is great uncertainty about whether the investment projects will be carried out , and it has been made worse by the economic and financial crisis .
I believe that intervention is necessary and that the lack of consistent data and information on investment projects should be remedied .
Without this data , it is impossible to analyse the expected development of the Union 's infrastructure and to introduce satisfactory monitoring in view of a cross-sector approach .
Moreover , Regulation ( EC ) No 736 / 96 , which the proposal in question repeals , is no longer applied consistently and is incompatible with the recent developments in the energy sector .
With this proposal , we have therefore strengthened the existing system , significantly improving the comparability of the information while , at the same time , reducing the associated administrative burdens .
Lastly , I should like to emphasise the fact that I voted against Amendment 81 ( by which the entire nuclear energy chain was to be included in the infrastructure covered by the regulation ) , since there are already provisions which regulate these matters in the Euratom Treaty .
EU energy policy is very pertinent if we are to succeed in using mostly renewable energy in the near future .
With the entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon , decisions on matters relating to energy policy are made in codecision , so it is necessary to readjust the regulations based on the new legal set-up within the EU .
For this reason , and so that all Member States are able to communicate the planned development of energy infrastructure in a satisfactory and beneficial way , a new regulation needs to be implemented to make this easier and faster .
The whole plan may well be based on a good idea - namely the ability to react to supply bottlenecks - but the Member States already failed to comply with their reporting obligations under the old regulation .
The proposal before us does not seem capable of effecting any great change in this respect .
In its current form , however , neither market interventions nor excessive administrative costs for business can be ruled out .
For these reasons , and in order not to encourage bureaucracy , I voted against the report .
The aim of this motion for a resolution is to ensure that Member States provide accurate information on their projects in the area of energy infrastructure .
As soon as a project in the energy sector is started or discontinued , this must be reported to the Commission , so that the Commission acquires the ability to draw up new or amended project proposals , thereby gaining significant influence over the energy diversity of individual Member States .
This represents a further step in the direction of centralisation .
I therefore voted against this motion for a resolution .
The purpose of this proposal for a regulation is to ensure that accurate information is provided to the Commission on a regular basis regarding EU investment projects in energy infrastructure to enable it to fulfil its duties , especially those related to its contribution to the European energy policy .
The repealed regulation is regarded as out of date as it does not reflect the major changes which have taken place in the energy sector since 1996 ( the European Union 's enlargement and the aspects linked to energy supply security , renewable energy sources , the policy on climate change and the EU 's new role in the energy sector under the Treaty of Lisbon ) .
I voted for this report as European legislation needs to be updated in every area , and especially in the energy sector .
This regulation is very important because it aims to ensure that the Commission is accurately and regularly informed of investment projects in energy infrastructure , at both national and cross-border level , so that the Union can ensure that the internal market functions correctly and that all the Member States have a secure energy supply .
It seeks to update the 1996 Regulation with regard to the Union 's commitments on security of supply , climate change and renewable energies following the entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon .
This report is of special interest because it reinforces the regulation 's role as an early warning system for interconnection deficiencies .
Parliament 's Committee on Industry , Research and Energy has always stressed the need to achieve a 10 % interconnection between Member States , as stipulated by the European Council , and any provision that highlights shortcomings in this respect is very positive .
I therefore voted in favour of this report .
in writing . - I voted in favour of the final resolution mainly because , during the vote , we managed to get : Codecision : this is a huge victory , since , for the first time , we now the TFEU ( Lisbon Treaty ) legal basis on energy to get codecision against the will of the Commission .
Even more historic , for the first time since I worked in this House , we managed to get rid of the Euratom Treaty as a legal basis although this regulation covers also transparency for investments in the nuclear sector .
This has been confirmed by the positive vote on AM 30 listing nuclear fuels as a primary energy source under the scope of the regulation .
For sure , we will have to fight now to maintain this victory in the upcoming tripartite negotiations with Council and COM ; MS must provide , at least five years before construction starts , the amount and types of investment in energy projects .
This is a really wise move towards better future energy scenarios , since the Commission will get a better idea of how the energy market is evolving ; renewables , including decentralised ones , will have to be fully considered ; every single mention of ' low carbon ' , the pro-nuclear Trojan horse has been deleted .
On the negative side , we tried , without success , through our AMs in plenary , to get better transparency , including on the part of the investments that will be paid by tax payers money and public consultation , although we managed to get lighter wording on consultation and access to documents .
in writing . - ( FR ) I voted against Mrs Vălean 's report because it calls for liberalisation of the energy sector and a liberal European energy policy , and we all know what tragic consequences that would have for workers in the sector and for more and more of our citizens , who might even experience regular power cuts .
This report establishes the primacy of the market and the neutrality of public interventions and prioritises ' economic operators ' .
We can be sure whose interests they serve .
We can fear for the preservation of the existing infrastructure when an amendment calls for a guarantee that priority investments will be made in the interests of the energy market only .
It is not enough to simply add the word ' solidarity ' by way of an amendment in order to make this European energy policy acceptable when , moreover , the very same amendment prohibits the EU from intervening in the operation of the market .
That gives a whole new meaning to the words ' fair competition ' .
Generally speaking , the aim should not be to focus on trying to meet an ever greater demand for energy .
Rather , additional financing for new infrastructure investments should be used to improve energy efficiency .
Despite the current economic crisis , neoliberal dogmas continue to underpin many EU policies .
I support this resolution and endorse the observations set out in it wholeheartedly .
I am delighted that the Presidential elections that took place reflected the considerable progress made by Ukraine and went better than previous elections , in particular , from the point of view of respect for citizens ' and political rights , including freedom of assembly , association and expression .
Compliance with international election standards demonstrates that Ukraine is taking the path to a mature democracy and closer cooperation with the EU , based on mutual respect for the fundamental values of the EU .
We must encourage Ukraine to actively participate in the Eastern Partnership and support its efforts to ensure more democracy and respect for the rule of law , human rights and fundamental freedoms , as well as the commitment to safeguard the market economy , sustainable development and good governance .
I am one of the people who prepared this resolution and therefore I voted for the goals planned in it .
Following the presidential elections , Ukraine must move closer to the European Union .
I am delighted that Ukraine is resolutely taking the path to democracy and that it understands it has a rightful place in the community of European democratic countries .
The door to Europe should be open for Ukraine .
Transparent elections are an important step in strengthening the principles of the democratic state .
Although observers announced that the Ukrainian presidential elections complied with high quality requirements and democratic principles , Ukraine 's government institutions should nevertheless adopt clear election rules .
Freedom of expression and media pluralism in Ukraine must be ensured for all citizens and election candidates .
It is very important for Ukraine to participate in the Eastern Partnership and in the Euronest Parliamentary Assembly , cooperating with the European Parliament .
Ukraine today is a European country , which has the right to take decisions on Europe .
The European Union must cooperate intensively with Ukraine to strengthen the democratic process and integrate into the European Union .
in writing . - ( RO ) The recently elected president of Ukraine is sending out an important signal by choosing Brussels as the destination for his first foreign visit .
Ukraine is a state with European aspirations and the fact that President Yanukovich is coming to the EU 's capital to meet with the leading members of the Commission highlights that Kiev is looking towards the West .
The new Ukrainian president is faced with major challenges at a time when the International Monetary Fund has suspended the stand-by agreement signed with Kiev , due to numerous unfulfilled or breached commitments .
It is important that President Viktor Yanukovich does not forget the promises he made on the day he assumed his mandate .
Ukraine needs , as the new leader in Kiev pointed out , internal stability , as well as to combat corruption and consolidate the economy on healthy foundations .
Ukraine needs to regain the confidence of the business sector and international community to be able to successfully overcome the economic recession , exacerbated by an unstable political climate .
The conclusion of the electoral campaign and President Yanukovich 's assuming office must signal an end to populist practices such as artificially increasing the population 's income on an economically unsustainable basis .
President Yanukovich 's inaugural speech gives hope to the international community that things can return to normal in Ukraine .
It remains in the period that now follows for these words to be demonstrated by actions as well .
I abstained because I consider that relations between the European Union and other countries should be marked by equality , mutually beneficial trade and economic relations , non-interference in the internal development policies and democratic processes of each country and , of course , respect for the will of the people .
Constructing a peaceful Europe presupposes , apart from anything else , the facility for each country to determine its international relations without imposition and pressure .
As energy security is a crucial factor for the Member States of the European Union , the role of Ukraine is important , which is why it should be encouraged to address its energy problems by improving relations with Russia through bilateral agreements .
That would be to the benefit of both sides and would ensure an uninterrupted flow of natural gas to Europe .
I welcome the compromise resolution drawn up on Ukraine , dealing not only with the issue of how democratic the last election was , but also offering solutions to the problem of transit supplies of oil and natural gas , and urging Ukraine to adopt the Energy Community Treaty and energy legislation conforming to Directive 2003 / 55 / EC .
I agree that an active and positive approach to the EU on the part of Ukraine is not the only assessment criterion .
Ukraine must also , as a matter of priority , have good relations with its neighbouring countries , the countries of the Eastern Partnership and EURONEST .
I support the proposals and also the other provisions in this compromise resolution as a whole and I will vote for their adoption .
I voted in favour of the joint motion for a resolution which highlights the importance of strengthening cooperation between the EU and Ukraine .
The political and economic stabilisation of that country and the strengthening of cooperation between Ukraine and the EU in the field of energy are prerequisites for the recognition of Ukraine 's European aspirations .
The stability of the EU also depends on the stability of its neighbours .
I remember the sense of hope that came with the Orange Revolution , and the break with the Soviet-influenced past that it brought about for the Ukrainian people .
I remember the promises of success , progress , democracy and cooperation that were made at that time to the Ukrainians , both within the country and from abroad .
At the time , the European Union seemed the likely destination for a people who were clearly turning towards the West .
Now that the euphoria is gone , today it seems clear that the protagonists of the Orange Revolution were not up to the challenge .
The disillusionment of the people with the way in which the country is being run is also plain to see .
The election of the candidate beaten by Mr Yushchenko in December 2004 shows either a major split within the country , or a shift in popular feeling , with people now more favourable to the Russian influence .
I believe it is important that the European Union should maintain its ability to be seen as attractive to the Ukraine , and that it should use the various means at its disposal to do so .
I hope that the Ukraine will persist and persevere with internal democratisation , and that , in terms of its past and its history , it will move towards convergence with the EU , a process that will end in its accession as a full member of the EU .
Following the disintegration of the Eastern bloc and the Union of Soviet Republics , the Ukrainian people and institutions have been strongly committed to the democratisation of the country and the construction of a modern society by developing a social , economic and political system that can consolidate the rule of law and respect for human rights , despite the difficulties that are normally inherent in a state that is in the process of regenerating its structural organisation and political identity .
As a reference area and a place for promoting peace and the economic , social and cultural development of its citizens , the European Union has a duty to take on a decisive role in the development of a democratic system within Ukraine , including strengthening the mechanisms for European integration .
This will also help to ease regional conflicts within the country , which is of great geostrategic importance to the EU , in view of relations with Russia and Central Asia , particularly in terms of energy .
In this process , I would also emphasise the contribution that this motion for a resolution has made to the integration into the EU of a large group of immigrant Ukrainians , along with promoting the role of young people and education in terms of social , economic and cultural progress within Ukraine .
Based on today 's vote on the resolution on the situation in Ukraine , we welcomed not only that the presidential elections were conducted in accordance with democratic principles , but also the inauguration of the new president , whom we are expecting to pursue a policy of openness and cooperation towards the EU .
We emphasised the importance of signing additional agreements in the energy sector , thereby guaranteeing energy supply security .
We also welcomed with this vote the need to continue discussions with a view to setting up a favourable system for granting visas .
Ukraine has been invited by the message conveyed today to continue working with us so that it becomes definitely committed to progressing along the path to democracy .
We have reconfirmed with this vote what we have said on other occasions as well , that we must demonstrate an open approach through dialogue and firm commitments in order to give Ukraine the necessary encouragement to favour a pro-European development .
However , Ukraine must show that it is a trustworthy partner for us .
in writing . - I supported Amendment 2 , tabled on behalf of the ECR Group , to the joint motion for a resolution on the situation in Ukraine , which voices concern that the Nord Stream pipeline project undermines the principle of solidarity in the EU 's energy security and will be constructed to circumvent Ukraine .
Even if not directly relevant to the current situation in Ukraine , I fully share the view that the Nord Stream project has been designed by the Russian Government as primarily a political project with a goal to divide Europe and isolate not only Ukraine but also some new Member States .
This amendment is a reminder that the debate on Nord Stream has not ended but is to be continued .
The EU , which is heading toward a common energy market with the implementation of an energy solidarity principle , cannot rely on a long-term relationship with a politically orientated state-owned monopoly that has already failed economically and is defying the basic EU principles of open competition , transparency and separation of production , transportation and distribution .
I voted in favour of the draft resolution tabled by the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) because I believe that the EU must help Ukraine implement democratic reforms and European values , and guarantee human rights and the rights of persons belonging to national minorities .
The new Ukrainian president won the elections standing on a programme guaranteeing rights for minorities , and the EU must support the effective , long-term implementation of this programme .
With this in mind , the law for implementing the European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages needs to be adopted and enforced .
Previous measures which drastically restricted the ability of schools to teach in the minorities ' mother tongues must be repealed .
The representation of minorities in local , district , regional and central institutions in Ukraine must be improved .
Respect must be guaranteed for all minorities ' rights in accordance with European standards , including Russians , Poles , Tatars , Bulgarians , Greeks , Romanians , Hungarians , Jews and Roma .
No minority must be overlooked .
I wish to draw attention to the need to conserve and restore the cultural and historical heritage of the Chernivtsi Region , which is part of a Jewish , Germano-Austrian , Polish , Romanian , Russian and Ukrainian cultural legacy .
I believe that the conservation of this valuable European multicultural and multidenominational heritage , including cemeteries , monuments , buildings and churches in Northern Bukovina , must be a priority objective for cooperation between the EU and Ukraine .
The recent elections held in Ukraine , taking into account the statements by the OSCE / ODIHR Election Observation Mission , which considered that most international standards had been met , are a signal that this country is continuing to develop positively by moving towards future integration into the EU .
However , it is crucial that the Ukrainian politicians and authorities are committed to bringing about political and economic stabilisation soon .
For this to be achieved , the necessary constitutional reforms must be implemented , with consolidation of the rule of law , the establishment of a social market economy and renewed efforts to combat corruption and the improvement of the climate for business and investment .
The motion for a resolution on the state of affairs in Ukraine addresses the current state of affairs in that country and the situation around the presidential elections extremely well .
It reminds Ukrainian politicians and government organs of the need for political and economic stabilisation , which can , in particular , be achieved by constitutional reform , a consolidation of the rule of law , the establishment of a social market economy , renewed efforts to combat corruption , and the improvement of the economic and investment climate .
Nevertheless , in my view , the considerations with regard to its rapid inclusion in the free trade zone , in other words , the EU common internal market , go too far .
Ukraine must steadily build up and strengthen its economy , and come to an agreement over its own needs .
For all Ukraine 's European orientation , we must not forget or disregard that country 's deep-seated roots in Russia 's sphere of influence , and we must take that into consideration .
For the reasons I have set out , I abstained from the vote on the motion for a resolution .
in writing . - ( DE ) The text contains some good statements , such as the condemnation of the Communist regime .
On the other hand , I consider that a far-reaching easing of visa restrictions and a rapid inclusion of Ukraine in the common market is not sensible .
It is for that reason that I abstained from voting .
Mr President , I supported the resolution by the European Parliament concerning the situation in Ukraine .
Among other things , I believe that we should take very seriously the decision of President-Elect Yanukovich to come to Brussels for his first foreign visit .
This is a clear sign that Ukraine is continuing its integration with the European Union .
I consider it important for the European Union to show support for Ukraine in the present situation , by concluding an association agreement and also guaranteeing visa freedom , provided that Ukraine fulfils its objectives .
The doors of the European Union must stay open for Ukraine .
I welcome the fact that the presidential elections in Ukraine were held in accordance with democratic standards .
At the beginning of 2010 , Ukrainian democracy has shown that it is alive .
The high electoral turnout is particularly worthy of note .
Today , the outcome of the Ukrainian election itself is not the cause of reservations which might result in it being challenged in court .
However , the European Union must not stop at expressions of approval for the way the elections were conducted .
It is essential to offer Ukraine a European perspective in several steps .
The first step should be participation in the Eastern Partnership , and the last should be membership of the European Union .
The European Union must maintain an open-door policy towards Ukraine .
The degree of integration with different communities is a matter for Ukraine to decide - this should depend on a sovereign decision of Ukrainian society .
An improvement in relations between Ukraine and Russia is in the vital interest of the European Union .
For the consequences of bilateral relations between Ukraine and Russia also concern EU Member States .
I welcome the announcement of an improvement in these relations .
The presidential elections in Ukraine complied with international election standards .
The country has taken a step towards European democracy .
This is proof that Ukraine increasingly feels itself to be part of the community of European democratic states .
Let us hope that the new Ukrainian President will be a reliable partner with whom we can cooperate to strengthen stability and economic development in Eastern Europe together with other neighbouring states .
One of the most important practical steps in EU relations with Ukraine is the simplification of the visa regime , the end goal of which is the abolition of visas for citizens of Ukraine travelling to the EU .
I voted for this resolution because it takes into account the positive changes in such an important neighbouring state of the EU , although there still remain many complications and tensions between various government institutions in this country .
During this plenary session we voted on the European Parliament resolution on the situation in Ukraine .
I endorsed the resolution , because it is a very important declaration of our institution which testifies to the fact that we are carefully following the development of democracy in Ukraine .
The resolution gives a generally good assessment of the course of the presidential elections , and calls for efforts to ensure the political and economic stability of the country .
A key point is that it is essential to strengthen cooperation between Ukraine and the EU , especially in the area of energy .
From my point of view , there were two controversial amendments .
The first concerned minority languages .
I voted against this amendment , because it increased the possibility of using Russian instead of Ukrainian .
The second amendment was the one about the Nord Stream pipeline .
In this case , I voted in favour of the amendment , because I wanted to manifest my opposition to construction of this pipeline .
The European Union campaigned for the United Nations Human Rights Council ( UNHRC ) to be set up and has undertaken , along with Member States , to play an active , high-profile role to support an effective body which deals with the current challenges facing human rights .
The new institutional structure created following the entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon offers the opportunity to improve the coherence , profile and credibility of the EU 's actions as part of the UNHRC .
This is why it is important for the EU to adopt a common , consolidated position during the 13th session of the UNHRC with regard to all the matters which will be discussed .
The EU must have an effective influence as part of the UN 's extended system and remain committed to finding a common position , as well as increase flexibility on less important issues to enable it to respond more quickly and effectively in negotiations on fundamental issues .
Above all , it must be actively committed to creating dedicated UNHRC mechanisms for responding quickly and effectively to human rights crises in Iran , Afghanistan , Iraq and Yemen .
in writing . - Human rights are still violated in many countries and it is unfortunate that grave violations sometimes are not addressed timely and properly by the international community .
We are lacking a coordinated approach on the international stage .
The EU 's role as a global player has increased in recent decades and the newly established European External Action Service under the Lisbon Treaty could be instrumental in helping the Union to act more effectively to meet global challenges and to address human rights violations in a more coherent , consistent and efficient manner .
The EU now has a great opportunity to strengthen its role in the UN Human Rights Council and should fully use it to increase visibility and credibility of EU actions in the area of human rights .
The compromise resolution put to the vote in this House unfortunately contains passages that prevent me from voting in favour .
The UNHCR is a political body that is subject to ' extreme politicisation ' , as is acknowledged in the text of the resolution .
However , we could have - I believe - said much more , especially since we are dealing with a subject that is sensitive and important to so many of us , namely human rights .
Upon reading the text , I note an unfortunate weakness - perhaps not for the politics of diplomacy , but certainly for that of values - and that is the lack of determination when criticising the well-known aspects that make the UNHCR a very controversial body .
We could have , in fact , been more decisive , speaking out more strongly against Iran 's candidacy in the next Council elections .
There is no specific reference to the senseless composition of a Council in which there sit too many members who are scarcely qualified to lecture on human rights , and who evidently have even fewer credentials to be able to judge or to try anyone .
My vote is therefore one of abstention and of scepticism about this text : I am abstaining in the hope that Parliament will take off its diplomatic hat - it is not its job to be diplomatic - and embrace more courageously the battle for values and for human rights .
I abstained , despite the fact that the motion for a resolution contains positive elements , because important amendments tabled by the Confederal Group of the European United Left - Nordic Green Left were voted down and , as a result , the content was inadequate .
The European Union must support efforts by the UN to ensure that human rights are respected throughout the world .
It must take centre stage in this sort of initiative , all the more so nowadays , when infringements tend to be the rule under autocratic regimes which engage in ' capitalist violence ' in order to impose their antisocial policies .
The European Union must re-examine its relations with the state of Israel , taking serious account of Israel 's military operations on Palestinian territory and of attacks on the rights of the Palestinian people , including the right to eventually acquire its own homeland .
The European Union must resign from US ' democracy export ' campaigns and create a framework for international relations with respect for the rules of international law and an enhanced role for the UN .
The Swedish Conservatives have today , 25 February 2010 , voted in favour of the joint resolution on the 13th session of the United Nations Human Rights Council , .
We would , however , like to point out that we believe that EU Member States should be urged to denounce violations of human rights in general and that it is regrettable that the United Nations Human Rights Council has not managed to deal sufficiently quickly with serious human rights situations in other countries not mentioned in the resolution either , for example Cuba , as well as other countries .
I must emphasise that compliance with international human rights legislation and humanitarian legislation by all parties , in every circumstance , remains a vital condition for establishing a just and lasting peace throughout the world .
I believe that at European Union level , concerted action by both the EU 's High Representative for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy and Member States , which are calling for a strong common position , would guarantee that those who are guilty of violations of international human rights legislation and international humanitarian legislation are held to account .
in writing . - I voted in favour of the resolution on the United Nations Platform for Action for Gender Equality , which identifies key steps required for the European Union to meet strategic objectives on equality between women and men .
There is a clear need for the Commission to step up efforts to compile comparable data on critical indicators for the follow-up to the Platform for Action , and to translate it into regular reviews of gender mainstreaming initiatives across a range of policy fields .
It is especially important to monitor , and act on , the gender dimension of poverty , violence and the needs of girl-children .
The follow-up to the Commission 's Roadmap for Equality between Women and Men 2006-2010 must take into consideration the long-term consequences of the economic crisis and climate change in a society that is getting older and ethnically more diverse .
Sexual and reproductive health and rights need to be acknowledged and furthered in Europe and at a global level .
The European Union should now become party to the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women , a legal step made possible by the entry into force of the Lisbon Treaty .
I voted in favour of the joint motion for a resolution on the 13th session of the UN Human Rights Council .
The new institutional structure of the EU offers a unique opportunity to increase the coherence , visibility and credibility of the EU within the UN Human Rights Council .
The activities of the High Representative for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy will also help to enhance the EU 's ability to cooperate with countries from other regional blocs , with a view to stopping human rights violations , including violence directed specifically against women and children .
The politicisation of the Human Rights Council and the ongoing blockade against those who have taken a stronger stance in condemning human rights violations in various parts of the world justify a change in the Council 's structure and way of operating .
The candidacy of Iran that has been announced is yet another sign that the path taken by this body may be lacking credibility and security , and that countries with a history of repeated human rights violations can use membership of the Council to try to whitewash their own violations .
The European Union must actively participate in the work of the Council , while remaining aware of its limitations and problems , and try to impart a balanced , yet strict and exacting , view of what respect for human rights should be .
If it does this , it will be capable of meeting its own responsibilities in this matter .
The Human Rights Council ( UNHRC ) is a platform specialising in universal human rights and a specific forum dealing with human rights within the UN system .
The promotion and safeguarding the universality of human rights is part of the EU 's legal , ethical and cultural acquis and one of the cornerstones of its unity and integrity .
I am sure that the Member States of the EU are opposed to any attempt to undermine the concepts of universality , indivisibility and interdependence of human rights .
I expect that there will be active participation from the Member States in the annual interactive debate on the rights of persons with disabilities and the annual meeting on the rights of the child ...
I would like to stress the importance of the 13th session of the UNHRC , which will be attended by ministers and other high-level representatives .
Its agenda includes the economic and financial crisis and the United Nations Declaration on Human Rights Education and Training .
Finally , I welcome the re-engagement of the United States in UN bodies and its subsequent election as a member of the UNHRC , as well as its constructive work on freedom of expression in the 64th UN General Assembly .
We very much agree with the concept mentioned in the report , regarding the universality , indivisibility and interdependence of human rights .
However , based on these same assumptions , it is necessary to stress the irreconcilable contradiction between this view and the severe attack on the rights of workers and of the people , caused by the crisis of the capitalist system , including high unemployment rates , increased poverty and increasingly difficult access to good quality public services at affordable prices .
Unfortunately , the majority in Parliament did not take proper account of this contradiction .
We regret the rejection of the proposals made by our group , particularly the following :
points out that the Member States of the UN should promote food sovereignty and food security as an instrument for reducing poverty and unemployment ;
welcomes the fact that a report from the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights on the violations of human rights in Honduras since the coup d 'état is on the agenda of the 13th session ; calls on the EU Member States to work for and support a strong condemnation of the coup d 'état and for the restoration of democracy and the rule of law in that country ;
expresses its concern at the situation in Colombia , particularly the discovery of thousands of unidentified dead .
I voted in favour of the resolution on the 13th session of the United Nations Human Rights Council , firstly to very warmly welcome the initiative to have the UNHCR put at the top of its agenda the impact of the global economic and financial crises to the realisation of all human rights .
I also think it is important to highlight the need for a strong EU common position on the follow-up to the fact-finding mission on the conflict in Gaza and Southern Israel ; it is imperative , in this regard , that the recommendations included in the Goldstone report be implemented .
Finally , Iran 's candidacy in the UNHRC elections to be held in May 2010 is of particular concern and must be followed up with strong EU action to prevent countries with a dubious human rights record from being elected .
As the Human Rights Council is an intergovernmental body whose main purpose is to address human rights violations , and given that one of the cornerstones of European unity and integrity is respect for and safeguarding of the universality of human rights , I would like to express my encouragement for the UNHRC , hoping that it continues to combat all forms of discrimination .
Our resolution is addressed to the UN Human Rights Council , an institution that one would have hoped to promote to the rank of the world 's enforcer of respect for rights , values and the most fundamental freedoms .
I use the conditional tense because the UNHCR 's legitimacy is more than undermined by its lack of impartiality .
Now all of a sudden , we have the added issue of Iran 's candidacy .
This is a provocation .
This state , this government , this president , scorn the rights of men and women .
At least 346 of the country 's citizens , including minors , were either hanged or stoned to death in 2008 .
The trials there are farcical .
Torture is used .
There is a complete absence of freedom of expression , freedom of association , and freedom of the press .
Minorities , particular the Baha 'is , are persecuted .
Since the presidential elections of June 2009 , any form of demonstration has been bloodily and systematically repressed .
I could go on .
The world needs governance that is based on universal values .
If the UN wishes to be the forum for this dialogue , it must ensure that its bodies are objective .
Iran 's candidacy is much more than a test of the UN 's credibility ; it is a test of its viability .
in writing . - I voted in favour of the final text of the resolution , among other reasons , because it kept the paragraphs related to the joint study related to the existence of secret detention centres , the necessary implementation of the recommendations of the Goldstone report and the ICC , and because it included also the amendment on Western Sahara tabled by GUE .
I am also glad that the request made by Brok to have a separate vote on the paragraph dealing with the defamation of religion was rejected and that the paragraph stated as follows :
10 . Reiterates its position with regard to the concept of ' defamation of religions ' and while recognising the need to fully address the problem of discrimination of religious minorities , considers that the inclusion of this concept in the Protocol on complementary standards on racism , racial discrimination , xenophobia and all forms of discrimination is not appropriate ; calls on UN Member States to fully implement the existing standards on freedom of expression and on freedom of religion and belief ;
We wanted to keep this sentence because we are of the opinion that we do not need a new legislation at the UN level which should deal with the concept of defamation of religions as we already have international standards , notably the protocol mentioned preventing discrimination of religious minorities .
EU policy on respect for human rights is one of the most important values which we are putting into practice .
Community policy on respect for human rights includes protection of civil , political , economic , social and cultural rights .
It attaches significant importance to support for the rights of women , children and national minorities and , in particular , to combating racism , xenophobia and other forms of discrimination .
It is very dangerous when legislation which discriminates against minorities is used to violate their right to freedom of religion or when it restricts their access to education and employment , thus restricting their right to work , which , in turn , restricts their right to have an adequate standard of living .
The Union 's work in this area to date gives us the right to demand respect from others for high standards in the field of democracy and human rights .
On the subject of human rights , at all levels and in all areas of the EU , it must be stressed that our duty as MEPs is not just to criticise and prepare resolutions on third countries , but to also closely observe EU Member States , paying attention to even the slightest negative phenomena which violate human rights .
In cases where human rights are violated , the European Parliament prepares a resolution which is addressed to the appropriate country .
Before we criticise others , we must first stop human rights violations within the EU , and then we will be able to criticise others and try to help them as much as possible .
I did not support this resolution because it fails to highlight the importance of the human rights of Christian minorities in the Middle East .
I regret the lack of courage shown when it comes to condemning the attacks on Christian minorities in the Middle East and to referring this problem to the Human Rights Council .
The General Assembly of the United Nations declared 2009 as the ' International Year of Human Rights Learning ' , and the EU has declared 2010 as the ' European Year for Combating Poverty ' .
We should remember that the UN has recognised extreme poverty as being a violation of human rights .
In the marble of the European Parliament and the Council of Europe buildings , we have engraved the leitmotif of 17 October - the International Day for the Eradication of Poverty : ' Wherever men and women are condemned to live in poverty , human rights are violated .
To come together to ensure that these rights be respected is our solemn duty .
Father Joseph Wresinski ' .
Our resolution fails to express our deep concern about extreme poverty as a violation of human rights .
That is why I am inviting the members of the European Fourth World Committee to send a letter along these lines to the delegates of the UN General Assembly expressing Parliament 's concern in this area .
Equality between women and men is a fundamental right and common value of the European Union .
It is also a prerequisite for achieving the EU 's objectives of economic growth , employment and social cohesion .
Although significant progress has been made in terms of achieving the objectives of the Beijing Platform for Action , adopted in 1995 , gender inequality and stereotypes persist .
I believe that the review of the Lisbon Strategy must focus more on gender equality , set new objectives and strengthen the ties with the Beijing Platform for Action so that Member States achieve concrete results through specific policies .
This is why better promotion is required of the exchange of experience and good practice between Member States in all areas affected by the Beijing Platform for Action .
I voted in favour of the resolution for the Beijing + 15 - UN Platform for Action for Gender Equality .
Fifteen years after the adoption of the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action , the European Parliament is debating today the progress made globally in terms of gender equality .
Equal opportunities for men and women is one of the European Union 's fundamental values .
Article 2 of the Treaty on European Union highlights a number of values shared by Member States : pluralism , non-discrimination , tolerance , justice , solidarity and gender equality .
Even though considerable progress has been made in certain areas and industrial sectors , there are still inequalities which persist .
In this respect , the European Union must continue to make efforts to resolve these issues .
Equality must be promoted in every area .
At European level , when devising strategies for combating the economic crisis and the impact of climate change , the European Commission must also take into account the effect these strategies have on women .
The resolution encourages the development of the strategies and instruments required to establish the situation on gender equality devised by the European Institute for Gender Equality .
I voted in favour of the resolution on Beijing + 15 - UN Platform for Action for Gender Equality , as the strategic objectives of the Beijing Platform have not been achieved and inequality and gender stereotypes persist , with women remaining in a position subordinate to men in the areas addressed in the Platform .
We regret the lack of timely , reliable , comparable data , at both regional and EU level , for the indicators decided on for the follow-up to the Beijing Platform for Action , including women and poverty , violence against women , institutional mechanisms , women and armed conflict and the girl child .
The Commission must develop further the annual review of the implementation of the Beijing Platform for Action and use the indicators and analytical reports effectively as a contribution to different policy fields , as well as a basis for new initiatives aimed at achieving gender equality .
We would like to reiterate the need for systematic implementation and monitoring of gender mainstreaming in legislative , budgetary and other important processes , and of strategies , programmes and projects in different policy fields .
I voted for this resolution , as we must develop further the perspective of gender equality throughout the European Union .
The European Commission should prepare a strategy of action for gender equality guidelines and take into account the economic and financial crisis , sustainable development , as well as current guideline priorities , equal economic independence for women and men , combining work , family and private life and equal participation of women and men in decision making .
At present , there is a distinct lack of data on gender equality , violence against women and institutional mechanisms .
It is very important that the Member States cooperate as closely as possible with the European Institute for Gender Equality , one of whose tasks is work with comparable data .
The institute will keep statistics , research will be carried out , the goal of which will be to provide analyses of gender equality matters and studies will be carried out into data indicator statistics and data explanation .
The aims laid down in the institute 's work programme should particularly help implement the indicators set out in Beijing .
Gender equality is a fundamental principle in our times , but gender inequality persists , and the strategic objectives of the Beijing Platform are still a long way from being achieved .
I welcome the motion for a resolution to be voted upon today in plenary , as it is an incentive for improving institutional mechanisms for promoting gender equality .
Gender mainstreaming in development cooperation is essential for promoting a more prosperous , fairer and richer society .
I would like to emphasise the importance of the role that women play in science and technology .
Women are increasingly present in areas of scientific research , but they remain a long way from the top of their careers and the centres of decision making .
Taking advantage of this potential is essential for promoting a fair balance and for supporting growth and employment .
It is crucial to consider gender mainstreaming in different policy fields as one of the pillars of a more prosperous , fairer and richer society .
As a staunch defender of human rights and the principle of equality , I would not undermine initiatives that aim to protect the rights of women and girls .
Such rights are often severely violated in a world where women are still the main victims of crimes against their physical wellbeing and sexual self-determination .
However , gender equality can never for an instant mask the natural , social and cultural difference between the sexes ; equal rights are not the same thing as equal treatment .
Men and women need to be treated fairly , giving them the same rights but taking their respective needs into account .
In the case of women , this is particularly pertinent in areas such as maternity support , the reconciliation of work and family life and special protection against crimes that are mainly committed against women and children , such as sexual exploitation , human trafficking or abuse .
Finally , I would stress that any EU initiative in this area cannot attempt to give women the right to abortion in the name of sexual and reproductive health ; this must remain a matter for the individual Member States alone to decide .
Gender equality is a fundamental principle of the European Union , and is enshrined in the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union .
Thus , the Union has a specific mission of promoting and mainstreaming equality between men and women .
There is no doubt that the unfortunate situation of gender discrimination continues to exist today , in both developing and developed countries - and , specifically , in the European Union - at all social , economic and cultural levels .
To effectively combat this phenomenon , it is vital to ensure that there are effective mechanisms for identifying problems and collecting information without coming up against obstacles or political constraints , so as to establish causes and consequences in a clear and sustained way in order to effect a complete response .
This structural problem is an obstacle to progress and the development of communities in particular , and humanity in general .
I believe that eradicating domestic violence should be a top priority .
In order to do this , it will be vital to ensure cultural , social and economic equality between men and women .
The economic and financial crisis , the impact of climate change and an ageing society are all factors that the European Commission and the Member States must take into account in actions and policies that aim to promote gender equality .
The Swedish Conservatives have today , 25 February 2010 , voted in favour of the resolution on Beijing + 15 - UN Platform for Action for Gender Equality , .
We would , however , like to emphasise that we do not believe that a chapter on equality should be included in the revision of the Lisbon Strategy 2010 , as this is already covered in the Treaty of Rome and the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union .
We would also like to point out that we believe that women should have power over their sexuality and reproduction .
We believe in the ability of individuals to make decisions concerning their own lives ; the EU should not interfere in this area .
Increased equality is one of the EU 's great challenges where Sweden 's progress can inspire the other Member States of the EU .
I supported this resolution because , 15 years after the Beijing World Conference on Women , we have to acknowledge that too little progress has been made in relation to gender equality and that sexist stereotypes still persist in numerous areas such as employment , education and politics .
I also supported the reference to the need to improve the sexual and reproductive health of women both in Europe and globally , and the encouragement that needs to be given to fathers to share family responsibilities , by taking advantage of parental leave , for example .
Finally , with regard to the revision of the Lisbon Strategy , priority will have to be given to the gender equality goal , which will have to make a real impact in national social protection and inclusion measures .
The objectives of the Beijing Platform for Action accepted 15 years ago have not been fulfilled to this day , and in most areas relating to equality between women and men , there has hardly been any slight measure of progress .
It is unfortunate that at both Member State and European Union level , little emphasis is placed on combating the extreme poverty and multiple discriminations that afflict women .
We need to harmonise much more closely the Beijing objectives adopted within the framework of the United Nations and the implementation of the new EU roadmap for equality between men and women .
In this European year for combating poverty and social exclusion , it is particularly important that women who are barely above the poverty line should receive suitable protection , since a change in their employment or family situation - such as job loss , divorce , widowhood and even childbirth - means that the danger of impoverishment threatens them exponentially .
It is gratifying that the programme of the Spanish-Belgian-Hungarian Trio Presidency places great emphasis , on the one hand , on following up on the implementation of the Beijing objectives , and , on the other , declares its intention to take a comprehensive approach to preventing and combating the poverty that affects women and children .
These perspectives will , hopefully , also be addressed with due seriousness at the UN meeting scheduled for early March .
In order to assess and review policies aimed at achieving equal opportunities between men and women , reliable data broken down by gender is necessary , and it would also be worth considering the introduction of standardised , common indicators for measuring gender inequality .
in writing . - I voted in favour of paragraph 9 of the resolution on the Beijing + 15 UN Platform for Action for Gender Equality , upholding women 's sexual and reproductive health and rights .
Sexual and reproductive rights are based on universally recognised rights to bodily integrity , non-discrimination , and the highest attainable standard of health .
These rights are enshrined in international law ( including Article 12 of the International Covenant on Economic , Social and Cultural Rights where States Parties recognise ' the right of everyone to the enjoyment of the highest attainable standard of physical and mental health ' and Article 12 of the Convention for the Elimination of all Forms of Discrimination against Women on eliminating ' discrimination against women in the field of health care in order to ensure , on a basis of equality of men and women , access to health care services , including those related to family planning ' ) .
Consensus documents ( such as the 1994 Cairo Programme of Action and 1995 Beijing Platform for Action ) also illustrated governments ' commitment to ( women 's ) sexual and reproductive rights .
Many in my electorate in Romania share this perspective .
Inequalities between men and women on various levels , whether by profession , sector or various stereotypes , have become blurred over the years .
Equality between men and women in the EU is increasingly a reality , and although there are still cases of discrimination , we are beginning to see very positive developments .
The defence of women 's rights is important to me , too .
However , I do not consider the use of quotas , so-called positive discrimination , to be sensible .
It is qualifications that should be decisive here , not gender .
This should be the basic rule for men and women alike .
It is for that reason that I abstained from voting .
in writing . - I voted in favour of this motion for a resolution because it is compulsory to implement gender equality in all fields .
Regarding Romania , these fifteen years , progress has been made only in some of the areas identified in the Beijing Platform for Action .
The presence of women in Romanian politics on the level of decision making after the 2009 election is around 11 % in the Parliament , and only one woman was appointed in the government .
Male violence against women , human trafficking and women representation in decision-making bodies are priorities we should strongly address .
We can address all this only if women will decide for women !
Not including women in all social and political executive bodies would be wasting 50 % of intellectual capacity as well as failing in representing truly the interest of all citizens .
in writing . - I voted in favour of the final text of the resolution because it included our petitions to the EU Commission to take into account in its 2010-2014 roadmap not only the economic and financial crisis but also the impact of climate change on women ; on the fact that inequality and gender stereotypes in the EU still persist with women remaining in a position subordinate to men in the areas addressed in the Beijing Platform ; and because it promotes gender equality especially in terms of paternity leave .
I voted for this resolution because it highlights the progress still to be made by the 189 states that are signatories to the Beijing Platform for Action if real equality between women and men is to be achieved .
I particularly support the paragraph stressing that ' sexual and reproductive health and rights are an integral part of the women 's rights agenda ' .
I would like to point out in this regard that , when my report on equality between women and men was adopted in 2009 , the majority of MEPs supported the view that women had to have easy access to contraception and abortion .
I , together with my colleagues from the Confederal Group of the European United Left - Nordic Green Left , voted in favour of Mrs Svensson 's report on Beijing + 15 - UN Platform for Action for Gender Equality .
Her assessment presents a mixed picture .
True , progress has been made , but how can we be satisfied when there is still a gender wage differential of between 14 % and 17.5 % ?
Furthermore , it is unacceptable that a majority of MEPs have adopted a highly ambiguous amendment tabled by the European Conservatives and Reformists implying that women who have recourse to abortion are not making an informed and responsible decision .
This is an indirect attack on the right to abortion
in writing . - The Member States of the ECR have signed the UN Convention on the Elimination of all Forms of Discrimination Against Women and the Beijing Platform for Action .
We therefore feel that for the EU to ' become a party to the Convention ' as a whole is unnecessary and we oppose the EU acting in this State-like way .
Whilst the ECR Group places great importance on equality between all people , we oppose further legislation at EU level ; we believe the gender equality issue is best driven at national level with the involvement of civil society within local communities .
For these reasons , we have voted against the resolution .
According to the resolution of the European Parliament on the draft general budget for the financial year 2010 , adopted on 17 December 2009 , a vote was taken today on the amending budget for the European Parliament , following the revised calculations made by the Parliamentary administration .
The FDP in the European Parliament abstained , because there was a paragraph in the package of amendments concerned that we could not reconcile with our convictions .
The FDP had already expressed its opposition to an increase in the secretarial allowance to EUR 1 500 during the discussions in committee .
It is out of the secretarial allowance that MEPs ' assistants are paid .
The FDP considers that the argument that more money is needed due to the additional work that MEPs have to do with the coming into force of the Treaty of Lisbon is unsound , as there is nothing in past experience to support this .
Certainly , due to the Treaty of Lisbon , which has just come into force , Parliament will overall need extra capacity for legislative work , but with the introduction of the Assistants ' Statute from the beginning of the current parliamentary term , there is still no proof that MEPs actually need more assistants .
For this reason , there are grounds for concern that further demands and supplementary increases , or an extension of office capacity , will follow .
For this reason , the FDP in the European Parliament abstained .
Presented for the first time in the meeting of the Committee on Budgets of 25 January 2010 , the Maňka report is characterised by three critical points , which are responsible for my decision to abstain from the vote .
Firstly , the sudden and belated discovery , in respect of the signing of the 2010 budget in December 2009 , that the 20 % limit for expenditure under ' heading 5 ' had been exceeded .
The agreement to shift the problem from December to January , the desire not to publicise the budgetary burden of the Treaty of Lisbon , and the hasty manner in which the issue was raised , without any scope to demand , where necessary , more efficient use of the resources currently available , have led to a real distortion of the facts .
Secondly , I disagree with the decision to use the reserves earmarked for buildings policy to cover the new need for liquidity .
This is a controversial issue that must be addressed in the coming months , once we are sure that we can count on having the necessary financial resources .
Lastly , I believe that the sum of EUR 1 500 as a monthly allocation for Members ' assistants seems inadequate , since the minimum threshold for the appointment of a new level I-accredited assistant is EUR 1 649 .
The Treaty of Lisbon means greater powers for Parliament .
Nonetheless , in a globalised world , issues are increasingly complex , and decisions need to be technically sound and backed up by science .
It is crucial that policy makers are aware of recent scientific developments , as these will allow them to make the best decisions .
This budget makes decisions with cuts to the buildings heading and an increase in technical support for Members , providing the necessary resources for Parliament to perform its duties well , with the scientific and technical backing that is so necessary in the 21st century .
I voted against this report , because the EU budget continues to constitute a minimum percentage of European GDP ( 0.97 % ) , which does not cover the need to strengthen weak economies and societies and finance enlargement .
The need for a bold increase in the budget , to at least 5 % , is becoming more urgent , especially in the current economic crisis , which has hit the entire European Union , in order to address social needs and stop public spending cuts .
It is within this framework that the problems of operational needs and the harmonisation of expenditure by the European Parliament and the European Union need to be addressed .
According to the resolution of the European Parliament on the draft general budget for the financial year 2010 , adopted on 17 December 2009 , a vote was taken today on the amending budget for the European Parliament , following the revised calculations made by the Parliamentary administration .
The FDP in the European Parliament abstained , because there was a paragraph in the package of amendments concerned that we could not reconcile with our convictions .
The FDP had already expressed its opposition to an increase in the secretarial allowance to EUR 1 500 during the discussions in committee .
It is out of the secretarial allowance that MEPs ' assistants are paid .
The FDP considers that the argument that more money is needed due to the additional work that MEPs have to do with the coming into force of the Treaty of Lisbon is unsound , as there is nothing in past experience to support this .
Certainly , under the Treaty of Lisbon , which has just come into force , Parliament will overall need extra capacity for legislative work , but with the introduction of the Assistants ' Statute from the beginning of the current parliamentary term , there is still no proof that MEPs actually need more assistants .
For this reason , there are grounds for concern that further demands and supplementary increases , or an extension of office capacity , will follow .
For this reason , the FDP in the European Parliament abstained from voting .
in writing . - I voted for the Maňka Report which is the first step in amending the 2010 European Parliament budget seeking additional budgetary and human resources to enable the European Parliament to fulfil its enhanced role .
The additional resources include an increase in the monthly assistance allowance available to MEPs to support their increased legislative role under the Lisbon Treaty .
The Lisbon Treaty puts the Parliament on an equal footing with the Council as colegislator accounting for some 95 % of legislative procedures .
It now includes such areas as freedom , security and justice , agriculture , fisheries , research and structural funds .
Parliament 's consent must also now be given for the negotiation and conclusion of international agreements which require detailed expert examination .
It is essential that MEPs have the staff necessary to do this work as required .
We Swedish Social Democrats believe that those committees that will gain a heavier workload with the entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon need to be reinforced .
This justifies an increase in staff for Parliament 's and the groups ' secretariats in these committees .
However , we do not share the view that we MEPs need more staff .
Above all , we would have liked to have seen Parliament 's resources being increased by means of redistributions and measures to increase efficiency , rather than the total budget being increased .
Given the new role of Parliament within the context of the Treaty of Lisbon and its new functions , and in view of the commitment made when the 2010 budget was approved , this increase in funds available for the running of Parliament makes sense , as it ensures that this body has all the material and human resources it needs to fulfil its new tasks in the new institutional framework with accuracy and excellence .
This increase in funds must not , however , jeopardise budgetary sustainability and the accuracy of financial statements , as this is crucial in any institution .
Additionally , there must be accuracy and transparency in managing the funds made available under this budget .
This amending budget for the financial year 2010 relating to Parliament 's budget ( Section 1 of the general EU budget ) now has a value of EUR 1 616 760 399 , which represents 19.99 % of the initial heading 5 , adopted at first reading .
In this amending budget , we have reduced the buildings reserve from EUR 15 million to EUR 11 million .

The need for this budget has come about as a result of the entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon .
Parliament is taking on new powers and new responsibilities .
Our priority now is excellence in legislation .
In order to secure this , it is important to provide the Members , committees and political groups with sufficient means .
This amending budget fulfils legal and budgetary standards and good financial discipline .
As the rapporteur of the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) for this budget , I believe that budgetary discipline and trying to make savings is necessary now more than ever , throughout its implementation .
I can therefore reaffirm the importance of developing a zero-based budget that will ensure further rigour and transparency , and I also appeal for information regarding Parliament 's fixed expenditure as a matter of urgency .
I must also insist on the need for long-term planning in buildings policy , with a view to ensuring budgetary sustainability .
Yesterday , tens of thousands of people took to the streets of Athens , and Greece was paralysed by a general strike in protest against the austerity plan imposed by the EU , the European Central Bank in Frankfurt and the IMF .
It is true to say that Greece has not always been as rigorous as it should have been in the management of its public accounts and EU funds .
However , it is scandalous that the main virtue of this austerity plan should be that it reassures the markets , these same markets that are currently speculating on the Greek debt and which caused this turmoil .
These same markets from which the States , thanks to your ultra-liberal laws , have to borrow at high rates of interest .
At the same time , under the pretext of an alleged increase in workload due to the entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon and of Parliament 's supposed concern about the quality of its legislative texts , the MEPs are awarding themselves a ' small ' budget increase to the tune of a few million euros so that staff can be recruited for the political groups !
Therefore , apply your nit-picking checks to your own expenditure and be as rigorous as you insist the Member States must be !
We will be voting against this text .
The crisis is here , and it is true that a large number of companies and citizens are struggling .
Nevertheless , I voted in favour of an increase in the parliamentary assistance package because the entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon increases the responsibilities of the European Parliament : we have more work and more obligations to fulfil on behalf of our citizens .
This increase will only benefit our assistants ; MEPs themselves will not see any increase in their salaries .
in writing . - Along with my group , I gave conditional support today for an increase in the secretarial allowance at this stage in the procedure .
This support is conditional on the evaluation of the use of this allowance , as called for in the Maňka report .
Our final position on the increased allowance will be contingent on the outcome of this evaluation .
I confidently voted for this budget amendment .
It is not a case of us asking for money for ourselves , as alleged by the press .
However , we need to provide the institution of the European Parliament with the necessary resources to meet European citizens ' expectations of this forum .
I know that we are not only going through a hard time economically , but that the budget restrictions in many states are also huge .
This budget is not even extravagant .
Savings have been made and will continue to be made .
I voted for the Maňka report , although I did not agree with the budget increase in the secretarial allowance for MEPs .
In her explanation of our vote , Mrs Trüpel , who is the responsible member on behalf of the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance , put it on record on behalf of the whole group that our vote in favour is conditional on there being an evaluation of the secretarial allowance before the increase is put into effect .
I consider both the other points - namely the increase in posts for committees and groups - to be sensible and necessary as a consequence of Parliament 's new legislative powers under the Treaty of Lisbon .
We Members wish to and will take these powers very seriously and thereby do justice to our role as the only elected representatives of European citizens .
in writing . - The approval and subsequent entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon have meant increased responsibility for Parliament , with the administrative burden that that entails .
Given that legislative excellence is a priority for Parliament , the Members need to be given the material and human resources to make this a reality .
This new budget must , however , respect the utilisation rates of the values under heading 5 ( administrative provisions ) of the multiannual financial framework ( MFF ) , which were fixed at 20 % of the value of that heading , so as to maintain budgetary sustainability .
In view of all the cuts being made throughout Europe , we need to show solidarity with those countries that finance the EU budget by not increasing our expenditure and I am therefore voting against the proposal for an amending budget concerning the European Parliament .
I voted against this report as it envisages an increase in the envelope for recruitment of and allowances for assistants by EUR 1 500 per month from 1 May 2010 .
Fortunately , an amendment tabled by the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance provides for an evaluation of the system of allowances , in force since the 2009 elections , as it currently exists .
Yet the increase in the secretarial assistance allowance is to take effect unconditionally , with no obligation to take account of the results of this evaluation .
The report also envisages a strengthening of the parliamentary committees and the political groups .
This operation costs EUR 13.3 million on an annual basis , EUR 8.832 million of which is for assistants ' allowances .
This is a bad decision .
It damages the reputation of this institution .
It has not been thought through .
No thought has been given to any further consequences .
Where are the new assistants to be accommodated ?
Will it be in a new building ?
Will yet more costs be incurred ?
In addition , I fear that this money will be used in large part for the recruitment of non-accredited assistants under national wage terms .
That very system has given rise to dirty tricks in some cases .
Now we may be leaving the door wide open to abuse .
Therefore , I urge a clear evaluation of the existing system in advance ; only then can we take an informed decision .
The entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon has led to the adoption of a proposal to amend the 2010 budget , with a view to meeting the additional needs of Parliament in relation to it .
Given that legislative excellence is a priority for Parliament , I would emphasise the importance of providing the Members , committees and political groups with the necessary means to achieve this objective , along with the means to cover their overall needs in relation to the long-term buildings policy .
Therefore , the amending budget for the financial year of 2010 now has a value of EUR 1 616 760 399 , which represents 19.99 % of the initial heading 5 , adopted at first reading , and the buildings reserve has been reduced from EUR 15 million to EUR 11 million .
I would like to emphasise the importance of the report 's inclusion of the establishment of a zero-based budget , which ensures greater budgetary sustainability , and the need for this to be in accordance with the annual legislative programme .
For the aforementioned reasons , I voted in favour of the document , which will allow Parliament to be given sufficient means to cover the expenses related to its new role following the Treaty of Lisbon .
in writing . - The Greens / EFA Group gives conditional support to an increase in the secretarial assistance allowance at this stage of the procedure .
For our group , the evaluation of the use of the secretarial allowance as asked for in the Maňka report is crucial .
This evaluation should come in time for a decision by the budgetary authority on the corresponding amending budget later in spring .
The group may reconsider its support for the increase in the assistants ' allowance in view of the outcome of this evaluation and discussions within our group .
I would really like to endorse the MEPs and , at the same time , express my concern that particularly at the time of the crisis , various allowances to both MEPs and employees in their teams are being increased .
In particular , I would like to draw attention to those categories of expenses which are difficult to monitor or are not monitored at all .
Precisely these categories of expenses should not be increased during the crisis .
The report supports the EU common fisheries policy which , in the name of protecting fish stocks , has resulted in the destruction of a large number of small fishing boats in Greece and in numerous small and medium-sized fishing enterprises being ousted from the profession , in the condemnation of numerous coastal areas to abandonment and unemployment and in the concentration of activities in the hands of large fishing companies .
The monopoly friendly nature of EU policy is illustrated by the fact that 2 / 3 of Community funds have been channelled to big business ( fishing companies , fish farms , processing ) , while the remaining 1 / 3 has been given to poor and middling fishermen to break up their boats and leave the profession .
Measures to replace / improve vessels have only benefited large companies .
The report , like the Green Paper , apportions equal responsibility for the reduction in fish stocks to large fishing companies and small-scale coastal fisheries .
It does not differentiate between the measures needed in fisheries areas and overlooks their individual peculiarities .
The EU common fisheries policy serves the ambitions of the big fishing companies that will remain to plunder the wealth of the seas and supports big business in the fish farming sector .
This policy , the only criterion for which is the profitability of capital , is resulting in the destruction of the marine environment and of ecosystems .
I welcome the launch of a new strategy aimed at resolving the issues relating to fishing in the European Union .
Overfishing , illegal fishing , pollution and climate change are factors which are jeopardising marine ecosystems .
This is why the concern for high-quality aquaculture in Europe will yield economic benefits and also ecological benefits at the same time .
It is vital for us to maintain the right balance between economic growth , fishing traditions in certain regional communities and the best fishing practices .
The most important thing is for us to realise that the promotion of aquaculture which is sustainable and economically efficient in the long term is primarily dependent on how environmentally friendly we are .
The fishing sector in Europe is experiencing hard times .
Fishermen are losing their only source of livelihood , and this is particularly true in those EU regions where there are few social and economic alternatives .
Therefore , I support wholeheartedly the Commission 's proposal , set out in the Green Paper , that it is necessary to fundamentally and comprehensively reform fishing policy , thereby adapting this sector to the changing market .
It is regrettable , but 27 years have passed since the creation of the common fisheries policy and this sector is not working as it should and problems are not being solved quickly enough .
The problems of 2002 still remain and they have been aggravated even more by the latest events , linked to the economic crisis and the impact of climate change on fish stocks .
The priorities of the reform of the common fisheries policy must remain the restoration of stocks , sustainable management and securing the subsistence level of fishermen .
Fishing is very important to the whole of the EU , therefore it should not simply be seen as an activity , but as a sector which is a direct source of employment .
in writing . - While this report points to a rather less awful CFP than the monstrosity we have now , it nevertheless recommends leaving fisheries under the predatory control of the undemocratic and anti-democratic ' European Union ' , and , for this reason , cannot be endorsed by UKIP .
The promotion of a common interest among producer organisations in observing the principles advocated by the European Union is becoming a key element in reforming the fisheries policy .
The European Union cannot expect Europe 's fishing fleets to be resized naturally , based on economic realities .
Their overcapacity , eight years after the global summit on sustainable development , and the continuing decline in fish stocks , are additional reasons for a far-reaching reform of the common fisheries policy .
However , it must not be forgotten that there are whole communities located in the coastal regions of the European Union 's states whose existence revolves around fishing .
As is also mentioned in the report on the reform of the common fisheries policy , this activity is part of the cultural heritage and traditions which no one wants to see lost .
A review of the common fisheries policy is in every Member State 's interest so that the main objective adopted at the 2012 summit , which is to attain the level of fish stocks enabling maximum sustainable yield by 2015 , can be met , thereby ensuring that the European Union is no longer obliged to import half of the fish it needs from other markets .
The fisheries sector is strategically important for the socio-economic wellbeing of coastal communities , local development , employment , and the preservation and creation of economic activity .
Ensuring sustainable development within this sector is vital , both on an economic and social level , but it is equally necessary to ensure the conservation of good environmental conditions in all EU marine waters .
The implementation of the CFP is directly linked to issues such as environmental protection , climate change , safety , public health , protecting consumers and regional development , internal and international trade , relations with third countries and development cooperation , and it is essential to ensure a proper and careful balance between all these areas .
I would like to emphasise the need for a coherent European Research Area framework in support of a sustainable use of oceans and seas .
It is also important to consider the nature of the constraints affecting the outermost regions which , by reason of their permanent and pervasive character and joint presence , differentiate those regions from the Union 's other regions with geographical disadvantages and / or demographic problems .
I voted against the report on the common fisheries policy , despite the fact that it contains a number of elements that represent a positive development compared with the current situation .
Unfortunately , however , basic points of the report clash with the fact that marine resources are common public property which cannot be privatised and an amendment by the Confederal Group of the European United Left - Nordic Green Left on this point was rejected .
This particular report fails to combine the necessary protection of the marine environment , conservation of fish stocks and social and financial protection for fishermen , especially small-scale fishermen , with catastrophic consequences for the environment and viable fisheries and an adverse impact on both fishermen and consumers , who have to pay the final price for the product , with the profits benefiting large private companies rather than small-scale fishermen .
The report does not succeed in taking real account of the various conditions prevailing in individual EU Member States and , consequently , does not succeed in making provision for the necessary , duly adjusted policies .
I wish to congratulate Mrs Patrão Neves on her excellent report on the reform of the common fisheries policy .
The countless problems and challenges with the CFP were identified back in 2002 , but have now been exacerbated by the economic and energy crises and by the damaging effects of climate change .
If the CFP is to serve the interests of modern fisheries , it needs to introduce a set of thorough changes which will ensure a fair balance between the preservation of resources and the viability of the sector , opening the door to new management systems for the different types of fisheries within the EU .
I welcome the concern to decentralise and de-bureaucratise the CFP , and to regionalise fishery management within the limits set by the Treaty of Lisbon , and also the need to ensure that treatment is tailored to small-scale coastal fisheries and industrial fisheries , whilst respecting environmental , economic and social requirements .
I would also stress the protection of the interests of Community fisheries .
However , these require appropriate monitoring by national governments , which should make fisheries a strategic priority in order to ensure the economic and social viability of coastal communities .
I believe that plans need to be drawn up for managing and supporting the long-term recovery of fish stocks for all types of fishing and all geographical fishing zones within the European Union .
Consideration must be given , first and foremost , to the huge differences which exist in Europe in terms of fishing .
Greater responsibility must be given to fishing zones and improvements made to the traditional quota system .
Europe needs to adopt a strong , joint approach to managing fisheries resources , which will include a continental and market dimension for the sector , as well as a catching sector and aquaculture , in accordance with the European Union 's new integrated maritime policy and with its interest in sustainable growth in coastal regions .
in writing . - While this report points to a rather less awful CFP than the monstrosity we have now , it nevertheless recommends leaving fisheries under the predatory control of the undemocratic and anti-democratic ' European Union ' , and , for this reason , cannot be endorsed by UKIP .
I voted in favour of the report on the Green Paper on the reform to the common fisheries policy because it made essential commitments that clearly helped to improve the initial proposal .
I would like to emphasise the importance of introducing an environmental and social approach in seeking new management systems for fisheries resources , which will complement the current system , based on the principle of relative stability .
We Swedish Social Democrats voted against the report on the Green Paper and the reform of the EU fisheries policy .
The majority in Parliament rejected the prioritising of ecological sustainability and voted in favour of an amendment stating that our policy towards countries outside the EU should be governed by the interests of European fisheries .
We find this unacceptable and therefore elected to vote ' no ' .
We are also sceptical about the fact that the European Parliament wants to provide more money for the common fisheries policy - this is something that we do not wish to be involved in , unless the purpose is to make a clear change to the policy .
I would like to begin by highlighting the excellent report produced by Mrs Patrão Neves .
Fishing communities are currently undergoing a difficult period , marked by severe deterioration in fish stocks .
This activity has an impact on the food supply for the general population and on the cohesion of the outermost regions of the European Union .
For this reason , there needs to be an integrated and comprehensive approach to the reform of the common fisheries policy .
I believe that it is urgent and vital for the European Union to engage effectively in ensuring better conditions of economic sustainability for fishermen , within a framework that can safeguard the specific features of each region and that recognises that a different approach is required for small-scale fisheries .
It is worth pointing out the recommendation of concrete measures such as the reduction in the number of middlemen in the chain between the producer and the consumer .
On the other hand , this reform cannot be isolated from the sustainable use of marine resources in a technical and scientific process of assessment that has been thoroughly checked , and which will contribute to the conciliation of the sector and have a bearing on quality and food security for consumers .
Within the context of changing the capacity of fisheries , I would like to emphasise the impact of modernising equipment on the professional dignity and safety of fishermen in a sector where loss of life is common .
The rejection by a majority in Parliament of the proposals that we tabled here , turning down the privatisation of fisheries resources , is indicative of the route that it is attempting to follow with the forthcoming reform of the CFP .
Parliament not only fails to reject the Commission 's proposal for the creation of ( private ) property rights for access to use a public good to be imposed ; it also opens the way for that intention to be made official .
This is an option that does not safeguard the sustainability of resources and it will inevitably lead to a concentration of activity among entities with greater economic and financial power all over the EU , seriously threatening small-scale , coastal fisheries that , in the case of Portugal , represent more than 90 % of the fleet .
We did note some positive points in the report , some of which corresponded with the proposals that we tabled , but we cannot fail to note that overall , the report sticks to a markedly liberal approach , and one which greatly limits the sovereignty of the Member States over their marine resources .
It also fails to provide a thorough response to one of the main issues that the sector is facing : income from work .
We can but point out the rejection of the proposals that we tabled , aimed at improving marketing in the sector , which would increase the remuneration for the fishermen 's work .
in writing . - I am supportive of extending the coastal limits from 12 to 20 miles as one of the key reforms of the CFP .
We must also end the practice of discarding vulnerable stocks .
It is important to retain the current quota management system and I do not support mandatory privatisation of quotas .
in writing . - The report contained many good and important elements and there is a consensus that the centralised , one-size-fits-all model of the CFP has been a disaster .
A number of amendments tabled by myself were successful and thus , the report recognises relative stability , the need to incentivise conservation efforts and the success that has been national control within the 12-mile zone .
However , the report goes on to state that historical rights should be reviewed .
Fisheries management must be returned to the fishing nations ; those fishing nations must not lose their historical rights .
I therefore voted against a report which invites an attack on such fundamental traditional rights of access to fish stocks .
A fundamental and comprehensive reform of the common fisheries policy ( CFP ) is to be welcomed , particularly with a view to the sustainable management of fish resources .
This is to be enabled by refining and standardising the framework conditions , better controls on the part of the Member States , and simplifying the decision-making system .
Even though Austria , as an inland country , is not directly concerned , the steadily growing consumption of sea fish is influencing fishing .
We need practical and efficient solutions that offer the sector a basis for sufficient viability through good stock conditions , ensure supply to consumers and , at the same time , guarantee the maintenance of species diversity and safeguard the marine ecosystem as a whole .
in writing . - This report is a broad document that covers all the aspects of the CFP , from aquaculture to angling , from the Baltic Sea to fisheries agreements with third world countries .
The Greens are happy about many of the amendments to the report that we managed to get accepted , such as fundamental principles on demands for sustainability on those that will have the right to fish , demands of environmental impact assessments on fisheries operations , the statement that the EU should not compete with local fishermen under the fisheries agreements , but only be allowed to fish from a surplus of fish , and also the motion to all EU institutions to put illegal fishing on top of the international agenda in all relevant fora , to protect the oceans as well as food security .
Unfortunately , there were also some completely unacceptable and contradictory paragraphs approved in the final text , such as the objective of the external parts of the CFP is to protect and promote European fisheries interests , that ecological sustainability should not be prioritised over social and economical sustainability and that all policy areas should contribute to fulfilling the CFP 's objectives .
This is why the Green group could not support the report , but abstained .
in writing . - ( PT ) The common fisheries policy , which was last revised in 2002 , is not yet sufficient to weather the vicissitudes of this sensitive sector .
For this reason , it is necessary to analyse the new factors that are affecting the sector and find new solutions to make it completely viable , particularly in economic , social and environmental terms .
I therefore recommend that new measures be taken to allow the fishing sector to escape from its current perilous situation .
The fisheries industry is very important in the EU .
It is therefore vital that the new CFP takes account of the rational and responsible management of resources , and that it concerns itself with protecting marine resources and maintaining the way of life of those who have always earned their living from fishing .
The new CFP needs to be capable of resolving productivity problems within the sector , stabilising markets and ensuring a good standard of living for families who are dependent on this sector .
However , this sector should be analysed as a whole , not in sections , so that we can integrate all its problems and vicissitudes in order to resolve them to the satisfaction of all those involved , and overcome the main problems affecting it : overfishing , overcapacity , overinvestment and wastage .
That fishing has a long tradition in Europe , and , one hopes , also will have in the future , is welcome .
Developments in these last few years certainly indicate that working in this sector of the economy is becoming fundamentally less attractive .
The reason for this is that groups of companies with their masses of fish products are pushing retail prices down so far that small fishing businesses cannot compete .
As a result of these circumstances , this sector is increasingly becoming the province of workers from third countries .
On account of the fact that this motion for a resolution does not sufficiently deal with this issue , I voted against it .
in writing . - I abstained in the final vote on the Neves Patrão report because it contained both positive and negative paragraphs .
In one side , agrees that priority access should be given to those who fish in the most environmentally sustainable way , leading to fewer discards , more jobs and less energy use , and stresses that the right to fish must be based on environmental and social criteria , rather than on who caught the most fish 30 years ago .
It is years of overfishing that has led to the current crisis , so it is absurd to let the same fleets continue the damage .
Other positive points include making ecological sustainability the basic premise of the CFP and the recognition that EU fleets must no longer overfish in the waters of developing countries .
Unfortunately , less constructive ideas are also in the report , such as a refusal to accept the destructive influence of subsidies .
The report also declares the CFP to be the dominant policy in the EU , with environment and development policies being subservient to it .
It is this ' preserve the fishing industry at all costs ' attitude that has led to the destruction of the marine ecosystem and the fishing communities that depend upon it .
The German members of the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe voted differently from the group as a whole on two points .
The first concerns Amendment 3 from the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance .
The FDP members voted against , because a radical devolution of fisheries policy such as proposed in the motion with the transfer of powers and responsibility to Member States and to local decision makers cannot be reconciled with the European common fisheries policy .
The idea here is precisely to find common forward-looking solutions at an EU level .
FDP members supported Amendment 33 because it supports the important principle of relative stability , which is important for Germans .
This concerns the basis for quota allocation .
The European fishing industry is sailing through troubled waters : fish stocks are plummeting , 400 000 European fishermen and their families are worrying about their future and wondering about the effectiveness of the common fisheries policy ( CFP ) which , until now , has provided them with a safety net .
In the light of the structural problems identified , namely overfishing , underinvestment , overcapacity of the fishing fleet and waste ( how many tonnes of fish are discarded into the sea every day because they are not fit for consumption ? ) , reform of the CFP must be a top priority .
Clearly , any reform must take account of the individual features of the various fishing areas and avoid at all costs a one-size-fits-all management model .
The fishing techniques and vessels used in the North Sea are quite different from those used in the Gulf of Gascony .
That is why the reform proposed by the Commission , which is based on regionalisation and which was adopted by Parliament this afternoon , is essential .
A responsible policy must also take account of the reality as presented by the figures : the EU accounts for approximately 4.5 % of world fishing production and does not aspire to become a ' giant ' in the sector .
This is yet another reason why we must opt for small-scale , innovative and sustainable fishing .
in writing . - The Commission 's Green Paper on this issue was a damning indictment and an honest recognition that the common fisheries policy has not worked .
On the contrary , it has contributed to a variety of problems which continue to have economic , social and environmental impacts .
Only two weeks ago , this House voted in favour of suspending international trade in bluefin tuna because of the critically low stocks - a situation which is yet another sign that our current levels of fishing are unsustainable and have serious consequences for biodiversity and the future of the fishing sector .
We must recognise that a new approach is needed .
A decentralised policy with more funding will allow different regions to adapt and respond to their own circumstances - something that the previous ' top-down ' policy prevented .
This should lead to better management of stocks and have a positive effect on the marine environment .
I fully support the Commission 's commitment to whole-scale and fundamental reform , which has been rightly backed by the Committee on Fisheries .
It is vital that we act to ensure that the European Union implements a truly sustainable fishing policy in order to protect stocks , the environment , and European jobs in the long term .
in writing . - I supported amendments put forward to change the common fisheries policy in a way which would have ended some of the distortions that exist already .
Increasing any funding for renewal of fleets or setting prices for fish centrally are particularly distorting and allow for increased use of subsidies .
Fishermen in the UK , particularly along the south coast in the 10 metre boats , are often badly affected by imbalanced quotas and subsidies to other national fishing fleets .
Hastings and Rye MP , Mike Foster , has brought to my attention the need for the Marine Fishing Agency and the Commission to end discriminatory and distorting practices , especially in the catching of cod along the UK south coast , and particularly his own constituency Hastings and Rye , which we both represent .
I abstained from the vote on the report on the common fisheries policy as it contains too many points that not only conflict with a number of other points in the report but also run counter to my political perspective on European fisheries policy .
On the one hand , the report says that European fishing fleets may no longer overfish the waters of developing countries , but on the other , it says that the common fisheries policy always takes precedence over environmental and development policies .
This position is patently at variance with the Treaty of Lisbon , Article 208 of which states that our foreign policy must not undermine the development objectives of poor countries .
The policy proposed by Parliament most certainly benefits Europe , but outside European waters , Europe is championing only its own fishing fleets and not the local fish stocks and fishermen .
The Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance has therefore abstained .
In addition , whilst the report does recognise that there is a serious problem of overfishing and that sustainability must form the starting point for the policy , it fails to recognise that fleet capacity and the subsidy and quota systems are at the root of this problem .
That explains our abstention .
The report on the Green Paper on the reform of the common fisheries policy , which we adopted today , revises the economic , social and environmental aspects of this policy , with the aim of redefining the approach to resolving the remaining problems within the sector .
I would like t