Resumption of the session
I declare resumed the session of the European Parliament adjourned on Thursday , 31 January 2008 .
Statement by the President
Ladies and gentlemen , the Kosovo Parliament declared Kosovo 's independence yesterday .
This decision was expected and reflects the will of the citizens in Kosovo to take their political fate and institutional shaping of independence peacefully into their own hands .
About a year ago , the European Parliament , as a consequence of the Ahtisaari report , agreed on the supervised sovereignty of Kosovo .
The negotiations between Belgrade and Priština were extremely difficult and regrettably did not lead to a solution which was acceptable politically to all participants .
As so often in politics , there was no magic formula .
The heavy burden of recent history contributed to this situation .
However , the case of Kosovo is not a precedent .
The situation of Kosovo as a UN protectorate is unique and is a special case which cannot be compared with others .
I would like to call upon all those involved and appeal to them for reason and calm .
I am sure that everyone in Kosovo - Serbs and Kosovans -wishes to achieve stability and prosperity in their region .
Indeed , that is the primary objective of the European Union and the European Parliament .
It is our task and duty to encourage the political leaders in Kosovo to assume their responsibilities and to create democratic political institutions which respect the rights and freedoms of all citizens in the context of a multiethnic Kosovo which lives in good-neighbourly relations with its neighbours .
In that connection , I also welcome the decision by the Council to send the EULEX Kosovo mission led by Yves de Kermabon .
The task of the mission will be to provide assistance to the Kosovans in the field of policing and the rule of law to ensure a smooth transition .
I also welcome the appointment of Pieter Feith as EU Special Representative in Kosovo .
This demonstrates the European Union 's clear and resolute commitment and our will to do something practical for lasting stability in the Balkans .
I trust in the wisdom of the decision to be made by the General Affairs Council at its meeting this afternoon .
The countries of the Western Balkans have European prospects .
Their accession will not be able to take place in the near future , but each of these countries has this prospect .
In light of that , we should help the people in Serbia and in Kosovo to overcome their differences from the point of view of European integration , as has already happened in other parts of Europe .
The debate scheduled for Wednesday will be an initial opportunity to do this .
Approval of Minutes of previous sitting : see Minutes
Dispute as to the validity of the mandate of a Member : see Minutes
Request for the defence of parliamentary immunity : see Minutes
Membership of committees and delegations : see Minutes
Temporary Committee on Climate Change ( extension of term of office ) : see Minutes
Corrigenda to texts adopted : see Minutes
Signature of acts adopted under codecision : see Minutes
Abuse of power by large supermarkets operating in the European Union ( written declaration ) : see Minutes
Texts of agreements forwarded by the Council : see Minutes
Lapsed written declarations : see Minutes
Documents received : see Minutes
Oral questions and written declarations ( submission ) : see Minutes
Petitions : see Minutes
Transfers of appropriations : see Minutes
Action taken on Parliament 's resolutions : see Minutes
Order of business
The final version of the draft agenda for the current part-session , as drawn up by the Conference of Presidents at its meeting of Thursday , 14 February 2008 , pursuant to Rules 130 and 131 of the Rules of Procedure , has been distributed .
The following amendments have been proposed :
Monday / Tuesday :
No amendments .
Wednesday :
The IND / DEM Group has requested that the vote on the report by Mr Corbett and Mr Méndez de Vigo on the Lisbon Treaty be adjourned to a subsequent part-session .

on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - Mr President , it is your task to give this Parliament a good image as a serious scrutiniser of European affairs .
I would therefore ask you to reschedule the vote on the Treaty .
The deadline for amendments to the report was set before we received the Treaty from the committee .
We have still not received the consolidated version you promised .
That runs contrary to a unanimous decision adopted in the Committee on Constitutional Affairs .
I started asking questions on the basis of a private consolidated version and have already found misleading mistakes in the translations .
For 29 years you and I have disagreed on constitutional matters , except for transparency .
Our disagreements have always been dealt with in a serious way , after proper scrutiny in the Committee on Constitutional Affairs .
I fight for transferring competences from the non-elected Commission to this directly-elected Parliament .
We have proposed that no EU law should be passed without the approval of this House .
How can we defend this report to the European Parliament when you close our decision-making process before anyone in this House has read a readable version of the Treaty ?
The last IGC represents the most secretive negotiations on a treaty we have ever seen .
I urge you to keep the debate on Wednesday , but to move the vote so that we can be seen to be a serious parliament by all the citizens of Europe .
We are not part of the executive .
We represent the voters .
rapporteur . - Mr President , what we are voting on is not the Consolidated Treaty , but the Treaty of Lisbon .
That was published in the Official Journal on 17 December 2007 .
I have it here .
We have all had it .
Admittedly , that is a text that amends the existing Treaties , and to work on it you need to look at the amendments contained in the Lisbon Treaty and also at the original Treaties .
But that is exactly what we , as elected representatives , are paid to do : to look at the details , and to take the trouble to compare the texts and see what changes have been made .
It is true that it would also be helpful to have a consolidated treaty that shows what the Treaties will look like when this Treaty is ratified - I say ' when ' it is ratified , because I am sure it will be - and which citizens will find much easier to read .
However , almost all our national governments have already published consolidated versions of the Treaty in their own language .
I have here the English version of the consolidated Treaties , as they will look once the Lisbon Treaty has been adopted .
I understand , furthermore , that one of the first governments to publish a consolidated version was the Danish Government - in Danish .
So I am sure Mr Bonde has had no difficulty in finding a consolidated , readable version of the Treaties to help him in his work in the Committee on Constitutional Affairs .
( Applause )
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , I will keep this very brief .
I must say , I am rather surprised why , for weeks and months , there has been such active , massive and , in part , aggressive opposition to a Treaty when the Members opposing it do not even know which Treaty we are talking about .
( Applause )
Mr Corbett has made the essential point : this is not about the Consolidated Treaty , it is about the contents of the Reform Treaty .
There are different opinions .
That is quite normal in a democracy ; indeed , it is a good thing that opinions differ and that there is a lively debate .
However , everyone should also take note of others ' opinions and allow a vote to take place .
We have been discussing this Treaty very earnestly for weeks and months and it is now time to send out a clear signal as to whether the majority of this House is in favour or against it .
Outbursts and attempts to prevent others from speaking , which is what we have witnessed here , could give the wrong message to the public .
Please , let the majority of this House decide this week whether it is for or against the Treaty .
That is what democracy is all about .
( Applause )

Mr President , in response to Mr Corbett , who says that a consolidated version is available in Danish , I can confirm that there is a version based on a draft from October 2007 , but that no consolidated version is yet available based on what was approved in Lisbon on 13 December 2007 .
There are 7 000 more words in the new edition , and I would like Mr Swoboda - who seems to be the expert - to explain what the content of those 7 000 new words is .
( Laughter )
( Parliament rejected the request by roll-call vote )
Thursday :
No amendments .
( The agenda was therefore adopted )
One-minute speeches ( Rule 144 )
We now come to the one-minute speeches on important political issues .
( EL ) Mr President , it is no secret that the declared target for biofuels has been set at 10 % of renewable energy sources .
I have the impression that the Commissioners for energy , the environment , industry and agriculture have different views .
In the interests of saving time I will not refer to private communications .
Nevertheless , how is it that there are four Commissioners and four different views ?
What message , Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , can I pass on to Greek farmers who have converted or wish to convert their crops to produce first-generation biofuels following the restructuring of the CMO in sugar ?
( RO ) For the near festival organized by the European Parliament as part of the intercultural dialogue , each country was requested to produce a film on this theme .
From what I understand , Romania 's initial proposal was not accepted for the reason of not answering to the theme , but the production replacing it , namely the film California Dreaming , has even bigger shortcomings .
The first one is that it answers even less to the theme , despite its opening night at Cannes , mystifying the reality and altering my country 's image .
While all the other films transpose the intercultural dialogue at a personal , human level , the film California Dreaming relates an imaginary case of an American transport through Romania , which is stopped by the local authorities and ends in a civil war .
Moreover , the film is pigmented with obscene language , and scenes of explicit sex and violence , a unique case in the festival .
I don 't believe all these are virtues of the intercultural dialogue .
But the biggest shortcoming is that , apparently , this film was not selected by the Romanian party , but by the European Parliament public servants .
If this is true , the situation is serious , because an apolitical concept , such as the intercultural dialogue , is consciously politicized for obscure reasons , thus damaging the image of a European Union Member State .
Consequently , I request the European Parliament to examine this matter .

( ES ) Mr President , transparency must be one of the cornerstones of EU institutions : for this Parliament too , and even more so for the European Commission , where senior officials have immense power , but hardly any political control at all .
Thus I wish to denounce in this House the Commission 's practice of replying to political resolutions of this House through mechanisms similar to the times of the ' Politburo ' or ' Kremlinologists ' who analysed documents .
I refer , for instance , although this is only one example , to the Minutes of the sitting of 13 December 2007 , under the heading ' Action taken on Parliament 's resolutions ' , where it is stated that a Commission communication on the action taken on a resolution adopted by Parliament had been distributed .
This text , Mr President , is published in English and French , not in all the official Community languages , as SP / 207 / 5401 , on a web page it took me three weeks to find with the assistance of secretarial staff and other House officials .
Without transparency there can be no democracy ; what we have here is hypocrisy in the Commission 's discourse , claiming it has consulted Parliament and subsequently burying its documents and replies on the web without publicising them in any way .
( PL ) Mr President , the debate on genetically modified organisms has come to the fore again in recent weeks .
Polish farmers could reduce production costs by introducing GMOs , but do not wish to do so .
This is because they want to protect European consumers and ensure that Polish agri-food products remain both healthy and good to eat .
Unfortunately , however , Polish farmers are bound by Union provisions .
Each Member State of the Union ought to be able to decide for itself whether or not to introduce genetically modified organisms on its territory .
Given that European taxpayers are already making a substantial contribution to supporting agriculture , agricultural products ought at least to be healthy , good to eat , and not contain any surprises .
Mr President , on Wednesday this week , Parliament will discuss the Lisbon Treaty , and citizens will watch this House on these institutional questions .
But citizens are even more interested to see European institutions tackle the practical question of European policy-making .
One of the most important issues is transparency and lobbying .
The EU Commission was well-advised , three years ago , to launch a so-called transparency initiative , but now we hear that the Commission wants to present a register in which no names of lobbyists would appear and no meaningful information on how much money is spent on lobbying would be available .

I warn the President of the Commission , Mr Barroso , and I also warn Mr Kallas not to undermine the credibility you have in Europe on the transparency initiative , but to come up with a meaningful register .
This is what citizens need , to believe in fair policy-making and decision-making in Brussels .
( CS ) My original intention was to address an entirely different topic .
Circumstances however , have forced me to express my opinion on a particularly serious matter , the proclamation of independence of Kosovo by Albanian separatists .
I am convinced that this development , which is contrary to international law , will have tragic consequences and repercussions for all of Europe .
It is particularly tragic that the EU intends to endorse this act of separatism carried out at the expense of Serbia , an already heavily tried sovereign state .
This is fundamentally unacceptable .
The whole scenario of this separatist act reminds me vividly of events that took place in 1938 in my own home country of Czechoslovakia .
At the time an act of separatism carried out by German nationalists and also supported at the time by the Western powers was followed by the most terrible war in history .
It is well known that history either repeats itself as a farce or as a tragedy .
We must not allow either of these situations to arise .
I call on this House to oppose this separatist act and infringement of Serbian sovereignty .
( BG ) Mr. Chairman , Dear colleagues , I am taking the floor , urged by a huge social , economic , environmental and moral problem which has been eroding the Bulgarian society for 18 years now .
Instead of being resolved , it continues to grow like a malignant tumour with unpredictable consequences .
I am talking about Kremikovtzi Metallurgical Works , which is supposed to play a strategic role in the Bulgarian economy .
Unfortunately , over the last decade and a half , instead of generating revenues to the treasury , it has turned into a canker for the whole society .
It is used only for the private gain of certain mafia groups and as a source to fill the coffers of political parties .
And all this has been going on under the protection of several governments in a row , including the incumbent one .
It is particularly alarming that the current crisis of Kremikovtzi , faced with the real threat of closing down and depriving ten thousand workers and their families of livelihood , is the direct result of the actions of people linked to both the criminal underworld and the top establishment .
These are the former CEO Valentin Zakhariev , the former Prosecutor General Nikola Filchev , and the former head of the specialised police task forces ( " the berrets ” ) Filko Slavov .
Their names are associated not only with the management of Kremikovtzi but also with the darkest sides of Bulgagria 's transition to democracy , including the assassination of the military prosecutor Nikolay Kolev .
As it turns out these people have enjoyed and continue to enjoy protection by the judiciary and the government .
They continue to feel above the laws .
I am confident that it is inconceivable for a member state to ...
( The Chairman interrupts the speaker )
( RO ) Mr. President , dear colleagues , at the beginning of February , the European Commission published the Interim Report on Progress in Romania with Judiciary Reform .
This year 's Final Report is prepared for June and will decide whether the safeguard clause will be applied or not .
I believe this will not be the case , since the institutions criticized for staying behind can solve their problems in the four monitored fields during this period .
The enforcement of the safeguard clause would mean non-recognition of the court orders in the Member States , which would affect the citizens and parties to proceedings who are not to blame for the fact that the relevant institutions , the Government and the Parliament , fail to fulfil their obligations .
The enforcement of the safeguard clause should be considered as not to be directed against the Romanian citizens because it is normal for those who are guilty of not meeting their obligations to answer for it , and not the Romanian citizens .
( HU ) Mr President , on 13 February Australia 's Labour Prime Minister Kevin Rudd made a formal apology on behalf of the Australian government for the indignities inflicted on the indigenous Aboriginal population over two centuries .
This gesture speaks for itself , and it is especially topical for us here in Europe .
More than 60 years on from the tragic events that occurred during and after the second World War , there is a country in Europe where three million people - your people , Mr President - were driven into exile , while another half a million citizens were deprived of their citizenship , their human rights and their property .
To this date , no apology has been made .
Europe is built not on nationalism and confrontation , but on apologies and forgiveness , on the politics of reconciliation .
Instead of focusing on collective guilt and scapegoat-seeking , it would be good if the leaders of every Member State in the European Union and in Europe were guided by a commitment to adhere unconditionally to fundamental European values , to respect each other , to apologise , and to protect human and minority rights . Thank you very much .
Mr President , next Sunday , on 24 February , Estonians will celebrate the 90th anniversary of the birth of their independent statehood .
In spite of being a relatively young state , Estonia has been part of European cultural heritage and shared values since the 13th century .
However , a special feature of the 90 years since the proclamation of independence that we share with our neighbours - Latvians and Lithuanians - is that we have enjoyed freedom for only 39 years , because of foreign occupations .
Therefore , I would like to recall one important fact : exactly 25 years ago , the European Parliament , as the first European institution to do so , reacted to the appeal of 45 freedom fighters from Lithuania , Latvia and Estonia , and adopted a resolution supporting the idea of restoring sovereignty to the three occupied Baltic nations .
I would like to thank all previous and current Members of the European Parliament who courageously expressed solidarity with the three Baltic nations .
Mr President , in the lead-up to the Beijing Olympics , the focus of the international community is on China 's record for violations of human rights .
However , we must not forget that other species , primarily the tigers , are suffering too .
Their numbers are being devastated due to huge demand - largely from China - for tiger-related products .
The cause of their looming extinction is the illegal poaching of tigers in India .
Even in reserves , keepers have been shot to get at the tigers .
These are then illegally transported across the border to China .
It is estimated that one tiger is killed every day .
At this rate the tiger will be virtually extinct within the next five years .
I welcome the news last week that the Indian Government plans to create eight new reserves to protect their dwindling population of tigers .
Nevertheless , it will take five years to set up new reserves , and in the last five years the population of tigers has already dropped by over 50 % .
Therefore , unless the European Union and international community take urgent action in curbing demand and tackling illegal poaching and trafficking , and changing attitudes in China on tiger-related products , the new reserves will be too little too late .
Finally , I hope you will support me on Tiger Protection Awareness Day .
( The President cut off the speaker )
( HU ) Thank you , Mr President .
Ladies and gentlemen , the blatantly racist comments made by Mr Silvio Berlusconi last week , in which he called for zero tolerance towards Roma , illegal immigrants and criminals , are shocking and unacceptable .
In a statement yesterday , Mr Francesco Storace , who is running for mayor of the Italian capital , spoke of ' denomadising ' Rome , thereby making it clear that Roma have no place in the eternal city .
Can these statements be happening just 18 days after the European Parliament adopted a resolution on a European Strategy on the Roma ?
I would ask my fellow Members from Italy to explain to their colleagues at home why it was that we supported this resolution , the objectives it contains that we formulated together , and why abusing Gypsies is inappropriate in the 21st century .
The open letter published by me in connection with these anti-Romani statements was signed by a total of 72 Roma non-governmental organisations including 33 in Italy , 12 in Hungary , 9 in Macedonia , 4 in Romania , 3 in Turkey , 2 in Moldova , 5 in Bulgaria , and 2 in France . Thank you .
( PL ) Mr President , Mr Alexander Milinkiewicz , the leader of the opposition in Belarus , has been detained once again in Minsk today .
Mr Milinkiewicz is a Sakharov laureate . The European Parliament awarded him this prize in 2006 .
Mrs Olga Kazulin has also been detained .
She is the wife of Mr Alexander Kazulin , a prominent opponent of Mr Lukaszenko .
Mr Milinkiewicz took part in a demonstration organised by private entrepreneurs , whose freedom of action has been restricted by new provisions increasing their tax burden and restricting their freedom to employ workers .
It was not the first demonstration in which this social group had expressed its discontent .
The march organisers were also detained and interrogated along with Mr Milinkiewicz and Mrs Kazulin , who had not participated in the march .
How many times has Europe watched passively whilst the one of its own laureates was detained ?
How many times have human rights been violated with impunity just beyond the Union 's eastern border ?
( PL ) Mr President , last week the Polish media reported the story of Karolina , a young girl whose life has been ruined by her former boyfriend .
Without her knowledge or consent , the boyfriend recorded their shared private experiences and posted the recordings on the Internet after the end of their relationship .
Karolina 's family and friends received e-mails containing pornographic material .
As she is not a minor , Karolina is not protected under Polish law and the perpetrator of this action remains unpunished .
The Polish authorities have undertaken to change the law at the earliest opportunity , so as to protect individuals whose privacy and dignity have been violated in this way .
The Internet transcends national borders , however , and there is no common Union legislation to deter potential perpetrators and penalise those who commit actions of this kind .
I appeal to the Commission and to the Member States to combat such behaviour , which could be described as rape over the Internet .
( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , too many animal sanctuaries in Europe basically serve only one purpose , and that is to dispose of stray cats and dogs .
This sounds cruel in itself , but the real cruelty is only revealed in the methods deployed for this purpose , which entail every conceivable form of barbarity , from poisoning to starvation and clubbing to death .
The worst aspect of this scenario , however , is that these cruel acts are not taking place far away in distant countries ; no , as committed activists from Austria have told me , they are happening right on our doorsteps .
Cases of animal cruelty only recently came to light in the Czech Republic , for example .
What is also worrying is the Commission 's brief and pithy statement that the protection of domestic animals still falls within the jurisdiction of the Member States .
It seems that the Commission very often acts when it is not supposed to , and takes far too little action when it ought to .
This situation must change , for a national competence does not mean that the EU should distance itself from an issue entirely .
I therefore appeal to all Members not to kill off the issue of animal killing stations in their own countries by remaining silent .
I also appeal to the Commission and the Council to condemn these cruel acts .
Mr President , I am seriously concerned by the misconception that a colleague of mine , Sahra Wagenknecht , spread in an interview with the Russian news agency ' Regnum ' on 7 February this year .
She accused the Estonian Government of disregarding human rights , and the European Union of conducting a silent cover-up with regard to the ' Bronze Night ' and the trials that followed in Estonia .
I can assure you that the ongoing trials of the people accused of organising the riots are being carried out in accordance with the rule of law and with respect for human rights .
I would also like to remind my colleague that one of the purposes of the state is to guard the sanctity of private property .
The marauding in Tallinn last year had nothing to do with freedom of expression or the right to demonstrate .
Criminal acts were committed , and that is why the state was obliged to intervene .
Justification of crime is no ennoblement to a politician and , fortunately , the views of Sahra Wagenknecht cannot to be said to extend to all the political left .
( PL ) Mr President , the Parliament in Kosovo declared independence yesterday .
Serbia has therefore lost the cradle of its nationhood for the second time in history .
I would remind the House that the Turks first seized this province from Serbia in the Middle Ages .
In our times , supported by Member States of the Union and by our own silence , Serbia has once again suffered the loss of this territory , which is so precious to it .
Ladies and gentlemen , Kosovo 's declaration of independence constitutes a violation of international law on the inviolability and integrity of borders and countries .
Kosovo 's declaration of independence also amounts to opening Pandora 's box , because it will foster extremism and nationalism and may fuel extremism of all kinds within Europe and beyond .
We already have to deal , amongst other things , with similar claims in Ossetia , Nagorno-Karabakh and the Basque Country .
This is a very ill-judged move as far as one particular Member State is concerned , namely Cyprus .
How is that country supposed to respond ? Cyprus is striving for reunification at the same time as we are supporting separatist movements .
We should not accept the independence of Kosovo , because it poses a threat to the security of Europe and above all to the internal security of Serbia .
( DE ) Mr President , Russia will be holding presidential elections at the beginning of March , but there are few signs of a positive outcome being likely .
What has happened in the run-up to these elections ?
The opposition has been systematically obstructed and silenced , press freedom comprehensively curtailed , and the arrangements for the elections disrupted .
Let me give you just one example : the Russian opposition politician Garry Kasparov , who is highly critical of the Kremlin , was arrested again by the police last week on completely spurious grounds .
What will happen during the election ?
There will be no transparency in these elections , for Russia has put obstacles in the way of election monitoring by the OSCE .
What will happen after the election ?
It is highly unlikely that the human rights situation will improve under a President Dmitry Medvedev enthroned by Putin .
The EU must take action here .
The Russian population should not be left to cope on its own .
( Applause )
( HU ) Mr President , Kosovo 's independence signifies a major change in the Balkans .
This step , albeit painful , seems to be another inevitable rung on the ladder towards settlement in the Balkans .
As far as Kosovo 's future is concerned , we need a solution that will secure the collective and individual rights of an indigenous minority , the Serbs , and ensure that they can continue to live as a community in their historic birthplace .
If some of them nevertheless wish to leave Kosovo , however , we must prevent them from going to areas of Serbia inhabited by other ethnic groups , such as the Albanian-populated southern areas or the Hungarian-populated northern regions .
A mass influx of this sort would simply create new tensions between the Serbs , who are understandably irritated at present , and these minorities .
By averting this risk we could facilitate another settlement that would include the long-term , and not merely superficial , regulation of relations between Belgrade and Novi Sad , and between the indigenous minorities in Vojvodina and the state ; it could also help to break the deadlock and enable a functioning state to be established in Bosnia .
Desirable developments such as these would be fostered by the system of ethnic rights and tolerance that is now to be put in place in Kosovo . Thank you , Mr President .
Mr President , I wish to point out that there are genuine concerns amongst trade unions in many Member States about the recent European Court judgment on the Laval issue .
The Commission must urgently publish its view on how this decision impacts on the labour relations systems and , indeed , the collective bargaining systems of each of our Member States .
I know the impact in Sweden is significant , and it is much less so in Ireland .
Nevertheless , action is needed to make clear that the EU does not sanction social dumping anywhere .
It is particularly important that the Commission and the Member States take steps to prevent the catastrophist predictions of the Euro-sceptics becoming the common view of the issue .
Genuine concerns need to be addressed and any loopholes for the unscrupulous to exploit must be closed off in European and legislative initiatives by European and national parliaments .
I urge you , Mr President , to convey this matter to Commissioner Špidla and Commissioner McCreevy , both of whom have a role in this matter .
( HU ) Thank you , Mr President .
In my earlier intervention I mentioned that I am able to speak in my mother tongue here , but am not able to do so at home .
By ' here ' of course I was referring to the European Parliament , and ' at home ' , obviously enough , refers to the Slovak national parliament .
Outside parliament we can of course use our mother tongue ; we can even use it in some higher education institutions , albeit to a much lesser extent than is warranted in view of the proportion of Hungarian speakers in the population .
Of the 6.4 % ethnic Hungarians in the population , barely 4 % are represented in higher education and only 1.6 % are studying in their mother tongue .
For the first time in around 50 years , Hungarian-speaking Csángó children in eastern parts of Romania are able to learn Hungarian again , although in some villages this only takes place outside of school , if at all .
In spite of this , the statement made by Commissioner Orban on the so-called ' second mother tongue ' was encouraging .
We are sure that from now on the majority ethnic groups in European countries will place importance not only on the acquisition of the official language of the state , but also on ensuring that other groups living alongside them are able to preserve their mother tongue and learn it at every level in their own education institutions , and that they are able to use their mother tongue in the public administration , in the courts and in the legislature .
2008 is the Year of Intercultural Dialogue .
May it live up to its name . Thank you .
( BG ) Mr. Chairman , All countries are affected by the problem of raising children in a disadvantaged position .
Children 's rights and their protection call for an integrated policy .
The reduction of the number of institutionalised children is a wonderful goal but , in all countries , there will always be children in need of care by society because they have no parents or they are socially disadvantaged for other reasons .
What we need is solidarity with these children and these countries rather than ostentatious clout that degrades their dignity .
I call upon the European Commission to undertake the development of special programmes for children in disadvantaged position , taking into account what the Member States have achieved and preventing any attempts at tarnishing their good name .
The dissemination of biased information , as is the case with a home in Bulgaria , should not be encouraged .
This affects the image of my country . It does not contribute positively to the common European policy .
We need programmes for productive education of socially disadvantaged children , regardless of the manner and place in which they are raised ; prevention of the exploitation of child labour and the involvement of children in various activities which affect their behaviour negatively .
( EL ) Mr President , I should like to remind you that on 13 December 2006 the United Nations plenary session ratified the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities .
The ratification of this convention has been ongoing since March 2007 , but only 16 countries , two of which are EU Member States , have ratified it .
I think that since the EU has promoted a policy supporting the rights of the disabled in culture and human dignity , all Member States should ratify this convention .
Its 50 articles describe in detail the rights of persons with special needs in every area of human activity ( health , justice , family ) and call for them to participate in decision making .
( RO ) The European nationality offers a series of rights and freedoms on the entire EU territory .
For this reason , by signing the Treaty establishing the European Community , the Member States undertook the obligation to prohibit any discrimination .
Nevertheless , a few days ago , I was informed about the case of a Romanian citizen who was not allowed to rent a car in Brussels for the reason of having Romanian nationality .
The employee 's refusal was merely based on an internal rule of the given car rental office .
In recent days , I have found out from various citizens of my country of many other cases of discrimination on the criterion of Romanian nationality .
Dear colleagues , it is our duty , as representatives of over 490,000,000 Europeans , to raise an alarm .
Through an active dialogue with our fellow citizens , we can contribute so that such incidents would be avoided in the future .
I consider it to be the European Union 's duty , as a democratic entity , to promote respect for the rights of all the Union 's citizens by initiating European programmes of education and information against discrimination .
I also request the European Commission to verify whether the Member States comply with the obligations they undertook via treaties , regarding discrimination based on nationality .
( CS ) In your contribution you spoke about the importance of ensuring that the International Protectorate in Kosovo remains part of Serbia in conformity with Resolution 1244 and international law .
I am not sure what relation this has with the proclamation of independence of Kosovo , with which you seem to agree .
You are certainly right in saying that it is our duty to ensure that Kosovo become once more multiethnic and democratic .
This unilateral proclamation of independence is an unprecedented breach of international law .
Several hundred thousand inhabitants of this territory , who belong to eight different ethnic groups , were banned from their homes with the silent consent of the occupation forces .
It is difficult to believe that these forces have not been able to create conditions for their return .
Today , instead of helping to create such conditions , you agree with the unilateral proclamation of a second Albanian state .
Mr President , does it not matter to you that the economy of this state seems to be dependant on opium trade in Europe ?
The Parliament of the Czech Republic as well as Parliaments of other countries has demanded a solution to this issue through international negotiations .
Let us realise that one-off solutions , as mentioned in your contribution , do not exist .
Any solution sets a precedent .
Let us not allow the breach of the Serbian sovereignty .
Mr Kohlíček , may I recommend that you read my statement through again .
I think that might clear up any misunderstandings .
( HU ) Mr President , I would like to offer my congratulations to the Albanian people of Kosovo on achieving independence , and to pay tribute to the memory of Albanian leader Ibrahim Rugova .
Every settlement plan put forward in the past decade and a half of the Yugoslav region 's tragic history has been conceived in terms of peoples ' self-regulation , of autonomies , and of power-sharing .
The realisation of the Ahtisaari plan , the latest in a series that includes the Carrington Plan , the Dayton Agreement , the Rambouillet negotiations , and the Ohrid Agreement , also demonstrates that there is still a long way to go before we can consider relations among the different ethnic groups and national communities in our region to have been settled .
It also shows , however , that in future a solution to every crisis can be found by means of international cooperation .
In this sense the Kosovo settlement sets an example and a precedent for us .
We are confident that a successful outcome to the peaceful struggle for autonomy by ethnic Hungarians in Romania , and that of the Szekler Land for territorial autonomy , can also be achieved with the beneficial involvement of the European Union .
( SK ) On 25 February 1948 the communists carried out a coup d 'état and established a totalitarian regime in our country .
This was the result of events that had been taking place in the country since 1946 .
Czechoslovakia was gradually losing freedom within the democratic environment of the re-established state .
This is extremely important .
Not only the defeat of Nazism but also the defeat of Communism is part of the heritage of united and peaceful Europe .
Thanks to this event the representatives of ten Member States are able to sit in this House today .
I would like to draw your attention to three issues .
There must be an equal condemnation of the rehabilitation of both the communist and nazi symbols .
Both Communism and Nazism must be perceived as being equal , in particular because of the victims for whom they are responsible .
Both the communist and the nazi totalitarian regimes were established in democratic states through the abuse of democracy .
This is a reason for being vigilant even today , in the European Union .
The victims of Communism would also deserve a minute silence observed in this House .
( EL ) Mr President , according to the provisions of the CMO in tobacco , from 2009 the resources that are now given as direct subsidies to growers from pillar 1 will be transferred to pillar 2 , which deals with structural measures .
In my country , Greece , tobacco is usually grown in semi-barren areas by poor farmers who have no other options .
Therefore , if tobacco-growing is stopped in certain areas we will have social , economic and environmental problems .
I have also observed that the aim is tobacco-growing rather than smoking .
Thus if we put a stop to tobacco-growing at the same time as smoking , we should all be in agreement , and this is how things ought to be .
This is not the case , however .
The European cigarette industry will continue to produce cigarettes , but all the tobacco will simply be imported from third countries .
We should therefore take the opportunity presented by the CAP review to try to remedy this wrong ; we must show that the EU is a place of equality , justice and solidarity .
This is why I ask for the present regime to be maintained after 2009 and for tobacco growers to continue ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
( RO ) On 4 February 2008 , the Romanian Parliament ratified the European Union Reform Treaty .
We welcome this ratification in the Romanian Parliament .
The Reform Treaty reaffirms the principle of equality of its citizens , gives legal force to the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union , introduces the control of subsidiarity by national parliaments , recognizes universal access to the services of general economic interest , emphasizes the importance of energy security and strengthens the spirit of solidarity between Member States in this field , and imposes special measures to the fight against climate changes .
The introduction of the territorial cohesion concept and its recognition as an objective caused the European Parliament committees , with an important role in defining the structural and cohesion policies , to have increased activity after the ratification of the treaty .
From the point of view of the Committee on Transport and Tourism , the Reform Treaty legalizes the procedure of co-decision , which is already used in the field of maritime and air navigation and provides a legal basis for the European Parliament to be able to propose support actions for consolidating the identity of the tourism sector .
( HU ) Thank you , Mr President .
This is the umpteenth time that I have spoken in this Parliament about the ongoing contamination of the River Raba over the past seven years .
We have obtained several promises from the Austrian agencies concerned , and indeed the Austrian and Hungarian authorities have devised a plan of action .
The European Union has been observing this process closely , and the river committee set up by the two countries confers regularly - most recently just this week .
It seems that the politicians are doing their bit , but the thing is that in the meantime the river is dying .
Now , moreover , it is dying not only on the Hungarian side , but on the Austrian side too .
Eleven species of fish have so far died out , and 13 are seriously endangered .
Greenpeace has carried out spot checks on water samples on several occasions , and has established that the Austrian factories are illegally contaminating the water , exceeding permitted levels many times over .
On the river itself , meanwhile , there is more foam than ever .
The river I am speaking of is not a sewer , Mr President , but a Natura 2000 site , a genuine river wetland .
The people who live there feel that either the EU legislation is not good , or compliance with it is inadequate .
I think that we in this House must keep this matter on the agenda until it has been resolved once and for all . Thank you .
I will certainly be doing so .
( RO ) Mr. President , dear colleagues , the financial instruments related to the European Union cohesion policy have a major importance in reducing discrepancies between the regions of Europe .
In the case of the newest European Union Member States , the funds allocated by way of the cohesion policy have a crucial contribution to ensuring the future development of the less prosperous regions in these countries .
The absorption rate of these funds in the new Member States is continuously increasing .
The Union has to adjust the resources allocated by the instruments of the cohesion policy to the reality of an enlarged Europe .
Following Romania 's and Bulgaria 's accession , the guarantee of increasing the financial resources of the cohesion policy after 2013 has become a requirement .
The increase of the cohesion funds is a logical consequence of the recent Union enlargement and it will prove the consistency of the Union 's policy as regards the European regions that are less developed and will represent a strong political signal to the new Member States .
( SK ) Recently we have had much debate about energy efficiency .
Practice shows that current labelling of domestic appliances that informs consumers about how energy-intensive the appliances are does not represent reliable evidence .
Since most appliances sold in shops belong to category A , clear information about the energy savings generated from the use of the appliance is lost and the manufacturer loses the motivation to produce an energy-efficient appliance .
If we want to motivate consumers and manufacturers , we have to ensure that domestic appliances are sorted according to new energy categories .
The original categorisation of appliances has been in operation since 1994 .
I appeal to the European Commission to speed up both the preparation of the new system of labelling appliances and the process of including other appliances in this system that is also under way .
Mr President , I wish to raise an issue in relation to the payment of REPS to farmers .
Over the last 14 years , REPS have been paid at a very early stage once the documentation has been filed with the Commission or with the Department of Agriculture in Ireland .
I now understand that the payments are going to be delayed , and that over 6 000 farmers are already behind in respect of receiving payments .
I also understand that this figure will rise to over 60 000 in the next few months .
The point is that farmers have planned their financial affairs for a 12-month period and have planned with their banks , and now many of them will not be able to make their repayments to the banks as a result of this change .
I would ask for my views to be conveyed to the Commissioner and for this matter to be resolved so that the old procedure -which was in place for 14 years - can be restored .
( FR ) Mr President , international law is quite clear on this point .
As far as Kosovo is concerned a state is said to exist when , firstly , it has a population , secondly a territory and , thirdly , public services .
There are no public services in Kosovo , and the Commission only needs to go there to see as much .
The only service that operates there is the mafia .
A state is sovereign when it has full powers of authority .
Proof , as the President of Parliament has just told us , that Kosovo 's powers of authority have been in a state of supervised sovereignty .
A state is sovereign when its authority is independent , autonomos in Greek , that is to say when it can decide for itself what it does .
In Kosovo it is NATO and the United States that decide .
A state is sovereign when its authority is exclusive .
Within the territory of Kosovo , however , there are several forces at work , not just a single one .
A state is sovereign when it respects the principle of uti possidetis , the inviolability of borders .
In other words , Kosovo does not meet any of the criteria required of a sovereign state under international law .
And why ?
Because after setting up delinquent states and gangster states we are now inventing laboratory states where the European Commission tests and invents federalism by breaking-up countries .
( SK ) Kosovo 's declaration of independence yesterday probably is , and will be , a dangerous precedent for the development of various countries and regions of the world .
The fact that this act has enjoyed significant political and diplomatic support of the US and of the majority of the large states of the European Union makes it even more questionable , as it has been clear since the beginning that this is a violation of international law .
A much better solution for the Balkans would be for the European Union to contribute to greater democratisation in Serbia .
This would in turn create a more positive atmosphere in the process of consolidation of relations between the Serbs and the Albanian minority in their common territory .
Of course this would clearly be a long-term affair .
It is also naive to think that the calls for the rights of minorities to territorial autonomy , boosted by this precedent , will not become an irresolvable problem even for the Member States of the European Union themselves in the near future .
Mr President , could I support my colleague and urge the Commission not to keep picking rows with different sections of the Irish authorities for the next few months , because we have a rather important job on hand ?
Need I spell out exactly what will be required of the Irish in relation to the Lisbon Treaty ?
I rise particularly to complain about the way the officials have picked on the REPS payment system in Ireland .
For over 14 years the Department of Agriculture authorities in Ireland - with the acquiescence of the Commission - had a scheduled payment of the Rural Environment Protection Scheme payments to thousands of farmers and their families .
Now this year , in the last month , the Commission have decided that it cannot be paid now , it must be paid at the end of the year .
Please do not pick rows with Irish farmers or any section in Ireland this year above all years , and let them have the monies they are entitled to have , in the way they have been paid for over 14 years now .
Now is not the time to pick rows .
Please hear us .
That concludes the item .
Request for defence of the parliamentary immunity of Mr Witold Tomczak ( debate )
The next item is the report by Mr Sakalas , on behalf of the Committee on Legal Affairs , on the request for defence of the immunity and privileges of Witold Tomczak .

rapporteur . - Mr President , in April 2005 Mr Tomczak requested that the European Parliament defend his immunity in criminal proceedings , but Parliament decided , a year later , not to defend his immunity .
On 21 May 2007 , Mr Tomczak again requested that the European Parliament defend his immunity .
In the new request , Mr Tomczak presented three new arguments concerning the same case .
The first argument : Mr Tomczak complains that the Court of Ostrów did not grant him access to the files of the case .
However , after examination of his complaint , it was found that Mr Tomczak was granted access to the files when he visited the court himself .
He even photographed at least one of the documents .
The second argument : Mr Tomczak claims that the proceedings are not objective , as the supervisory judge made a request to the judge presiding in the case to deliver the judgment as soon as possible , even without the presence of the accused .
However , this request was issued after Mr Tomczak had failed to appear at the court hearings on as many as 12 occasions .
The third argument : Mr Tomczak alleges that the Court of Ostrów is prejudiced against his person .
However , the fact , declared by Mr Tomczak , that the judge presiding in the case lives in the same town as the prosecutor against whom Mr Tomczak had previously filed charges does not in itself prevent that judge from acting objectively .
In addition , Mr Tomczak has the opportunity to appeal to a higher court and to make a cassation complaint to the Polish Supreme Court .
The argument put forward by Mr Tomczak , who was a member of the Polish Parliament in 1999 , that his national parliamentary immunity remained a formal obstacle to the criminal proceedings should be duly considered by the Polish judicial authorities .
The problematic legal consequence that , according to Polish law , Mr Tomczak might lose his seat in this Parliament has been noted by the Committee on Legal Affairs , and its chairman put an oral question to the Commission .
It was answered on 14 January 2008 by Commissioner Frattini , who promised to address the Polish authorities , with the aim of ensuring that Polish law does not discriminate between Members of the European Parliament and national parliamentarians .
After the debate with the Commission , the Committee on Legal Affairs took a decision not to recommend the defence of Mr Tomczak 's parliamentary immunity on the above grounds .
It is clear that Articles 8 and 9 of the Protocol on the privileges and immunities of the European Communities are not applicable in the case of Mr Tomczak .
His request should be treated as a request for a decision of the European Parliament to ask for suspension of the proceedings against him , as , for example , is possible under Article 105 of the Polish constitution .
Following its established practice , Parliament could decide to defend the immunity of one of its Members if a suspicion existed that the prosecution was based on an intention to prejudice a member 's political activities ( fumus persecutionis ) .
There is no clear evidence of this kind in the case of Mr Tomczak .
In the light of the above considerations , I recommend that the immunity of Mr Tomczak should not be defended .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( PL ) Mr President , the main purpose of parliamentary immunity is to protect Parliament itself as a democratically elected representative body .
It ensures the collective independence of this institution against external pressure and guarantees Members freedom of speech and action whilst undertaking their parliamentary duties .
The legal basis of the immunity of Members of the European Parliament is laid down in the 1965 Protocol on the Privileges and Immunities of the European Communities .
Article 8 of the Protocol states that Members of the European Parliament shall not be subject to any form of inquiry , detention or legal proceedings in respect of opinions expressed or votes cast by them in the performance of their duties .
Similarly , Article 9 states that during sessions of the European Parliament , its Members shall enjoy in the territory of their own State , the immunities accorded to members of their parliament , and in the territory of any other Member State , immunity from any measure of detention and from legal proceedings .
This immunity also applies to Members while they are travelling to and from the place of meeting of the European Parliament .
Pursuant to the above , it should be noted that the charge against Mr Tomczak does not relate to opinions expressed or votes cast by him in the course of his official duties , because he was not a Member of the European Parliament at the time of the events in question .
In view of the circumstances , therefore , there is no legal basis for granting Mr Tomczak parliamentary immunity .
Mr Tomczak 's case has , however , highlighted the lack of consistency between arrangements for election to the Polish Sejm and the European Parliament in Poland regarding conditions to be met by candidates for election , and the circumstances in which after being elected individuals may be deprived of their seat .
This matter was debated at a special sitting and when Poland joined the Union it undertook to comply with the EU legislation in force , notably regarding its direct implications for the internal legislation of a Member State .
I would like to take this opportunity to call for legislation relating to the status of Members of the Polish Sejm and European Parliament to be harmonised at the earliest opportunity .
As things stand at present , a Member of the European Parliament may automatically lose his or her seat as a result of certain actions , whilst a Member of the Polish Sejm may not be penalised in any way for the same actions .
on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( PL ) Mr President , Mr Tomczak 's case is an example of the Polish judicial system 's failure to recognise that when Poland became a Member of the European Union it undertook to comply with the legal system in force in the latter .
The European Parliament has not yet taken a decision on Mr Tomczak 's immunity , but the competent court nonetheless set 15 February , last week , as the date for a sitting .
Not only does such action by the court amount to contempt of the European Parliament , but it also fails to comply with the European Parliament 's Rules of Procedure and with the Polish Penal Code , pursuant to which no penal proceedings may be brought against a Member until the European Parliament has ruled on the issue of immunity .
The situation I have outlined leads to the conclusion that in Mr Tomczak 's case we are dealing either with an exceptionally incompetent court or , alternatively , with a court intent on convicting Mr Tomczak for a minor incident , which in his case would result in him losing his seat in the European Parliament .
Mr President , I urge all Members to vote against the lifting of immunity in the Tomczak case .
We have had a very good debate in the Chamber .
Everyone has agreed that we cannot allow Poland to set double standards : one for MPs at home and another , much stricter one , for MEPs here .
The responsible Commissioner , Mr Frattini , promised to send a letter to the Polish Minister for Justice to insist on identical rules for waiving immunity .
I talked with Commissioner Frattini after the meeting on 14 January , and met with him again two weeks ago , when he said that he had instructed the services to send the letter .
Last week I was in contact with his office .
It confirmed that the letter had been sent , and that I would receive a copy of the letter the same day .
Then somebody suddenly called from Commissioner Frattini 's office telling me a different story , saying that the letter was still pending .
So here we are , with no letter and no answer from the Polish Government .
Our rules are very clear : we have to have a vote .
I would therefore ask you to vote against the waiving of immunity , and request that the case be referred back to the committee for a possible new decision once we have received the letter from Commissioner Frattini and the answer from Poland .
rapporteur . - Mr President , I think that the consequences of the issue of waiving immunity are not the same as waiving immunity .
Mr Tomczak was expected and summoned to appear before a court 12 times , but he did not appear at court .
All the procedural and substantive questions raised in connection with Mr Tomczak 's case , and especially the question of the alleged insulting language used against the police officers , should be resolved objectively by the Polish judicial authorities .
Therefore , I would like to stress two points .
The question of whether the immunity of Mr Tomczak was properly waived at the beginning of the proceedings , when he was a member of the Polish Parliament , is a question that can be verified only by the appropriate judicial authority in Poland , in this case the District Court in Ostrów Wielkopolski . There is always the possibility of appeal .

Secondly , the possibility of Mr Tomczak 's losing his seat in this Parliament cannot be considered as a motive for the prosecution , as , at the time of the incident of 19 June 2004 , Mr Tomczak was not a Member of the European Parliament , and the law applicable to national parliamentarians does not contain provisions for such consequences .
On the basis of the above considerations , the Committee on Legal Affairs recommends that the European Parliament should not defend the parliamentary immunity of Mr Tomczak .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow .
Transparency in financial matters ( debate )
The next item is the report by Mr Pomés Ruiz , on behalf of the Committee on Budgetary Control , on transparency in financial matters .
rapporteur . - ( ES ) Mr President , our European Parliament has always wished to implement a policy of transparency with regard to our funds , the EU 's funds .
Such was the case when , perhaps through mismanagement , problems arose that forced the Commission headed by Mr Santer to resign .
Since then it must be said that things have improved considerably ; this Parliament has propelled a policy of transparency , and the Commission has supported the Parliament .
The result of this interest on the part of the Barroso Commission is the creation of nothing less than a Vice-Presidency to achieve this objective , represented here by Vice-President Siim Kallas , whom I welcome .
European citizens must know what we do with the very small amount of money they pay to the EU , what we do with that scant 1 % ; we must have more control over Community funds through visibility .
Visibility is no longer just a notice hung up in a town hall or on a building site financed with regional funds or the Cohesion Fund ; we have to go much further , and it must be possible to determine the whereabouts of that small amount of money provided by European taxpayers through Member States .
That is the Transparency Initiative , which this Parliament supports wholeheartedly . This own-initiative report we are submitting says two things .
The first is that a little more must be done .
In the text we have chosen to say that transparency must be manifested by the publication of black lists and information as to which tenderers have been accepted and which have been excluded , and OLAF must have a code to guarantee the presumption of innocence , which has not been the case on many occasions .
In other words , within the EU , the European Parliament already has its own code of ethics .
We are not officials , we are politicians ; we must be transparent too , and we already are .
Thus in Amendment 2 to paragraph 22 , I request that the list proposed by the Transparency Initiative be removed , in the main not only because this Parliament has already taken decisions on our financial interests , missions and travel , but because we also feel there must be rules for the entire European Union .
This Parliament has its own rules , but they will have to improve and perhaps go even further .
There is another amendment where I remove the reference to MEPs as holding public posts ; we do not hold public posts , we are politicians .
This confusion could lead to problems in some national legislation .
Through this idea of increasing transparency , which we support , we also wish to draw attention to the fact that Member States share the management of 80 % of the funds , and so we again call for Member States to submit National Declarations of Assurance .
This is urgent and necessary , and we insist it must be done .
We are saying that the initiative presented by Commissioner Kallas must include the recovery of Community funds .
This cannot be excluded : when our money is misused , we must know where it is , how it is to be recovered , and when it is to be recovered .
We have made many improvements in terms of transparency , Commissioner , but this Parliament will strive to make many more .
Vice-President of the Commission . - Mr President , I am very pleased to be here today to speak on behalf of the Commission on this key issue of transparency .
I must thank Mr Pomés Ruiz for this own-initiative report and the Committee on Budgetary Control for its valuable contribution .
The report addresses five main issues .
First , the report gives guidance on the publication of information about those receiving EU funds through grants and contracts .
We are working to implement the terms of the modified Financial Regulation on transparency .
These terms were included through Parliament 's efforts and came into force in May 2007 .
With regard to direct management , the Commission launched a website last year , with a single portal giving access to all relevant sites in the various directorates-general .
Although we continue to update these sites , the portal still seems a rather confusing and complicated entry point .
The Commission services are working to improve this .
Regarding shared management , the role of the Commission is to ' finalise and agree with Member States on the common standards of these sets of information before April 2008 ' .
I am quoting here from the draft discharge report by Mr Jørgensen .
The Member States will remain responsible for the data .
The Commission assumes responsibility for the standards applicable and checking that Member States respect the terms of the Financial Regulation .
The second issue in Mr Pomés Ruiz 's report is the issue of recoveries .
I clearly said in the Committee on Budgetary Control in January 2008 that ' the Commission has so far been unable to give Parliament a comprehensive picture of all our recovery efforts ' .
I gave an estimate for the recoveries made in 2006 and announced improvements to our own systems , so that , this year , the ABAC accounting system will include more detailed and complete data on recoveries .
We are discussing the methodology for doing so with the European Court of Auditors .
Information about recoveries would be incomplete without reliable input from the Member States .
For agriculture , the picture is encouraging .
Tomorrow , the Commission will adopt an action plan to strengthen our supervisory role regarding the Structural Funds , addressing this issue among other things .
The third issue in the report relates to the declaration of financial interests and , in particular , to the results of an independent comparative study launched in July 2006 , in the context of the European Transparency Initiative , and published in 2007 .
The study concluded that most of the European institutions are regulated more intensively than institutions at national level .
The Commission and the European Investment Bank have the most comprehensive ethical rules of the EU institutions .
While the study noted that the Commission has a relatively well developed system for notification of conflicts of interests , it suggests that consideration be given to enlarging the mandate of our ad hoc Ethical Committee to include a broader advisory role .
I invite you to examine the study and draw whatever conclusions you think are relevant for the European Parliament .
The fourth issue raised by Mr Pomés Ruiz concerns the composition of experts groups advising the Commission .
I would like to thank Mr Pomés Ruiz for recognising the value of the work done so far .
We will study the recommendations you make for further improvements .
The fifth and final main issue concerns governance within the institutions .
Last Friday , 15 February 2008 , was the deadline for Member States to send in ' annual summaries ' .
As of noon today , we had received 22 replies from the Member States .
We are assessing the compliance of these reports with the obligations under the Financial Regulation , and we will report to you as soon as we have a clear picture of this , including with regard to the quality of these reports .
In conclusion , I can declare that we are taking transparency very seriously and that the European Transparency Initiative is delivering on many points raised in the report .
( Applause )
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the transparency initiative is probably the greatest success achieved by the Barroso Commission .
I am grateful to you , Commissioner , for your words and for the fact that you want harmonisation of the publication of information on beneficiaries of subsidies .
This was a major point of discussion between Parliament and the Commission last year .
As you know , this House and the PPE-DE Group have always stood by you on the issue of transparency because we want to know whether we are meeting our political objectives via the beneficiaries of the subsidies , in other words , the recipients of the funding .
This is about meeting our political objectives , nothing else , and we need to know more than we do at present .
Commissioner , you are working on new ethical rules .
We believe that the institutions need these rules and the Commissioners themselves need a new code of conduct .
However , in order to avoid misunderstandings , may I remind you that it is not up to the Commission to lay down rules for Parliament .
We make our rules ourselves .
We are not public officials , unlike the members of other EU institutions , although imprecise use of language could create this impression .
We have an amendment to paragraph 22 , and I would like to ask you very warmly for your support .
We want to replace the list with a reference to the existing rules .
Lists are all very well , but we want an open form of words which allows us to decide whether we want so many , or perhaps more - or , indeed , fewer - criteria .
We are not satisfied - and this is part of the report - with the difficult question of the recovery of funds which have been paid out incorrectly .
Commissioner , I think this is going to be the major issue for us this year and the main point of conflict between Parliament and the Commission .
This is an area which is anything but transparent .
I would ask you to tackle this problem vigorously .
Recoveries cannot continue in the same random fashion as in the past .
We welcome this week 's action plan for the Structural Funds , but this needs to be underpinned with credibility , both for Parliament and for the discharge of the Commission .
Our rapporteur , Javier Pomés Ruiz , has drafted a good and interesting report , and I am sure that with this report as the opinion of Parliament , we will help the Commission to make further progress .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( DA ) Mr President , there is no doubt that the public debate in Europe has focused a great deal on the fact that there is a democratic deficit in the EU and that this deficit is due to not least the lack of sufficient transparency .
In particular it may be due to the fact that there has been too little transparency concerning how the funds that the EU manages - that is , the funds that the EU pays to individual countries for good , well-intentioned projects - are used ; and it is a problem !
It is fortunately a problem that is now being resolved .
It is fortunately a problem that the Commission has long recognised and is actually doing something to resolve , and the Commission deserves much praise for this .
Mr Kallas , you personally deserve much praise for the enormous contribution that you have made in connection with this .
There are of course some matters that need to be addressed .
This is the reason why Mr Pomés Ruiz has produced a report .
I support his report , which highlights many points of criticism that naturally must be tackled .
It is clear that the data available should be comparable etc . , but this is a minor matter , as we have now taken the key decision that there should of course be transparency .
Another very important decision for which the Commission deserves praise is the decision to establish greater transparency in connection with the ' expert groups ' .
It is simply not acceptable that a ' democratic ' system has people in office whose names are unknown .
There are all kinds of democratic arguments for why you cannot operate in such a way , and it is of course unacceptable from a financial perspective too .
I can well imagine , Commissioner , that you could confirm a statement that you made in the recently completed hearing in the Committee on Budgetary Control in connection with discharge .
In this statement , you assured us that this would naturally also apply to the groups that fall within the comitology procedure .
There are of course many different types of expert groups .
Some of the most important groups are actually those that fall within the comitology procedure .
In addition , you gave this approval on several occasions in the Committee on Budgetary Control .
Commissioner , could you not repeat this here in front of the entire assembly ?
on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( PL ) Mr President , on behalf of the Union for Europe of the Nations Group , I would like to thank Mr Pomés Ruiz for a very good report which I support in its entirety .
Transparency must be a fundamental principle of the functioning of the European Union .
I should like to begin by saying that I consider the sections of the report concerning better information on the beneficiaries of Union funds and more transparent information on the Commission 's web pages to be particularly valuable .
These are important issues . I would also like to state that those parts of the report underlining the importance of divulging and providing information on the financial interests of holders of public office in the European institutions are equally important .
European Union citizens need to be certain that those who handle Union funds and those who oversee their allocation act impartially and not with a view furthering their private interests .
I believe it was right and proper for this issue to be dealt with so extensively in the report .
Mr President , Commissioner , this debate is really a warm-up act for the discharge procedure currently taking place in the Committee on Budgetary Control , and for the extraordinary hearing that we are to have next week with Commissioners Špidla and Hübner .
A key issue in that debate is paragraph 41 of Mr Pomés Ruiz 's report , in which the Commission is urged to support the issuing of National Declarations of Assurance .
Commissioner , if you pledge to support this , the struggle we are waging in the discharge procedure will not be a struggle of Parliament against the Commission but a joint struggle : the Commission and Parliament against the Member States .
This is the best strategy , for the internal cohesion of the Commission too .
Transparency does indeed ensure credibility and accountability ; everyone agrees on that .
One aspect of this is indeed the publication of information about the ultimate beneficiaries of EU funds .
It is compulsory under the Financial Regulation to provide information on this , but this information must be made accessible , it must be reliable and it must be suitable for further research .
With all due respect , Commissioner , attempts are being made on your website but there is a long way to go .
Some private initiatives really are doing this better .
This report by Mr Pomés Ruiz also sets out very clearly what needs to be improved : the presentation , the content and the organisation of the information .
The Committee on Budgetary Control is asking for this to be completed before 2009 .
I want to submit an amendment to bring this forward by one year .
If we manage to do that , then the new Commission and the new Parliament will be able to start with a clean slate in 2009 .
I ask my fellow Members to support that amendment .
Commissioner , I have another question to put to you : what is the state of affairs regarding the undertaking on your part set out in paragraph 34 to publish the names of all members of formal and informal groups from 2008 ?
I also endorse the question put by Dan Jørgensen on this topic .
Finally , Mr President , I have a question for you : when will Parliament 's Secretariat decide to opt for complete transparency and publish the names of all members of Parliament 's voluntary pension fund ?
After all , these people are also beneficiaries of substantial European funds .
I ask you to convey this message to the Secretariat .
With regard to the question asked by Mr Staes , this has of course been discussed in the Bureau and a solution will be found .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( FI ) Mr President , Commissioner , Mr Pomés Ruiz 's report is a comprehensive one .
The problem areas are set out well and await the necessary measures .
In this connection I would like to say to the Commission Vice-President , Mr Kallas , that during his term there have been major improvements generally to the Union 's openness and transparency and he has been extremely active in this area .
Evidence of this are the many new databases on the internet , but the problem , which the report also mentions is - and this needs to be put right - that the search procedures are still unsatisfactory . This being the case , the material on the search engines ought to be standardised .
In other words , if there is no proper search procedure there is a danger that a lot of information will be obtained but that its very abundance will harm the quality .
The question of the ' blacklist ' of proven fraudulent actions needs to be considered .
In principle our group approves of and is in favour of this list , but we need to ensure in particular that the data protection of individuals is guaranteed and that no one will be blacklisted this way for no good reason or because mistaken procedures were carried out .
Then there is the question of the Advisory Committee on Standards in Public Life .
For the Members of the European Parliament , who are directly elected by the people , it is obviously good to have a procedure which is different from that for civil servants , as Mrs Grässle has already said here .
The procedure for elected Members must also be at least as strict , however , because there can be no grounds for asserting that ethical requirements should be relaxed as far as Members of Parliament are concerned .
In many countries money used to finance the election of Members of Parliament is public knowledge , and it might be in order for Parliament to move in that direction , so that national declarations on election funding , on the campaign publicity of candidates and on its financing are included in Parliament 's databases , making them visible at European Union level too .
Finally I wish to say that political parties and foundations at European level cannot be made exempt from the general obligation to declare interests and sources of finance .
( Applause )

on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - ( SV ) Mr President , it is very unusual for me to be able to respond favourably to the reports that come before us here . However , this is an exception .
What the rapporteur has argued for here is greater transparency , and I warmly support that .
But I would remind the House that , as long as we have such things as the agricultural policy and the structural funds , our task of scrutiny will be an entirely superhuman one .
What we are forced to do is constantly introduce new rules , more monitoring , and we end up with a bureaucracy beyond all reason .
The solution , as we all know , is to let the richer countries in the EU give money to the poorer countries without discussing in detail what it is to be used for .
The major part of the scrutiny process will disappear , and that must be the long-term aim .
We should not have to count cows and set-aside fields and all that kind of thing .
We should concentrate on what the EU is there for - the internal market .

- ( NL ) Mr President , I would also like to thank the rapporteur for his excellent report and I would like to mention a couple of points before making an appeal to the Council and the Commission .
The first point is that we need to publish the recipients of financial support from the European Union .
This concerns the agricultural sector in particular .
We should treat this information with caution and fairness .
We cannot have a situation where some Member States comply with the disclosure requirement and others do not .
There are links on the Commission website to 14 national websites concerning the recipients of agricultural support , which means that there are another 13 missing .
Perhaps the Commission could explain why that is .
Is this information not available in electronic format or have the Member States still not supplied the figures ?
In addition to this , the Commission should think about the protection of those recipients whose details are to be published : protection from radical animal rights activists , for instance , a problem that several Member States , including my own , are having to deal with at the moment .
Finally , the fact is that the data are difficult to compare and so more direction from the Commission is needed .
I understand from the Commissioner that he will take the initiative on this tomorrow in relation to the Structural Funds and I am pleased to hear that .
My second point concerns the annual reports on the activities of the institutions , where there has been some improvement , but this is a sensitive topic .
Now to my appeal , which is related to the fact that 80 % of the funds in Europe are not managed centrally but through the Member States or in collaboration with the Member States .
We could improve and tighten up transparency and control at European level for all eternity but as long as the Member States do not take responsibility by means of the National Declarations of Assurance , ensuring balanced control will remain difficult .
It takes two to tango .
We can dance the most brilliant spirited dance through the field of budgetary control at European level , but as long as the Member States do not dance along it will never be a prize-winning performance .
I therefore call on the Member States to accept their responsibilities and I call on the Commission to support this process in connection with the national declarations , like a good conductor , shall we say , or like a dance teacher : you should know that yourself , Commissioner .
We on this side would like to count on your support .
( PT ) Mr President , I must congratulate our rapporteur and also Mr Kallas on this initiative .
However , in the same breath , I must tell Mr Kallas that I would be much happier if he had taken the steps needed to ensure that the European Commission was complying with the Financial Regulation rules which entered into force on 1 January 2007 , particularly on the designation of end beneficiaries of the various Community funds .
It is really a matter of great concern that the European Commission 's answer to the question of whether the IMG has been lawfully and properly designated as an international organisation is wholly unsatisfactory .
I would like to know , Commissioner , whether , in addition to this new international organisation , the European Commission has also decided to meet with others , so that we can find out who has access to Community funds without having to go through the tender procedure .
( PL ) Mr President , the allocation of funds from the various budget lines always awakens the strongest emotions and debate .
It is entirely understandable that those who are awarded funding should rejoice , and that those who are not awarded any despite their merits should voice their criticism .
If , however , as in the recent notorious Polish case , an entity obtains funding from one government only to have it taken away by another , a number of concerns emerge .
What principles determine the allocation of funds , and what procedures apply ? Are decisions made on the basis of facts or of base politics ?
That is why , pursuant to the report by Mr Pomés Ruiz , we should focus not only on the clarity and transparency of procedures , but also enable society to assess the actions involved in awarding funding .
Publishing information on beneficiaries of Union funding is a fundamental condition of the transparency of the intentions of the European Commission and the government .
Why then are certain countries so opposed to publication ?
Do they have something to hide ?
This also involves information on individuals holding public office and experts at the European institutions .
Our Union would benefit greatly from the creation of a common ethical space .
Mr President , let me begin by congratulating the rapporteur , Mr Pomés Ruiz .
I am not doing it only because he is standing next to me and kicking me in the ankle , but because I think his report is very good indeed .
I would like to make three points , if you would allow me .
Firstly , I think that the aim of this report is basically to improve transparency and improve controls .
Usually you do that three ways .
One is to have transparency in terms of documentation : that is quite well provided for under Article 255 of the EC Treaty ; secondly , transparency of finances , which is what we are doing in this report ; and thirdly , of course , transparency of meetings .
The sad thing I find in this debate - not so much inside but outside this Chamber - is that there are a lot of anti-Europeans that are using transparency in a very populist way , in the sense that , on one hand , they call for transparency , then when transparency is given , they start attacking people for it .
I find this debate , in that sense , a little bit sad , and I think that , when we go transparent , we should be honest and straightforward about it .
Point number two is on national declarations .
I would like to second what Ms De Lange said about those .
We should always stress that .
I think Mr Kallas is doing a very good job .
The Commission is doing a good job .
But 80 % of all the funds are actually spent by the Member States .
That is where we need a little bit more in the financial declarations .
I am sure , Mr Mulder , if he was here , would agree with me .
The final point I have is on the famous , or perhaps infamous , paragraph 22 of this report .
I see where it is coming from , but I think we should not throw the baby out with the bath-water .
Therefore , I would recommend that we get rid of paragraph 22 , so that all of us can easily vote for this report , because , after all , being against transparency is a little bit like being against peace and motherhood .

( ES ) Mr President , I wish to add my congratulations to the rapporteur , who has produced an extremely interesting report , and of course also thank the Commission , represented by its Vice-President Kallas , for all its work , positive dialogue and cooperation with the House .
Here I simply wish to expand a little on the comments already made , most of which I agree with , and say , beyond the actual need for this information and for transparency , that it must be easily accessible , reliable and comparison-friendly ; the information should be organised and classified and be of real practical use , not only for the greatest experts , but for the public at large .
As regards shared management funds , in addition to what has already been said , we need to put pressure on the Member States in this regard , and in particular try to find instruments that improve the situation with international organisations , which often seem opaque .
I certainly welcome the idea of creating a common ethical space .
This is a luxury the Commission can certainly afford , and it could be exported or proposed in certain global negotiations as an example of good practice .
I therefore particularly welcome the study being carried out by the Commission on the ethical codes and standards that may subsequently be applied to each institution .
Finally , I congratulate the rapporteur and thank him for accepting my request concerning a code of ethics for OLAF , which is absolutely essential : on one side we have those responsible and the guilty parties , and on the other the innocent parties , whom we must protect by all means .
( FI ) Mr President , first I want to join those who have congratulated and thanked the rapporteur , Mr Pomés Ruiz , for an absolutely splendid report .
At the same time I would also like to take this opportunity to thank Commissioner Kallas , who over the years has worked very hard to promote these issues .
The idea behind this report is such that hardly anyone here can disagree with its objectives .
Any form of openness and transparency regarding the misuse of EU funds can only be for the good .
In general the use of appropriations financed though tax revenues must be open .
The taxpayer must always have accurate and proper knowledge of what their money is being spent on .
The public must always be able to tell who is spending the money , and on what , and how much is being spent .
We must in particular adhere to the principle of right of access and transparency when these funds are being misused .
In my opinion , publishing the ' blacklist ' of fraudulent uses of EU funds would also pre-empt possible cases of abuse and so promote openness and transparency in the use of EU resources .
This kind of monitoring is obviously made challenging by the fact that the systems in different countries vary greatly , and for that reason it is difficult .
I believe the report is an important step forward , and we need to find a common compromise so that the report can be adopted here and not thrown out because of a few small details .
( DE ) Mr President , I think this is a particularly good debate .
However , I would like to warn about the abuse of transparency .
Some populists - although they are not here in this chamber today - abuse this debate in the public arena , but in doing so , make no distinction between the private sphere and what is appropriate in the public interest .
We must not lose sight of this privacy debate .
We are aware that there is also justification for data protection .
Finding a balance here is the right response from the European Parliament for the future .
( DA ) Mr President , it is a pleasure to attend the debate today .
I recall a few years back that there were a few idiots who were demanding transparency , but now Parliament consists of nothing but idiots who are insisting upon transparency regarding the presentation of accounts .
In addition , we have a commissioner whom we cannot criticise ; instead we must also praise him for his personal contribution towards including the more sluggish parts of the Commission within the transparency reforms .
However , I have not been elected to offer praise ; I have been elected to highlight the more thorny aspects of the debate .
Therefore , I would like to ask Mr Kallas whether next year there will be exceptions within the area of agriculture for which there will not be a full presentation of accounts on the Internet , and for which we will not be able to see who receives what and the corresponding amounts in other areas .
Will there be exceptions , or will every expense be accounted for on the Internet ?
And what about the working groups : will the names of all the experts be given ?
Finally , now that we have progressed so far with transparency , would it not also be a good idea to send an apology to the heroes Dorte Schmidt-Brown , Hans-Martin Tillack , Marta Andreasen and all those who have been badmouthed over the years , but who were the reason that you , Mr Kallas , have been able to achieve such success with your reforms ?
( PL ) Mr President , clarity and transparency are fundamental principles of life in society .
Particular responsibility for the challenges involved rests with us parliamentarians .
We are the ones who meet the voters and it falls to us to explain the current situation in the Union and its administration to them .
We cannot say : ' It is not us , it is the Commission ' .
European citizens look to their Members of Parliament for answers .
All too often , on the pretext of creating transparency , we complicate procedures and impose too many requirements regarding beneficiaries . For example , we insist on documents that are often unnecessary .
As we build transparency , we must define roles clearly and distribute them .
I repeat , we must distribute roles and tasks between the Member States and the European Union .
Mr President , I want to make two points .
First of all , if we want to follow the Lisbon Strategy we have to know who in the field of science gets the money and what for .
Is it really the best , or are there some divisions between the more privileged Western countries and the other , new ones ?
I , as an academic , would claim that there has to be more justice and evenness .
My second point is that , when we give money - with a pretty generous heart - to third countries , to those that are underdeveloped and less privileged , I would like to get some feedback on how that money is used , in particular under those soft programmes like democratisation or similar , which do not produce tangible things but change minds , or entrepreneurship .
We know little of how that money is used in Africa , and in all ACP countries .
I would really claim that we have to have some more knowledge about it .
Mr President , I want to take issue with three of the speakers .

Firstly , Mr Seppänen , I would like to congratulate him on his speech , because it was extremely moderate , and he is slowly moving - almost - towards the pro-European camp .
Secondly , Mr Bonde : the way in which he talks about transparency makes me believe that he is a federalist .
So , in that sense , I think that he is also moving in exactly the right direction - even if the request to publish all the people who sit on comitology committees is , perhaps , pushing it a little bit !
My final comment concerns Mr Rübig .
I agree with him 100 % : the type of populism that we see in the Austrian media from the anti-European side is simply abominable , and I really would not like to see any more of that .
I have one more question for the rapporteur , Mr Pomés Ruiz : if there was one thing he would like to take out of this report , what would it be ?

Vice-President of the Commission . - Mr President , I wish to thank honourable Members very much for their support for this transparency action , which has been a common action : in all issues , the Commission has always felt it had strong support from Parliament .
There are two things I want to say .
The first concerns the information available on end beneficiaries .
I consider this to be an amazing change .
When , together with some Members of Parliament , we started to initiate this at the beginning of 2004 , there was no great hope that it would be implemented .
But the political decision has now been taken , and the year 2009 is the final year by which the information on end beneficiaries of 2008 will and must be published .
So , politically the decision has been taken .
This is a great step forward .
Now the technicalities remain to be solved .
That is not easy at all , because guidelines have now been issued on what this information on end beneficiaries should look like .
But of course many of you raised the issue of workable search engines , and this is really not an easy task .
Of course , we will have a portal via which it will be possible to access the information in the Member States , and access information about end beneficiaries .
I foresee a lot of technical problems , but those technical problems - nothing is perfect , and everything takes a little time - definitely should not undermine the importance of this great change .
Concerning the famous national declarations , I must again say that the situation has completely changed in these three years .
When I first appeared in Council to discuss these issues , these were completely out of the question .
Today you have the annual summaries - we had already received 22 so far , and perhaps even more now .
We will assess the quality together , and there definitely will be an improvement .
So the understanding is that we have shared management problems , and we must also share information about the work - how we manage the Structural Funds .
That understanding has increased tremendously in Member States too .
We will also try to fill out the idea of more comprehensive national declarations with specific substance .
You know as well as I do that there are certain Member States that are still very reluctant to have this greater involvement , but we already have a certain degree of involvement .
As concerns international money , that is a something of a different issue .
The issue of how this information should be made available will probably also be discussed within the framework of COCOBU .
However , we are partners in international agreements and do not manage them directly .
Information on what we manage directly must be made available , but we are partners in very big international poolings .
That is a little different .
Concerning expert groups , as I said in COCOBU , I can repeat here that we have a commitment to publish the list of permanent experts .
This is really a question of definition : what kind of experts should be included on this list .
This is a debate , and some experts who fulfil certain confidential tasks of assessing projects and people should not be so transparent , probably .
There are some nuances .
However , the commitment exists and I have been informed that we are ready to publish a long list of permanent experts .
There is the question of all those national experts sent by Member States participating in certain bodies , whose names will be sent afterwards , not before , but there is at least the commitment that there should be no big secret as to who is advising us .
My last point , in response to an issue which was raised , is that the Commission has no intention to propose how Parliament should deal with its own rules , and what the declarations of economic interest should consist of .
I can say only two things : this ethical space is a common space - if something happens in one institution , it definitely has an immediate effect on other institutions .
We must , of course , address all these questions on the basis of common sense , and not go to absurd lengths and into unnecessary details , but only into the relevant issues , in order to avoid a real conflict of interests .

rapporteur . - ( ES ) Mr President , Mr Kallas can feel pleased with himself because he realises the transparency initiative is one which is much appreciated and dear to the hearts of the entire House , and because he has now experienced the support that can be found here .
Mr Kallas , we wish to go further with regard to transparency , and in the report we outlined some of the areas in which progress ought to be made : recoveries , expert groups or the presumption of innocence .
Nevertheless , I urge you : this must remain within the confines of common sense , with no consideration for the populism of certain elements of the gutter press that seems to devote itself to earning money through its populist exaggerations of serious topics in the European Union .
I wish to thank Inés Ayala for her suggestion that OLAF should concern itself with these matters too , and Mr Jørgensen , Paulo Casaca , Mr Bösch , who is present , and my colleagues Ingeborg Grässle , Alex Stubb , etc .
I would like to say that Alex Stubb also asked me what I would take out , and I must say that , for instance , I would remove the reference to a spouse 's activity .
I remember that the greatest problem in the European Union was caused not by a spouse , but something similar : I refer to the case of Edith Cresson .
By this I mean that we should not be placing such restrictions on ourselves , and we should do what is logical , not what is illogical .
Indeed , even Members of this House also have a right to family life and private life .
I also wish to say that we will continue to set an example for many Member States of how the EU is spending its funds better and more efficiently , with low administrative costs and much more effectively than certain Member States .
In this preliminary mission on which we all agree , several Member States - those that refuse to give explain how they spend 80 % of Community funds and then seem to be all smiles when we refuse to approve the EU accounts - use this to justify giving less money to the common fund , limiting EU activity , abusing our accusations that it is the Member States that do not spend correctly and using this argument to refuse to give this House more than 1 % .
Thank you , Mr President , and may I also wish Mr Kallas well in securing an objective so warmly supported by Parliament .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow .
Written Statements ( Rule 142 )
in writing . - ( FR ) The Pomés Ruiz report , on the other hand , quite rightly takes the view that major efforts still have to be made before we achieve transparency in financial matters .
An analysis of the 2006 Annual Activity Report of the Budget DG has in effect identified what still needs to be done before achieving transparency in the EU 's accounts .
An examination of the funds allocated to the common agricultural policy , for example , shows that the instruments available to the Commission do not always allow it to guarantee the accuracy of the data supplied by the Member States .
If we are to prevent the budgetary slides of the past the Commission needs to improve the quality of the information supplied to the public concerning the beneficiaries of Community funds and must do this without delay by taking a number of concrete measures : rationalisation of published information on those receiving Community funding , creation of an overall search-engine , publication of a ' blacklist ' of fraudsters , and so on .
In order to ensure rigorous , effective and transparent control of the Community funds allocated to the Member States the Commission should in future assume political responsibility for the information it publishes .
Protection of the Communities ' financial interests - Fight against fraud - Annual reports 2005 and 2006 ( debate )
The next item is the report by Mr Musotto , on behalf of the Committee on Budgetary Control , on protection of the Communities ' financial interests - Fight against fraud - Annual reports 2005 and 2006 .
rapporteur . - ( IT ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to begin by thanking Mr Kallas for his valuable cooperation with Parliament during its work .
I am likewise grateful to OLAF , in the person of the Director , Franz-Hermann Brüner , for its unstinting support and for the vital work it does , which is far from easy .
Finally , I would thank all my colleagues for their helpful contributions , as well as all the national bodies and institutions that have cooperated with us in this arduous task , especially - if I may - the Italian Guardia di finanza , whose approach in this field has been highly professional .
Protection of the Communities ' financial interests is a subject of capital importance which affects us directly as States and as citizens ; it must therefore be tackled with all due rigour and determination .
Today 's resolution is intended as a practical response to the alarming phenomenon of Community fraud .
The data gathered ...
( The President interrupted the speaker to reprimand some Members who were causing a disturbance )
Thank you , Mr President .
We are talking about transparency and there is also a need for common courtesy .
Today 's resolution is intended as a practical response to the alarming phenomenon of Community fraud .
The data gathered are worrying : in the areas of own resources , agricultural expenditure and structural actions , irregularities notified in 2006 totalled EUR 1 143 million , compared to EUR 1 024 million in the previous year .
The statistics reveal an ever-increasing number of irregularities .
I would however point out that a large number of irregularities does not necessarily imply a high level of fraud ; it may also demonstrate that the supervisory arrangements in place are effective and that there is close cooperation between the Member States and the Commission .
In its annual report for 2006 , the Commission rightly emphasised the importance of such cooperation for prevention purposes and for recovery work .
So far , the statistics have relied on very diverse national structures with different administrative , judicial , supervisory and inspection systems .
In particular , we consider it unacceptable that Spain and Germany have not been forwarding information on irregularities to the Commission in electronic form , despite an obligation on all Member States to do so .
The Community rules and the obligations arising from the fight against fraud must be implemented in the same way by all countries .
To this end , closer cooperation between Member States and the Commission is vital to protect the Community 's financial interests , which must be perceived as common interests going beyond those of individual states .
Greater synergy is required between the supervisory authorities and local administrations in terms of coordinating and exchanging information .
Keeping the organisation and disbursement of funds at central level necessitates complex implementation arrangements and increases distances between the financial authorities and the final beneficiaries .
Simplification of the rules is another fundamental point touched upon in the report .
The 2000-2006 programming period in fact proved that overly complicated rules contributed to the irregularities detected .
Finally , despite a slight improvement in recovery activity , recovery is still a problem which causes immense damage to the Community budget .
In particular , a period of 39 months between the time when an irregularity is committed and the time when it is notified to the Commission is unacceptable , as such a delay makes recovery more difficult if not impossible .
Vice-President of the Commission . - Mr President , Mr Musotto 's report covers two years of efforts to improve the protection of the financial interests of the European Union .
A sound system of financial management needs to focus on expenditure and the control and fighting of irregularities , and especially those committed with fraudulent intent .
The report contains many of the same preoccupations as the discharge report , with the protection of financial interests being viewed , of course , as a core element of sound financial management , but the focus is different .
I would like to warmly thank the rapporteur , Mr Musotto , for a very focused report , which concentrates on the main issues and makes many calls on the Commission to strengthen efforts .
Allow me to comment on four of them .
Firstly , the role of Member States : the report makes use of the wealth of figures and statistics on irregularities by Member States , and their financial impact .
It does not hesitate to point out that some Member States perform better than others .
I would stress once again that a high number of irregularities does not necessarily mean a high level of fraud , but it can be a good indicator of effective and thorough controls .
When I presented the Commission report in July , I emphasised the need for Member States to ensure a correct , complete and timely communication of data on irregularities .
A good flow of information between the Member States and the Commission is essential for effective recovery and joint action against fraudsters .
Many of them are doing this , but for some there is still room for improvement .
The Commission , with the support of the European Parliament , will not shy away from reminding them of their responsibility .
I fully agree with the invitation expressed in the report for the Council to take up the annual reports and consider them at ministerial level .
The EU 's financial management system is complex , because responsibility is shared with the Member States .
The increased focus on the national declarations , placing responsibility for spending with the Member States , should go hand in hand with cooperation over tackling irregularities and fighting fraud .
I very much welcome the report 's focus on systemic and general issues rather than on individual cases , for which , as you know , OLAF is independent in its investigations .
The Commission fully agrees with the European Parliament on the need to analyse in greater depth the structures existing in Member States in charge of combating irregularities , to support them and facilitate cooperation and the exchange of information .
This will be taken up in the 2008 report .
This year 's Commission report highlights the topics of risk analysis and risk management , exclusion databases and early-warning / whistleblower tools .
In addition , the report examines the steps taken by Member States to improve recovery of amounts not collected or wrongly paid , as well as the mechanisms under national law for recovery by offsetting .
The report also contains information on amounts recovered and the financial corrections , in particular when a payment has not been made in conformity with Community rules .
The role of organised crime , such as the Mafia , in undermining the EU 's financial interests is a subject close to the heart of the rapporteur .
OLAF has contributed to the Organised Crime Threat Assessment ( OCTA ) produced by Europol .
I am happy to report that I have asked both bodies to continue to cooperate on the matter .
Value added tax and customs fraud is where the big money is .
Sadly , it is an area where cooperation with Member States is often difficult .
I will be very brief , and refer to what I will say on the Newton Dunn report , and thank the European Parliament for its ongoing support in underlining the useful role that cooperation at EU level can bring in this area .
My fourth and last comment will be on the revision of the OLAF regulation .
The Commission tabled a proposal in this regard in May 2006 .
I remain convinced that it raises the main important issues relating to the effective functioning of the anti-fraud office , namely the flow of information , procedural rights and the complaints mechanism , the role of the supervisory committee and , more generally , governance and accountability .
I very much hope that we can enter into interinstitutional discussions on finding solutions in the very near future and make progress on these important points .
The Musotto report reiterates the desire to group together anti-fraud legislation .
From a political viewpoint I fully support this , but technically it will be a challenging task .
The Commission will be ready to forward the requested analysis to the European Parliament by May this year .
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Regional Development . - ( CS ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , we have before us a report on the protection of the financial interests of the EU with the somewhat equivocal subheading : ' Fight against fraud ' .
The actual focus of the report is not fraud as such , but rather irregularities .
While fraud presupposes malicious intent , an irregularity can result from negligence or incorrect accounting procedures .
In delicate areas such as financial relations within the EU such terminology , should be used circumspectly .
As the rapporteur for the Committee on Regional Development , I regret the increase in the number of irregularities detected in projects financed from Structural Funds .
This reflects negatively on some Member States and their internal control mechanisms .
Difficulties on the part of these countries should not , however , become a reason to re-evaluate the existing system of decentralised controls governing the use of Structural Funds .
The responsibility is evident ; it is individual and as such it also has to be enforceable .
Attaining an appropriate level in financial control mechanisms in individual Member States is the first necessary step .
The following step is to ensure the recovery of sums unduly paid .
A possible approach to this could be the suspension of regular payments to those Member States procrastinating over returning amounts paid under irregular circumstances .
The existence of imperfect control mechanisms has the potential to undermine confidence in the Structural Funds system and could cast a negative light on the EU as a whole .
Furthermore , we need controls with greater openness and transparency .
I would therefore like to express my support for the European Transparency Initiative , according to which information on beneficiaries of assistance from Structural Funds would be published .
As we are talking about managing public funds , certain demands should be placed on the beneficiaries of such assistance .
A prerequisite of a better assessment of control systems is closer collaboration with the Court of Auditors , which has to date been lacking .
Whilst it is true that reports from the Court of Auditors make for tedious reading for the European institutions , this should be all the more reason to devote more attention to them , and is certainly preferable to burying one 's head in the sand and avoiding responsibility .
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development . - ( FI ) Mr President , Francesco Musotto has produced an excellent report on the annual reports of the European Anti-Fraud Office 2005-2006 , and I want to express my sincerest thanks for that .
The number of irregularities notified by the Member States rose in 2006 to the equivalent of EUR 1 143 million .
Of this , the European Agricultural Guidance and Guarantee Fund accounts for an amount of EUR 87 million .
Although this is just 0.17 % of the total for agricultural expenditure , EUR 49.7 billion , it nonetheless has to be viewed seriously .
Approximately a third of these irregularities were cases of direct fraud .
With the new Regulation the Member States will be able to recover unjustified payments of aid more easily than before .
That is why the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development and the Committee on Budgetary Control consider it regrettable that the level of recovery of this aid remains low .
The Commission should speed up the recovery process and if necessary apply corrective measures .
Both committees also assure the Commission of their full support in rigorously applying the option of suspension of payments if the Commission does not have absolute guarantees that the Member State which is the beneficiary of funds has a reliable management and control system .
( Applause )
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the EPP-ED Group is responsible for the report on the fight against fraud for the first time and we are very grateful to Mr Musotto for making OLAF 's work and the cooperation with the Member States the focus of his report .
He had to work very hard , having to contend with 630 pages of statistical material from 2005 and 2006 on the fight against fraud .
His review reveals a very mixed picture and I believe that we really need to take action here .
Uncovering irregularities does not appear to be a very important issue for the Member States .
This is apparent from the fact that , yet again , the Council is absent from this very important debate , despite the fact that as the second arm of the budgetary authority , it should be concerned about what is happening to the taxpayers ' money , which it is responsible for managing and disbursing .
The rapporteur proposes taking formal steps against Germany and Spain for their violations of EU law .
Spain is only providing paper information about irregularities .
Moreover , this information is extremely sketchy , as is apparent from the 18th Structural Funds report .
Germany is a very specific case .
It takes longer to provide the information than the other Member States , and it is the only country which does not disclose names .
How can OLAF do its job without names ?
The fraudsters are hiding behind data protection here , for the fact is , Mr Březina , that between 15 % and 20 % of the irregularities have some kind of fraudulent background .
Germany is also putting obstacles in the way of OLAF 's investigative work at local level , notably in cases of customs offences and export refunds .
We are calling on the Commission to report on every Member State and its willingness or lack of willingness to cooperate , and to do so by the time the next OLAF report is due .
From our Group 's perspective , the forthcoming reform of OLAF 's legal basis must be utilised , first and foremost , to improve the working conditions in OLAF 's cooperation with the Member States .
I would like to express my warm thanks to OLAF itself and to the staff who are working in a very difficult area .
I think that the outcomes really do stand up to scrutiny .
However , I am also convinced that these outcomes could be improved through better cooperation with the Member States .
on behalf of the PSE group . - ( HU ) Mr President , Mr Vice-President , ladies and gentlemen , the European Parliament considers protection of the European Union 's financial interests to be one of its most important tasks since , like all parliaments , it has the right and the duty to monitor expenditure .
Moreover , the view that EU funds are inadequately looked after is increasingly widespread in Europe , so we also have a political debt to the public , to our constituents and to our taxpayers in this regard .
We put this legislative and political obligation into practice primarily by means of the discharge procedure , but in addition to this we have been producing regular reports on the protection of EU financial interests and the fight against fraud .
Our aim in doing so is not to create a sensation or cause a scandal , but to expose the situation objectively and resolve any problems .
I would like to take this opportunity to congratulate my fellow Member , Mr Musotto , for this excellent report , and to express my gratitude to the Commission Vice-President , Mr Kallas , and OLAF Director-General , Mr Brüner , for the constructive cooperation they have demonstrated in this area too .


Despite the fact that these high-level reports are greeted with much appreciation year on year , we in the European institutions sometimes feel as if we are tilting at windmills , since the findings of the reports encounter resistance on the part of the Council , with the result that the Commission has not been able to put the necessary measures in place for years .
We believe that the weakest link is the attitude of Member States , since in some Member States - our fellow Member Mrs Grässle spoke just now about Germany in this connection - there is a failure to recognise how very important it is to ensure that EU funds are spent in accordance with the rules , that expenditures are subject to scrutiny , and that any amounts unduly paid are recovered .
We consider it particularly lamentable that VAT fraud in the form of ' carousel ' transactions is becoming increasingly widespread throughout Europe , to the extent that we have no global figures on the amount involved , although some estimates suggest that it may be around 35-40 % of the EU budget .
It is time to take resolute action in this regard too , both in the interests of managing European affairs and in the interests of public opinion . Thank you very much .

on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( PL ) Mr President , as I take the floor on behalf of the Union for Europe of the Nations Group regarding protection of the Communities ' financial interests , I should like to draw attention to the following issues . Firstly , there has been a significant increase in the sums affected by irregularities in the area of own resources , EUR 328 million in 2005 and EUR 353 million in 2006 , compared with EUR 212 million in 2004 .
I should also mention the increase in irregularities in the area of structural actions : EUR 703 million in 2006 compared with EUR 601 million in 2005 .
Secondly , there has been a marked reduction in the sums affected by irregularities in the area of agriculture . In 2006 the figure was EUR 82 million , compared with EUR 102 million in 2005 .
This reduction is worthy of particular note because very often expenditure on agriculture involves huge numbers of beneficiaries - farmers - who often have to cope on their own with the complicated procedure of accounting for the funding received .
Thirdly , I would like to highlight the statement in the report that some of the main reasons for the emergence of irregularities in budgetary expenditure are the complicated programming principles and ineffective monitoring and control methods .
Fourthly , the call for greater transparency when awarding resources should also be noted .
An important feature of this transparency is a commitment by the Member States to publish information on projects and beneficiaries of resources originating in all Community funds .
Mr President , the Commissioner said the same thing : the report does indeed overlap with the discharge procedure .
In this sense , too , this debate is a warm-up act for the hearing next week with Commissioners Špidla and Hübner .
We know the figures for reported irregularities .
They do not tell the whole story , of course , but they do tell us a lot about the problems reported in the policy areas of own resources , agriculture and the Structural Funds .
The report mentions a total of EUR 1.1 billion worth of reported irregularities and the trend is upward .
We are back to the level of 2002 , following better figures in 2003 , 2004 and 2005 .
Agriculture is doing relatively well .
The problem sectors are clearly own resources and the Structural Funds : own resources accounted for EUR 325 million of reported irregularities and the Structural Funds accounted for EUR 700 million .
Within the Structural Funds , five Member States accounted for 84 % of the reported irregularities .
Anyone who is interested can read which countries they are in Mr Musotto 's report .
It really is quite remarkable .
It also has to be remembered that in the period before 2006 , another EUR 1 billion of resources had yet to be recovered and that the Court of Auditors says that 12 % of the Structural Funds in 2006 could not be paid out .
This is the context in which the present discharge procedure is taking place and it is a cause of great concern to us .
We will come back to this .
As far as own resources are concerned , the problem of cigarette fraud is being tackled properly .
We had the agreement with Philip Morris .
There is a new agreement with Japan Tobacco , which should deliver a lot of money and will also bring about a reduction in smuggling .
The main problem area in own resources is the VAT ' carrousel ' transactions .
The figures are quoted : enormous amounts are involved , running into billions of euros .
An investigation by the British House of Lords highlights this further .
I am pleased that Parliament is tackling this .
The Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs has already organised a hearing and the Committee on Budgetary Control will do the same on 4 or 5 May .
I hope that I , as rapporteur , will be able to produce as good a report on the VAT carrousels as my report on cigarette fraud .
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - Mr President , this report is a long catalogue of failure .
It graphically illustrates how the amount of fraud , described as ' irregularities ' , is steadily rising and that attempts to deal with it are failing .
It openly admits that fraud in 2006 in the areas of own resources - agricultural expenditure and Member States ' structural actions - totalled EUR 1 143 million .
It was EUR 922 million in 2003 , so in just four years fraud has risen by over EUR 200 million .
I would remind everyone in this institution that these are not meaningless sums of money , but taxpayers ' money .
The EU is funded by its citizens , including hard-pressed taxpayers in the UK .
They deserve better than this for their money .
Governments of all Member States should be saying ' enough ' already , and these appalling figures provide all the more reason why the government of my country should honour its manifesto commitment to give the British people a referendum on the Lisbon Treaty .
( DE ) Mr President , it is no secret that the European Union has been battling for years to get its finances under control .
We fund major companies which then relocate from one Member State to another , while small and medium-sized enterprises go away empty-handed .
Indeed , the EU often does not appear to know who it is actually funding and who is pulling its strings .
In my view , a register of lobbyists is long overdue .
The numerous irregularities also leave a bitter aftertaste , especially when they have a direct connection to the EU 's institutions .
In this context , freezing the EU funding for Bulgaria until the cases of corruption have been cleared up sends out an important signal .
There is also the fact that some Member States apparently have little interest in recovering funds that have been paid out incorrectly .
If cases from the 1990s are only now being closed , then obviously things are moving far too slowly in the EU .
( FI ) Mr President , I want to thank the rapporteur , Mr Musotto .
He has done a very thorough and excellent job .
This report is crucially important , and the fight against fraud is something over which the confidence of the public is either won or lost .
I think there are three very important problems contained in this report which need to be put right .
First of all , it is intolerable that some countries do not even provide information on agricultural expenditure .
Germany and Spain are prime examples of this , and Germany does not even provide details of the individuals and companies which the European Anti-Fraud Office would definitely need in order to be able to address these matters .
This is obviously something we cannot allow : all Member States must obey the rules .
If a few big countries set a bad example , the situation does not look very good .
The second issue is that notification of irregularities can take up to 39 months - more than three years .
That is far too long and does not inspire trust in the notion that the Member States are acting with sufficient vigilance .
The third issue , which is very interesting and important , is that specialised and organised crime is also occurring in this area .
This is now so serious that all measures need to be taken to cut this sort of crime .
This is a very important report and every effort needs to be made to improve the situation in order to gain public confidence .
( Applause )
( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to express my sincere congratulations to the rapporteur .
It is not an easy task , coming in new to such a comprehensive dossier , and I think we can be proud that Mr Musotto has done such a magnificent job .
I think we can say this with confidence today , given that there are no amendments to this report for tomorrow .
That , too , is a tribute to the rapporteur .
Secondly , it is apparently of no interest whatsoever to one of the budgetary authorities to find out what is happening to the taxpayers ' money .
Once again , the Council is shirking its responsibility .
Whenever we talk about how European taxpayers ' money is being spent and try to seek solutions to difficult issues , the Council simply absents itself .
However , we have seen - and this brings me to the issue of what will happen with the discharges in our committee - that for years in the field of agricultural policy , where we have been resolute in our action and developed systems to control direct payments , irregularities have decreased .
In structural policy , on the other hand , where nothing has been done and where we have sat back and watched events unfold for years , the figures have gone up and up .
This has been apparent for years , and has repeatedly featured in the fraud reports for years . Commissioner Kallas will see in the 2006 discharge that this is a problem and we will expect him to take action and not just sit back and watch .
That is why I would like you , Commissioner , to say this to those Member States which behave as if the rules that we have all devised do not apply to them , and this is also what the rapporteur says , with the full support of all the previous speakers : we want you to say , ' okay , we will put 10 % of your funding on ice .
It will form a reserve , and you can have the money once you have taken appropriate action ' .
That is a very practical demand from Parliament .
It is not a plan of action ; it is practical action .
This is what we expect from the Commission , and then we will be very satisfied .
Once again , congratulations to the rapporteur .
Mr President , like the other speakers , I would like to congratulate the rapporteur on what is a very important report .
I am prompted to take part in this debate because of the focus on agriculture .
Other speakers have said that there has been an improvement in terms of the controls and inspections , particularly when it comes to money given to farmers , and there is now the transparency initiative to publish what farmers are getting .
One of the difficulties for those in the farming community is that they believe very often they are guilty until proven innocent .
Obviously , none of us can or will condone fraud , and because there is fraud in the EU budget there is a very poor public perception of the European Union and how it accounts for the money collected .
If the public understood the European budget better , they might clamour a little louder for us to be harder on fraud .
It is important to stress the difference between fraud and irregularities , of which many are discovered , because they are very different .
We cannot punish ourselves for irregularities , but we should punish fraud against the Community budget .
This is an issue involving the Member States - as the last speaker said - because all the Member States signed up to the European Union in good faith and have pooled resources in certain policies , and it is up to us to ensure that the money we have pooled is well spent and that there is no fraud against the public purse .
Member States which are light on fraud , and take a light-touch approach , need to be punished in some way , but it is very important that Member States that perform well in this area are not penalised .
It is therefore important for the Commission to take action at Member State level .
I shall finish by reiterating the very important point that , on the farming side , there is now a very strong feeling among those who farm that they are sometimes guilty until proven innocent .
That is unacceptable , and we therefore need to be careful to get the balance right .
- ( NL ) Mr President , thank you for allowing me to speak again .
Anyone who follows me in my political office and my statements knows that I am a critical politician and that I am also highly critical of the European Union but that I am still very strongly pro-European .
I cannot therefore ignore the words of Mr Clark , who has meanwhile left the room .
Like all Eurosceptics , Mr Clark uses half truths , complete lies and lots of oversimplifications on a frequent basis .
He talked in his speech , for instance , of several million euros worth of fraud , while the report clearly states that we are dealing with irregularities .
He invariably substitutes ' fraud ' for the word ' irregularities ' .
That is crass , because that is not what it says in the report .
Secondly , he talks as if every disaster that befalls us comes from the European Union .
I would just like to ask Mr Clark to read the report of the British House of Lords on VAT carrousels .
Then he will see that his own authorities have not managed to put a stop to this VAT fraud .
We are talking about GBP 3.5 to 4.5 billion of fraud a year .
That is more than GBP 10 million a day !
That is significantly more ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
( RO ) Congratulations on Mr. Musotto 's report .
I consider that many irregularities from 2003-2006 would have the support of changing the rule of presentation of the Framework Programme 6 , for instance , as compared to Framework 5 .
In Framework 5 , the B party was anonymous and any reference to the country and to the person behind the project was penalized .
In Frameworks 6 and 7 , the anonymity disappeared .
In Framework 8 is it possible to no longer resort to this system of advanced submission of projects ?
( DE ) Mr President , thank you for giving me the opportunity to speak again .
I would like to thank Mr Bösch , not only for his praise of our rapporteur , but also for his fairness and help .
Mr Bösch has been dealing with the fraud report for many years .
Now we have this honour , and I think it is a great sign of strength in the Committee on Budgetary Control that we are in agreement here .
We have focused our full attention on the Member States .
The Commission should also take with it the message that we want to help to bring this lack of clarity to an end .
If we look at the figures on the recovery of funds , we see that we are dealing with a very wide range of opinions .
That is why we are having this discussion as part of the current discharge procedure .
Consequently , I really must ask the Commission to have the courage to say if it does not know certain things , so that we can help .
I think that if we tackle the issue together , then together , we will be successful .
Once again , very many thanks to Mr Bösch .
Vice-President of the Commission . - Mr President , I would like to thank the honourable Members for their comments on this report .
We consider the report to be very focused and constructive .
I have just two remarks on an issue raised by very many of you - namely , what is irregularity , what is fraud , and how should one approach recovery ?
I can say that we have had one preliminary meeting with the relevant people at the Court of Auditors , and tried to harmonise the understanding of what is what .
That will probably also help in all our future debates on discharge , and of course all the three reports - including the next one - are all very closely interrelated .
Secondly , I have raised this issue with the Council Presidency , and asked it to consider this parliamentary report during its proceedings , by which I mean to discuss this document within the framework of Ecofin .
I hope it will do that .
We will definitely , after the vote on this report , when it becomes an official document , also try to initiate this discussion in the Council , including at the level of the relevant subcommittees .

rapporteur . - ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , allow me firstly to thank all my colleagues for their kind words , and especially Mr Bösch whose earlier work laid the foundations for my own report .
I should like to emphasise a few points , the main one being the meeting of minds with Commissioner Kallas , particularly as concerns the nature of the regulatory mechanisms governing the disbursement of funds .
The Commission has made an undertaking here . One important aspect underscored by Mr Kallas is that the more difficulties and complications there are , the harder it becomes to understand the rules and the easier it becomes for organised crime above all and for all forms of unlawful activity to move into these grey areas .
Therefore simplification and , even more , a closing of the gap between those disbursing the sums of money and the beneficiaries is another means of achieving clarity , transparency and ease of understanding of the whole system .
The problem of recovery is a very real one .
The procedures are too lengthy , and the capacity to punish those who defraud the European Community must be ensured by some kind of security or guarantee , to be applied through the banks .
It is essential to devise methods of ensuring disbursement and , especially , of making it possible to recover these sums and hence assisting , improving and facilitating the speed of recovery .
I believe that , thanks to the cooperation , good will and political commitment of all of my colleagues , we have done a crucial job of work .
There can be no doubt that this cooperation , this willingness and desire to stamp out a phenomenon that does enormous damage to the European Community is motivated solely by political concerns .
Of course , the absence of the Council has not made matters any easier ; the presence of a representative would have enabled us to find out what the Council thinks .
But Parliament is absolutely united and unanimous on these principles , and we therefore believe that we have done something positive which gives us hope for the future .
in writing . - ( HU ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , congratulations on this report , which highlights not only the successes of the recent past , but also some lamentable shortcomings and long-standing debts .
For me this report is very topical because in Hungary a decision has been made to establish a national anti-counterfeiting body .
This body will primarily have a coordinating function linking the Hungarian Patent Office , other government agencies and actors in the economy , including functions connected with European Union-related data services .
We need to prepare ourselves for a long and futile battle .
Knowledge - whether protected or in the public domain - is becoming increasingly widely accessible .
A car on display in one room can be copied in the space of 5 minutes in the room next door .
The result will not be any worse , just cheaper : it is up to us to decide whether to go ahead and buy the more expensive item anyway .
We have to decide whether we are willing to pay for the intellectual achievement , the innovation , even if we have the option of choosing the secondary product or service that has no value added .
To do this requires considerable awareness and commitment .
We cannot expect individual citizens to recognise these connections and make decisions based on values if our legislators or governments are unable to do so .
It is particularly important to reduce the number of irregularities relating to use of EU funds to below the tolerable error rate : fraud of this sort makes the European Union as a whole look ridiculous when it involves EU funds being used in a manner that contradicts the declared aims of the EU .
Application of the law on customs and agricultural matters ( debate )
The next item is the report by Bill Newton Dunn , on behalf of the Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection , on the proposal for a regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council amending Council Regulation ( EC ) No 515 / 97 on mutual assistance between the administrative authorities of the Member States and cooperation between the latter and the Commission to ensure the correct application of the law on customs and agricultural matters - C6-0033 / 2007 - .
Vice-President of the Commission . - Mr President , this third report is very much linked to the two previous ones .
Council Regulation ( EC ) No 515 / 97 on mutual assistance between the administrative authorities of the Member States and cooperation between the latter and the Commission to ensure the correct application of the law on customs or agricultural matters is a very important piece of legislation dating back to 1997 , when we had 15 Member States .
It was essential to propose an amendment to Regulation ( EC ) No 515 / 97 in the light of developments in the last decade , technological progress , successful experience with joint customs operations coordinated in Brussels , and the enlargement of the Union to 27 Members .
I would like to pay tribute to the rapporteur , Mr Newton-Dunn , for the way he has guided this proposal through Parliament .
I would also like to thank Mr Audy , who drafted the opinion .
The two committees , IMCO and COCOBU , worked closely together using the enhanced cooperation mechanism .
Their excellent work has enabled a compromise to be brokered between the various political actors .
Thanks to the constructive approach of Parliament , a first-reading adoption of this legislation can now be achieved .
Customs authorities apply controls on goods entering and exiting the Community based upon a common risk management framework , including the use of random checks .
In this context , their task is generally not limited to the enforcement of customs legislation : they also apply Community law in the fields of VAT , excise and agricultural legislation .
I also note that the issue of the fight against VAT fraud and the need for closer cooperation between the Member States and the Commission is strongly emphasised in the Musotto report which we have just discussed .
For this reason , it is crucial that customs authorities and the Commission are allowed to exchange VAT information .
In the case of certain types of data , the new Article 2a makes such an exchange of information possible .
The Commission regards this as the first step in the direction of closer cooperation in the field of the protection of the Community 's financial interests against VAT fraud .
rapporteur . - Mr President , I thank the Commissioner .
I believe this should be a very uncontroversial proposal by the Commission .
As the Commissioner said : enlargement , more Member States , new technology , new equipment , computers .
We need updated Commission legislation to allow good cooperation across internal borders in the Union against the bad guys - the organised criminals and so on .
I talked to the director of a major Anglo-Dutch company last week and he says that he finds organised crime is increasing and - I use the word which he used - ' exponentially ' , increasing incredibly fast , and yet the Member State governments do nothing about it , because the public does not know the full picture and does not push the governments , so they say , ' Well , don 't worry , everything is okay ' .
We have a serious problem .
So we need this proposal from the Commission , and everybody should agree and it should go through .
There should be nothing more for me to say , but actually there is a whole story to tell you , Mr President , which I would now like to do .
To my amazement , my own Member State , the UK , threw in a veto in the Council of Ministers , saying that they would not agree to this .
They did not tell me , though I am British , and from the same Member State .
Not a single Labour MEP from the Labour Government in London tabled an amendment to anything , but they chose my good Conservative friend , Christopher Heaton-Harris , a very honourable man , who is going to speak , to pick up the Labour Government 's objection and he tabled an amendment , which is slightly weird , but I wish Chris good luck ; he is entitled to do that .
But what was the Labour Party doing in all this ?
So , I thought , this is very strange , and there are a lot of other British objections and vetoes and opt-outs going on in lots of different policy areas , so I thought I would investigate what the overall UK policy was on all these directives that they are opting out of , what was going on ?
I went to OLAF , which deals with fraud in the EU , as we know .
OLAF tells me that the UK refuses to cooperate with it , even though the UK loses billions on VAT carousel fraud .
London says , ' If we give OLAF a finger , they will take our whole arm , so we are afraid , and we will not cooperate ' .
This is very weird , so I made further enquiries in London .
How does this work ?
And I am told this is what happens : the Commission makes a proposal , then a junior official in the appropriate government department in London has to write a briefing paper to recommend what the Government should do about it .
He is very careful ; he is a bit nervous ; he does not know what to do , so he says , ' We must not do anything about this .
I recommend great caution .
I do not think we should approve .
Perhaps we should even opt out ' .
And his careful paper - because he wants to be promoted and not sacked - goes up the tree in his department , and officials who are busy doing other things say ' okay ' and tick it .
Other government departments asked for their opinion do not know either , so they say , ' It seems okay to us ' .
It goes finally to a cabinet committee chaired by our Foreign Secretary - and he has a million other things to think about - and so it gets rubber-stamped .
So , suddenly , the Government 's position in London is negative , cautious , in favour of an opt-out : ' We do not understand .
We do not really know what is going on ' .
Very strange indeed !
So what happens next ?
Well , back to the Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection in the Parliament .
The blockage in the Council has meant that I have attended several informal tripartite conciliations with the Council , first of all led by the Portuguese , now led by the Slovenes , in both cases excellently .
And , although no UK official has ever briefed me about anything , and I was therefore the only British person present at the conciliation , even though the British Government apparently has a veto situation on this , it went through .
Finally , the Commission and the Council have found a form of words which has enabled the British objection to be got round , or overcome , or whatever words you like to use .
So the amendments before the Parliament , for voting tomorrow , were all approved by the IMCO Committee and I hope very much that Parliament will vote for them tomorrow .
But what is going on in London , Mr President , I just do not understand .


draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Budgetary Control . - ( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , my colleague Mr Audy , who is draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Budgetary Control , has been delayed at the last minute and so I am speaking on his behalf .
The correct application of the law on customs and agricultural matters plays a decisive role in ensuring that the internal market functions properly .
It is also essential for protecting the financial interests of the Community and , more generally , those of European economic operators and citizens .
The customs files identification database will allow the different services of the Member States and the Commission to cooperate more effectively .
Some of the amendments are aimed at implementing the Court of Auditors ' proposals with a view to making the database more useful .
The draftsman shares the Court 's concerns about the integrated approach to managing the various databases relating to the fight against fraud , but considers this to be a discussion going beyond the bounds of this Regulation and therefore one which should be conducted in a different context .
The draftsman , Mr Audy , supports the Commission 's proposals aiming to promote the added value of cooperation at European level , in particular the European data directory and the platform of services .
In the absence of a more uniform legal framework , an exchange of best practice will ensure an increasingly coherent approach in the medium term .
On the question of financing , the draftsman emphasises that expenses must be clearly identified so as to avoid an overlap between this proposal and other instruments , such as the Hercule II programme .
Finally , the draftsman would like to keep the legislative procedure for the decision on other communication and information exchange systems , including the mandatory opinion of the Court of Auditors , rather than apply the ' comitology ' procedure .

on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - Mr President , I would like to start by thanking Mr Newton Dunn , another honourable Member of this institution , for eloquently painting the picture of how EU matters are dealt with - or how he believes they are dealt with - in London .
Perhaps I can explain what was going on in London and why they came to a Conservative Member of the European Parliament rather than go to a Labour MEP , or indeed to himself .
Actually , I think they should have gone to him , and I cannot believe they did not .
He might not believe me , but I had more contact with the current Presidency-in-Office than I did with anybody from London or the British civil service .
But perhaps it was just the fact that this young civil servant he described had forgotten to read the newspapers and believed that the general election had been called in October , that my party had won it and that the Prime Minister had not dithered , and that , therefore , he was dealing with a member of the Government party .
Alas , that is not the case .
But I do understand what he says about London being concerned about giving OLAF a finger and it taking an arm .
This actually goes back to the structure of OLAF itself , to the wise men 's paper back in 1999 , and the fact that OLAF is simply not independent of the Commission - something that will be addressed in the future .
There were other problems with this particular dossier : the fact that VAT was being dragged between pillars , possibly - and we needed to get legal advice on that - and the fact that much of this information is already exchanged electronically .
The British Government did believe - and I can see from reading between the lines how it came to that conclusion - that it would need a permanent coordination unit and would need to second people to this , therefore having lots of people in a place rather than just exchanging information electronically .
However , there is no problem with the amendments .
There is no problem with the debate .
This should go through very quickly , and I hope it does .
Thank you , Mr Heaton-Harris .
Now that all is clear in London , Europe too feels more at ease .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to congratulate the rapporteur for having produced an excellent piece of work and for having collaborated so well on what is a particularly sensitive issue .
At a time of increasing trade not only within the Union but also with third countries , the opening-up of markets and expanding commercial activity are set to represent key development factors for Europe for years to come .
However , the gradual removal of the barriers that define the European Economic Area also opens the door to a host of fraudulent activities that threaten the viability of the internal market , with Community producers , and by extension European consumers , counting among the first victims .
This problem is especially prominent in the agricultural sector , where the crucial measures that have been put in place to provide farmers with financial aid and solidarity have attracted the greedy eyes of international crime on both a small and large scale .
In this context , and given the shortcomings of the present controls , Europe is preparing to arm itself with a new regulation that will permit a better distribution of data among the Member States with regard to the movement of goods and the various investigations that are being carried out in the different countries of the Union .
I welcome the compromise that has been found with the Council , which now gives us a more balanced document , the details of which are to be voted on tomorrow by the Members of this Parliament .
While continuing to protect the various aspects of private life , the agreement should help improve the effectiveness of surveillance procedures and lead to better coordination of actions undertaken between each of the Member States .
In the area of customs controls , as elsewhere , I am convinced that Europe can only develop through greater combination of effort and by the pooling of our respective resources so that we can give our citizens the level of protection they desire .
In this respect , any improvement in the measures we have for combating fraud cannot be achieved without also maintaining a consistent level of regulation , for this is essential if we are to retain sound and effective control from above of the commercial activities under way both within the Union and with third countries .
Mr President , I rather enjoyed the remarks by my eminent colleagues from the UK and their storytelling about how things are done in the UK .
I think we should write that down and translate that into many languages , because I think it happens in many Member States that junior officials have a dossier and prepare various reports on it .
I think we should not point the finger at the junior official but rather at the department that allows that to happen .
I would just like to put to the House that there are concerns about the UK and Ireland - and maybe the Commission can update me , if there is an update about this particular issue - because , while there is support for the principle of mutual assistance between the customs authorities , I think that both Member States , Ireland and the UK , have reservations on the exchange of information between these authorities on the use of VAT numbers in Article 2a ( f ) and contend that the exchange of information using VAT numbers is de facto , the exchange of fiscal information falling outside the scope of the proposed legal base .
So perhaps there could be a comment on that .
Vice-President of the Commission . - Mr President , I also enjoy seeing how things are debated in the UK .
However , I can assure you , with regard to what had just been said , that this does not happen only in the UK .
I have met several chiefs of finance , and several ministers , and promoted the idea of mutual administrative assistance , and can state that this reluctance is not just limited to the United Kingdom .
It has been viewed as a suspicious matter , but I can assure you that there are no grounds for this kind of suspicion .
As an investigative body within the Commission , OLAF can only provide a platform for cooperation , and it is absolutely clear that value added tax fraud can only be fought in cooperation between Member States and the European Commission , because , basically , major fraud can only happen cross-border .
So there is a real need for better cooperation , and to exchange information .
I cannot comment on the last question , as to the substance of the information .
We are only talking about smoothing the fight against value added tax fraud , which is a major type of fraud .
That would indeed be the case , and I am very happy to hear the opinion being clearly expressed that Parliament would support this legislative proposal in the form proposed .
rapporteur . - Mr President , I should like to thank everybody who spoke in the debate .
To the very perceptive comment from Ms McGuinness , representing Dublin , I would say : when she said this is widespread and should be written down , she probably is aware that there was a very famous TV programme about 15 , or even 20 , years ago in the UK called Yes , Minister , in which the minister , who was a bumbling idiot , imagined he was in full control and was eventually promoted to Prime Minister .
But the words ' Yes , Minister ' were actually the words of his civil servants , who were telling him what to say and what to do - ' Yes , Minister .
No , Minister .
Of course , you are all-powerful , Minister . '
But it was the civil servants who were in control .
This was happening 20 years ago and , clearly , it is still happening today .
And it is happening all over Europe , which is very interesting .
So perhaps we need an updated European programme - Ja , Herr Minister or Sí , Señor Ministro .
But perhaps scriptwriters could actually entertain us with a new programme on the same theme , because the old truths remain as true as ever .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on 19 February 2008 .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
in writing . - ( PL ) The latest two enlargements have resulted in a significant increase in the length of the European Union 's land and sea borders .
This calls for closer cooperation between Member States and between Member States and the Commission . It also requires coordination and cohesion of actions aimed at combating international economic and financial crime .
I agree with the rapporteur that the role of third countries should not be overlooked in relation to these activities . I fully support authorising the Commission as appropriate , so it can provide technical aid and training to liaison officials from third countries and from European and international agencies and organisations .
I welcome the proposal to improve the procedures for transferring data obtained from another Member State to third countries .
I am confident that the proposed changes will have a positive impact on limiting financial irregularities .
I should like to highlight the text of Article 18a regarding the creation and management by the Commission of a directory to help detect consignments that may not comply with legal provisions in the areas of customs and agriculture .
In this connection , I believe specific provision should be made in the text to enable every Member State to access the aforementioned database if it submits a request to the Commission to that effect .
As it currently stands , the text refers to assistance to the relevant authorities .
Community Customs Code ( debate )
The next item is the recommendation for second reading , on behalf of the Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection , on the Common Position adopted by the Council on 15 October 2007 with a view to the adoption of a Regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council laying down the Community Customs Code ( Modernized Customs Code ) ( 11272 / 6 / 2007 - C6-0354 / 2007 - ( Rapporteur : Janelly Fourtou ) .
rapporteur . - ( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , now that we have come to the end of three years of hard work I am delighted at what has been achieved in respect of the key points in this document .
The customs union is one of the pillars of the European Union and an essential element in the functioning of the internal market .
The present Community Customs Code , which was drawn up in the 1980s and adopted in the 1990s , is now outdated .
Our customs services are faced with new challenges .
In 2007 world trade totalled nearly 16 billion dollars , or 31 % of global GDP , and the European Union alone accounted for 20 % of the total volume of global imports and exports .
The customs services are therefore responsible for maintaining the smooth flow of trade and the controls that are needed to provide for this , while at the same time ensuring that the safety and security of EU citizens is protected .
If a satisfactory balance is to be reached the control methods used have to be modernised and the level of cooperation strengthened between the different services and economic operators .
The Code also has to be adapted to other radical changes that have occurred in the international commercial environment , mainly resulting from the growing and irreversible recourse to IT and electronic data exchange technologies .
This particular subject was also the focus of a report that was drawn up by my colleague Mr Heaton-Harris and adopted by Parliament last December .
The first reading of the modernised customs code was adopted on 12 December 2006 and the German Presidency managed to secure a political agreement on 25 June 2007 .
Parliament adopted 51 amendments to the proposal at first reading , 34 of which , mostly of a substantive nature , were taken over fully or in part in the Council common position .
The main subjects of disagreement were the status of authorised economic operator , the right to act as a customs representative , centralised customs clearance and comitology .
The status of authorised economic operator , which is directly related to the events of 11 September , was introduced by the so-called ' security amendment ' Regulation , whose aim was to offer greater facilities to operators and hence offset the new burdens they had to shoulder in order to cope with security-related aspects .
Your rapporteur is satisfied that the concept developed by Parliament at first reading has been taken over ; this involves drawing a distinction between two types of authorisation , namely ' customs simplification ' , on one hand , and ' safety and security ' , on the other .
This pragmatic solution allows for the different needs of the economic operators .
Turning to the subject of customs representatives , emotions have been running fairly high in those countries which have had a long history of this profession .
While the Council has not adopted Parliament 's proposals to the letter , it has nevertheless proceeded from the premise that customs representatives and authorised economic operators should interact along the lines we desired .
Your rapporteur believes that the Council has arrived at a good compromise .
Moreover , this solution has been accepted by customs representatives associations , even though they have lost their monopoly in certain Member States .
As far as centralised customs clearance is concerned , we have another novelty in that the Council has introduced a new Article 106 , taking the view that it is more logical and transparent for all of the provisions of the Code related to this concept to be encompassed within a single article .
Henceforth all economic operators may benefit from centralised clearance on the territory of any one Member State .
In cases involving several Member States they have to satisfy the eligibility criteria for authorised economic operator status .
Finally , of all the areas in which this document has made significant progress we can also be very pleased that we have broadened out the comitology process to cover 44 provisions of the modernised customs code .
For this reason I am calling on Parliament to support the Council common position without amendment .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , after more than two years of active interinstitutional work , we are now very close to the completion of the codecision procedure on this proposal , thanks in particular to the commitment of Ms Fourtou and the support of the members of the Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection .
I am very pleased that the legal framework for a future-oriented reform of European customs will - hopefully - be in place this year , which marks the 40th anniversary of our Customs Union .
That will provide encouraging impetus for the work that still lies ahead of us .
The customs union is usually presented as an ' old ' pillar of the Community .
It cannot , however , be reduced to a simple legacy of the past .
It is in operation today - and not just to ensure the collection of own resources .
More and more , customs administrations , legislation and procedures will secure the internal market , contribute to consumer protection , support the external aspects of common policies and , at the same time , contribute to the facilitation of our international trade .
To this end , customs legislation will evolve to respond to major changes and challenges , inside and outside the Union , and resort to the most effective rules and efficient techniques .
What will modernisation of the Community Customs Code actually mean ?
First , better customs regulations , including simpler and streamlined rules and procedures , clarifying the rights and obligations of economic operators and guaranteeing their more uniform treatment , while providing for an equivalent level of security and safety .
Second , a progressive computerisation of all customs formalities , with a view to a completely ' paperless ' environment for customs and trade , whose development will be supported and framed by the e-customs Decision ( No 70 / 2008 / EC ) of the Parliament and of the Council , adopted on 15 January 2008 .
These changes include interoperability between national computerised customs systems .
They will allow , in particular , customs clearance of goods at the place of establishment of the declarant , irrespective of the place of entry into , exit from or supply within the Community of those goods - so-called ' centralised clearance ' .
They will also permit an exchange of data elements , in real time , between customs authorities , in order to perform risk analysis and improve controls within the framework of common risk management .
By supporting the Commission 's proposal at first reading , Parliament has acknowledged the essential contribution of this legislative initiative to the Lisbon strategy for growth and jobs .
The Council common position of October 2007 , which incorporates most of the amendments adopted by Parliament at first reading , is considered by the Commission to be a well balanced compromise .
The Commission therefore welcomes Ms Fourtou 's report recommending approval of the common position without amendment .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - Mr President , firstly I would like to thank Ms Fourtou .
I am always in awe of her grasp of the detail in this very complex matter .
The Modernised Customs Code , as the Commissioner has heard me say before , is an amazingly boring but ever so important piece of law from the Commission .
In 1975 , when the United Kingdom voted in a referendum that we should actually be having now ( a referendum on the Lisbon Treaty ) - a referendum to come into this club - we thought we were voting to come into a free-trade area .
What people got was , in fact , a customs union , and since I have been here I have been working hard on this particular report , because getting this Customs Code right and modernising it correctly is possibly the most important thing we can do until the whole thing is rejuvenated , as the Commissioner said , within the system of e-customs , making trade much more easy and duty collection much more simple across the Union .
However , as with all things European , we do not move forward as quickly as some of us would like - if we move forward at all .
There are still barriers that are contained within this text .
Some are pretty much built-in , until there is a complete wipe-clean of the slate and we start all over .
What is an Authorised Economic Operator ?
What qualification should customs representatives - or AEOs , as they are known - have ?
Could these be used in the future as barriers to stop people coming into the business as start-ups , or indeed existing businesses running in Europe spreading across the rest of it ?
This Modernised Customs Code is actually a very good document , on balance , but it could have been very much better as well .
Alas , we have to compromise in this House a little too often , but I hope that , on balance , this will be good for the continent of Europe .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( ES ) Mr President , in my opinion , the Community Customs Code as presented by the Commission and debated by Parliament and the Council has proved an exemplary procedure .
Our rapporteur , Mrs Fourtou , has put in an enormous amount of work on this and in the end , as is almost always the case , Parliament , the Council and the Commission have agreed on the final text we will be adopting .
I think that , as Mr Heaton-Harris has already mentioned , the European Union is above all a customs union , and so the customs code is an important component to allow it to function .
However , the customs service as such does not function as a totally free operation : the authorities are involved to a great extent , since certain goods and values affect us all .
What we are talking about here is smuggling and some of its more dangerous varieties , such as arms and drug smuggling , and controls of capital outflows .
It is therefore logical that the Community Customs Code should include the normal restrictions operated by each of the Member States , and make an attempt at harmonisation .
I feel the points of debate we had here were satisfactorily resolved by the dual concept of customs representation rights and the Authorised Economic Operator : the idea of two concepts that are theoretically different but can find common ground for harmonisation .
I think the solution adopted is quite a good and proper solution .
Commissioner Kovács insisted on the concept of centralised customs clearance insofar as the customs union constitutes a single unit .
It does not , of course , make sense for there to be differences between the various customs facilities .
I feel this is a good and practical solution that will allow us to operate in the appropriate fashion .
The last aspect to be mentioned is the comitology procedure .
Both the Commission and the Council have now acknowledged the importance of Parliament 's involvement in the procedure .
The agreement reached means that the 28 provisions with respect to which this procedure was applied with the involvement of Parliament have now increased to 44 , i.e. Parliament may intervene in an increasingly effective fashion in the creation of provisions for the customs code .
Finally , Mr President , I wish to thank Mrs Fourtou for her work and the Commissioner for his efforts to encompass the proposals of this House .
( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the European Union is undoubtedly much more than just a customs union .
We will not reduce it to a customs union in today 's debate and in the decision we take tomorrow .
Nonetheless , the customs policy at the EU 's external borders is an important element of the European Union 's activities and a functioning internal market .
The ÖVP Europe Club in the European Parliament welcomes the proposal for a regulation on a modernised Community Customs Code .
Why ?
Because it streamlines customs procedures , because it establishes the basis for simpler , speedier common customs procedures at the external borders , because it means that the radical changes in the international trade environment - for example , in relation to information technology , electronic data , etc . - will now be taken into account , and because customs representatives will now be subject to clearly defined common criteria , which will result in greater reliability and professionalism .
This regulation strengthens cooperation between the Member States and the European Union .
It creates a stronger Community , which is also reflected in the fact that all the amendments tabled by Parliament have been taken over by the Council .
From my perspective , it means simpler , speedier common customs clearance , and that is good for business and for the European Union as a whole .
( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would also like to express my sincere thanks to the rapporteur and , of course , to our shadow rapporteur , both of whom have done valuable work on a highly technical dossier .
With the new customs code the aim is to replace the existing code and the related regulations with a modernised code , streamline current customs procedures and create the bases for accessible interoperable customs systems across the European Union .
This is something which we greatly welcome , for it will mean that companies will benefit from the adaptation to current developments in information technology and faster and more secure processing of the increasing volumes of goods passing the EU 's borders .
Business associations and chambers of trade have rightly warned from the outset about the excessive red tape being generated by the EU 's security initiatives which have spilled over from the US . Through our deliberations in Parliament and intensive contact with the Commission 's offices , we have finally achieved a relatively sound and unbureaucratic solution , for which I am grateful .
A key point for companies that is now being implemented is centralised customs clearance through a single point of contact .
We have also been able to push through our demand - and I am very proud of this - for privileged status for those businesses which fulfil the requisite criteria .
As a Member from South Baden , I must point out , however , that the customs code could cause considerable problems at the EU 's external borders with countries which are not EU Member States , unless precautionary measures are taken in time .
I know that the Commission wishes to take these precautions - I am talking about Switzerland here - and I hope that the Member States in the EU-Swiss Joint Committee will also play their part .
Switzerland is one of the most important markets for EU goods .
Switzerland 's four immediate neighbours in the EU account for 41 % of its total exports and 59 % of its total imports , which is why there is a need for action here .
We cannot allow kilometre-long queues to form at the Swiss borders as a result of the introduction of the customs code , simply because the Swiss system of customs clearance differs slightly from that of the EU .
Commissioner Kovács , I would ask you to look at this problem and draw it to the attention of the Member States concerned as a matter of urgency .
We are talking about an economic centre in the heart of Europe which must not be cut off from the international flow of goods as a result of our activities .
( CS ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I trust that tomorrow we will approve at second reading the Council 's common position on the customs code .
It is a successful modernisation of European customs legislation .
It is a true gateway to an electronic , centralised , interoperable and automated customs system .
All EU bodies will be able to avail of a single management point - a one-stop-shop - for their operations , making the much-needed controls more effective .
Thanks to a unified customs information portal - single window - entrepreneurs will be able to communicate with only one customs office in the EU at the place of their establishment .
This rule simplifies and unifies terminology and definitions , as well as making them more user-friendly .
It is a good example of the ability , even in an enlarged EU , to simplify bureaucracy and improve the legal environment for entrepreneurs and citizens .
Moreover , the project will reportedly have paid for itself by 2010 .
I thank the rapporteurs , Mrs Fourtou and Mr Newton Dunn , the Commission and the Council for the excellent work carried out over the last three years .

Mr President , I would just like to make one comment in response to Mr Heaton-Harris saying that he thought that Britain in 1975 was joining a free-trade area .
I am very worried about his memory , or perhaps it is his education .
Britain was leaving a European free-trade area - it was called EFTA .
We chose to leave it to join the European Community , and Mrs Thatcher , who was the Conservative leader at the time of the 1975 referendum in the UK , said that it was ' more than a free-trade area ' .
Very simple , very clear , on the record .
Now , since Mr Heaton-Harris wants a referendum today on the Lisbon Treaty in the UK , he is clearly confident that the British public would read all the documents to make up their minds how to vote .
And that must have been true in 1975 .
The British public in 1975 will have read in the documents that this is about an ever closer union and not a free-trade area .
The European Union is about an ever closer union .
So please , Mr President , can we get a pill for Mr Heaton-Harris 's memory ?
Thank you , Mr Newton Dunn .
How gloomy our evenings in the European Parliament would be without these interesting British discussions .
Mr President , I will resist the temptation to join in .
I would like to thank the rapporteur for the detailed work on this report .
Let us be honest , this is not the stuff that people talk about in public houses and on social occasions .
But getting our customs laws right is very important for business and for jobs , and that is why we are doing it .
So the idea of centralised clearance makes good sense , if it works - and let us hope that it does , under these new rules .
Also , the idea of a single window has potential to reduce unnecessary bureaucracy .
But can I make just one point : let us take feedback , when this all is up and running , from the economic operators , and be willing to adjust it where we see problems which have been identified by other speakers this evening .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , my point of departure is that I am not only pleased but also very proud that we have reached this point , because I agree with all those speakers who consider it a very great achievement for the Union as a whole .
First of all , I would like to express my thanks for your support for the Modernised Customs Code and for your interest in future developments .
As you have recalled , the adoption and subsequent entry into force of the Code will not be the end of the story , since its application will depend on the finalisation and application of its implementing provisions .
The new regulatory procedure with scrutiny will be used for the adoption of these provisions .
It will give Parliament the possibility to check the way the Commission intends to implement in detail , with the assistance of the Customs Code Committee , the general provisions resulting from the Code .
Besides this procedural requirement , the Commission intends to keep Parliament , through its Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection , properly informed about the state of preparation of the draft implementing measures and the time-schedule envisaged for the application of the Modernised Customs Code .
Concerning the problem of Switzerland and the European Union , which Mr Schwab raised , on 1 July 2009 the security amendment to the Community Customs Code will be fully implemented .
This means that all goods entering or leaving the Community shall be the subject of a pre-arrival or pre-departure declaration .
The Authorised Economic Operator will benefit from the facilitations envisaged in the Code .
As with other third countries , we are currently negotiating with Switzerland on the mutual recognition of control centres , the results of controls and the status of Authorised Economic Operator .
The negotiations are ongoing , and we are looking for a mutually satisfactory solution to be in place by 1 July 2009 .
Now let me finish by inviting you to join the celebrations of the 40th anniversary of the Customs Union on 1 July 2008 .
The Customs Union was the first cornerstone in building the internal market and remains one of its essential components .
I am looking forward to continuing our discussion about the future role of customs in the context of the celebrations .
Thank you very much , once again , for your support .
rapporteur . - ( FR ) Mr President , I would like to thank all those who have spoken and all those who have contributed to the drafting of this report .
Since Mr Medina Ortega has spoken about smuggling I cannot resist the urge to bring up the subject of counterfeiting .
Between 1998 and 2004 the number of arrests for counterfeiting rose by 1 000 % .
This just goes to show that the controls currently in place need to be updated and a new approach adopted as far as the duties of customs officials are concerned .
I also wish to pay tribute to the professionals themselves , who have displayed a real openness of mind , and I would like to say to them that I still feel a debt of gratitude towards them .
This will no doubt answer the concerns voiced by Mrs McGuinness .
As far as the implementing measures are concerned , I will do my best to encourage dialogue between the customs authorities and the Community institutions , including the Commission , with which there has always been a good measure of close and productive cooperation .
I therefore call on you to support the common position and would conclude by thanking you all for your attention .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on 19 February 2008 .
The factors favouring support for terrorism and the recruitment of terrorists ( debate )
The next item is the report by Gérard Deprez , on behalf of the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs , with a proposal for a European Parliament recommendation to the Council on the factors favouring support for terrorism and the recruitment of terrorists .

rapporteur . - ( FR ) Mr President , the report that I have the honour of presenting to you today on behalf of the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs has its beginnings in a proposal that was tabled at the end of 2005 by our colleague Mr Duquesne , to whom I now pay tribute .
I also wish to point out that the bulk of the work relating to this report was carried out by our colleague Mr Mayor Oreja , who for reasons that I cannot comment on here decided to withdraw his name following the vote that was held in committee .
As regards the content of the report that has been presented to Parliament , I believe that it can be summarised by structuring the numerous elements it contains around four main themes .
Theme one is the gravity and permanence of the threat .
It is an undeniable fact that terrorism in general , and Jihadist terrorism in particular , is now one of the most serious threats to the security of the citizens of the European Union .
The bloody attacks on Madrid in 2004 and on London in 2005 , and let us also not forget all the other attempts that have been foiled since then , all testify to the permanent and serious nature of this threat .
From this it follows - and the report is fairly emphatic on this point - that the fight against terrorism must remain one of the priorities of the European Union and its Member States .
However , and this is the report 's second theme , this determined fight against terrorism has to be waged in a certain way .
There are fundamental principles to be respected ; otherwise , we shall distort the basic values that govern our societies .
The fight against terrorism has to be carried out on the basis of scrupulous respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms , especially freedom of religion and the right to a fair trial .
At the same time , and especially where Jihadist terrorism is concerned , it is important to draw a distinction between cultures and religions , on the one hand , and terrorism , on the other .
The vast majority of Muslims , and here it must not be forgotten that it is they who have been the main victims of terrorism in Iraq , in Afghanistan and in Pakistan , have nothing whatsoever to do with the extremists ; it is these groups , who distort the religion they claim to follow , that we have to combat .
Finally , setting out from the principle that hatred and frustration are two of the factors that drive radicalisation , the report reminds the Member States that combating all forms of discrimination , and in particular those measures that seek to integrate minority groups , are priority policies to be implemented in order to promote calm , tolerance and good relations in our society .
The third theme relates to the measures specifically aimed at preventing terrorist activities .
While there is a long list of recommendations for Member States in this area , the report emphasises the need for greater vigilance against propaganda sites , especially via the Internet , places where preaching sessions are held and the audiovisual media in general .
The fourth theme concerns repressive measures .
Here there is obviously one action that needs to be highlighted above all others , for it will certainly cause no shortage of controversy .
It is presented in paragraph 10 of the report and proposes extending the scope of the definition for acts of terrorism to the justification of terrorism .
Now while I am not sure whether the term ' justification ' is adequate here - and personally I think that in French it would have been preferable to use the term ' praise ' or ' apologia ' for terrorism - and whether it would not have been better to change it , I will be interested to see how this House reacts tomorrow to this somewhat delicate point , which goes to the very heart of the debate , namely where to draw the line between security , fundamental rights and freedom of expression .
Vice-President of the Commission . - Mr President , addressing radicalisation into violence is at the core of the Commission 's counter-terrorism policy , and I therefore welcome the report being discussed today and the very vital issues it tackles .
I also welcome the progress in interinstitutional cooperation in the area of recognition of the enormous challenge we face in developing a coherent EU policy that prevents , interrupts or reverses radicalisation processes .
After a series of initiatives in recent years , since my first communication on the subject in September 2005 , a communication will be presented to the Council and Parliament in July this year , identifying good practices in the Member States and making concrete recommendations for the way forward .
I notice that the report makes a recommendation to the Commission in this regard .
We have devoted time and resources in the last three years to better understanding this phenomenon , its trends , its manifestations and its dynamics .
We have commissioned four separate comparative studies which are now being completed .
We have sent a questionnaire to all the Member States and are currently analysing the answers received .
We have organised a conference on the role of education in preventing radicalisation , which brought together educators , religious leaders and policy-makers to brainstorm new ideas .
We are working on drafting the communication at the moment .
The first three studies - on trigger factors , narrative and mobilisation tactics - are to be approved in the coming month .
A fourth study on civil society engagement ( best practices ) is likely to be published around the time of the communication 's adoption in July .
Its main results will by that stage already have been incorporated into the communication .
Analysis of the questionnaire sent to the Member States is ongoing and will also feed into the reflection on the communication .
We can therefore now formulate our policy with much deeper insight into the problem .
Our communication will deal with important issues like the narrative used by violent radicals and radicalisation in prisons and in other places of vulnerability .
We will also be talking about the role of education , and civil society engagement in countering radicalisation .
Members will be aware that , in relation to incitement , we have presented a proposal for the amendment of the Framework Decision on combating terrorism that is one part of the ' terrorism package ' introduced last November .
That instrument aims to introduce into the Framework Decision offences parallel to those covered in the Council of Europe Convention on the Prevention of Terrorism : public provocation , recruitment and training for terrorism - including via the internet - and in particular internet instructions on how to produce home-made bombs .
The Commission is strongly committed to supporting the victims of terrorism .
We have , since 2004 , demonstrated our support through financial assistance to numerous projects intended to help associations of victims of terrorism and to promote solidarity among European citizens .
We envisage creating , in 2008 , a European Network of Associations of Victims of Terrorism , in order to represent victims ' interests at European level and to strengthen European citizens ' solidarity with victims of terrorism .
In conclusion , in order to tackle the terrorist threat at European level , it is absolutely necessary to implement a global prevention policy on the factors leading to radicalisation and recruitment , in order to explore its deep roots , while never justifying terrorist behaviour .
Jihadist terrorism remains the biggest threat to democratic societies , including thousands of millions of honest Muslim people in the EU and in many other parts of the world .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , Vice-President , ladies and gentlemen , I think it is sad that we have to hold yet another debate about terrorism .
Radicalisation and terrorism do not fit with Europe .
The Europe which we are building is a Europe of tolerance , so it is always sad when we have to discuss this issue .
There is a great deal that unites us .
Terrorism is recognised as a major threat .
Recruitment must be stopped .
We must respect fundamental rights .
Dialogue is the key to tolerance .
We must be particularly aware of the Internet , particularly its significance in communication .
In our foreign policy we view anti-terrorism as being particularly important .
In Europe we need better networking of services to ensure that we can combat radicalisation and terrorism .
I would particularly like to thank the Vice-President of the Commission for his suggestions here and for his summary .
For my group , therefore , it is a great pity that the outstretched hand of our own rapporteur , Mr Mayor Oreja , was not taken and that we could not reach a compromise at the end of the process .
The EPP-ED therefore has a number of key points which we have defined for tomorrow 's vote : for example , when there are motions for deletions which state that the violation of individual rights and the rule of law lead to terrorism ; when there are motions for deletions which put school and religious centres under special surveillance ; and when there are motions to delete references to Jihadist terror .
If we want to combat a threat , we need to know where the threat comes from .
That is why we must identify Jihadist terror as the key challenge and state this in the report .
If it is deleted , we will not be able to vote in favour of the report .
We will not support any further watering-down of the report .
I therefore hope that we can achieve a good result in tomorrow 's vote .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to thank my colleagues and say immediately that we were , quite frankly , obliged to work on a report that got off to a bad start , sent out mixed messages and contained shaky proposals .
I believe that the Committee on Civil Liberties did a remarkable job of restoring a meaningful , tangible political profile to this report .
The basic premise was of course shared by us all .
The violent radicalisation of individuals and groups in recent years has shown up one of the greatest weaknesses in our legal system and represented one of the greatest onslaughts on our democratic institutions .
It is essential to combat this phenomenon .
In this sense , European Union action offers added value since it provides harmonisation , because if we pool our instruments we shall have a sum of instruments , each of which will have its own intrinsic weakness .
However , this is a new challenge which calls for well-balanced efforts without giving way to the natural human temptation - inevitable , given the attacks we have suffered in the years since 11 September - to generalise or to build a Fortress Europe , or to sideline a priority that is central to the process of EU integration , namely the safeguarding of fundamental rights .
That is why we believe it is essential to move in the three directions set out by this report .
The first step is to uphold fundamental rights and the rule of law , particularly - as Mr Frattini said - religious freedom and freedom of expression .
Unless these rights are guaranteed , the very idea of Europe will be a failure , as will an integration process predicated above all else on the fundamental rights of European citizens .
We need to strengthen judicial cooperation so as to strike at radical , violent , organised fringe groups .
We need full harmonisation of terrorist crimes at European Union level , and that of condoning criminal activity should be added to the proposal of the Committee on Civil Liberties .
Of course we also need careful prevention work : we must attack the causes and factors - which are numerous , and it is pointless to pretend otherwise - leading to the radicalisation of various population groups within our societies .
This entails expanding the rights of citizenship , active citizenship , in other words a form of citizenship comprising responsibilities and participation in political life , as well as dialogue with religious movements .
As the Vice-President has said , we must also fight in favour of , and protect , the millions - tens of millions - of European citizens who profess a religion different from our own , as well as the Muslim non-Community citizens who have always lived by the rules of our democracy and complied with our laws , which makes them worthy of our full respect .
Lastly , we need to build a dialogue which genuinely represents an alliance of civilisations and not a clash of civilisations .
' Alliance of civilisations ' - I am concluding now , Mr President - Is not a term we have borrowed from a political polemic ; it is the term coined by the United Nations Security Council .
It expresses a major responsibility and a strong commitment for this House and our communities .
I believe it is vital to keep this term in tomorrow 's resolution .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( ES ) I feel , Mr President , that beyond its actual format the report is balanced , extremely important , and deals with an issue that is all too familiar to us nowadays .
There can be no doubt that terrorism is a policing phenomenon and we are all aware that it has a policing dimension .
Nevertheless , the reasons behind terrorism , or rather the reasons that lead certain people to become terrorists , lie well beyond this .
Jaime Mayor Oreja set this out in his first report , in an extremely debatable fashion at the outset , but after many meetings and many amendments he produced a result that was fully acceptable , including to his own Group .
I wish to testify before this House , as one might testify in court , that it is not true that Jaime Mayor Oreja 's outstretched hand was rejected .
I would testify to this under oath if it were the practice of Parliament .
This is not true .
The reasons why stumbling blocks are now being produced for this report are best known to the European People 's Party and the Group .
I can testify to meetings in Mr Mayor Oreja 's office at which we accepted 99 % of what is to be put to the vote tomorrow .
They cannot tell us that certain items have been rejected or that the offer has been rejected , since this is purely and simply their misrepresentation of the truth .
The position to be adopted by the Partido Popular tomorrow , therefore , remains a mystery , and doubtless this will serve to weaken the joint political message we wish to convey .
I therefore wish to express my regret at this attitude .
I feel that to say the problem is that the word ' Jihad ' must disappear in one section , when it subsequently appears in three sections , and again in recital H that Jihadism is doubtless the main focus of the type of terrorism we are dealing with , is looking for excuses that do not hold water .
In any case , this report talks of freedom , religious freedom , freedom of thought and even freedom to reject a social model , but makes it clear that Europe cannot accept incitement to violence , incitement to hatred or the destruction of the very pillars of society under the cloak of religion .
The State is entitled to instruments to be used in its own defence , instruments to defend its citizens .
It may , in fact , fully implement this right in terms of the police and the judiciary , while simultaneously maintaining dialogue , participation , and working towards the full integration of people who may one day become such fanatics that they could attack their own society , the society into which they have integrated , or simply their own society , since in many cases these people were actually born among us .
It is debatable , and my Group has debated this , to what extent current legislation is or is not sufficient ; concepts such as apology and justification for terrorist acts are necessary for some , while they are rejected by others as potential excessive curtailment of freedom of expression .
This , then , is the position of my Group : to go no further in modifying the law and to reject the concept of apologia .
At any rate , and I am finishing up now , Mr President , I welcome this report .
I hope that the European People 's Party reconsiders and reflects on the support it could lend to the contents .
As a guideline towards a global policy , I welcome a Commission policy whereby police forces act in close cooperation throughout Europe and measures are adopted that , beyond the polish , produce a result which respects the rights of one and all .
on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( PL ) Mr President , paraphrasing Ernest Hemingway I would say : ' Do not ask for whom the terrorist bell tolls , it tolls for thee ' .
Following the attacks in Spain four years ago and those in England three years ago , this is a very relevant message .
If Oriana Fallaci , a fellow-countryman of Commissioner Frattini , could read the document we are debating , she would most probably be shocked .
Mrs Fallaci was a distinguished Italian intellectual renowned for being uncompromising and controversial She believed Islamic terrorists essentially represent Islam in a nutshell , and are the quintessence of Islam .
Clearly , the European Parliament may have a different view on the matter .
It is worth considering , however , why Muslim terrorists are able to garner so much support amongst young people of Arab descent born in Member States of the European Union .
I fully support the statements that the war on terror will remain a priority for the European Union .
It is very important for us to focus on terrorist propaganda conducted over the Internet .
I would add that satellite television broadcasts in Arabic can also be used to promote radical Islam .
Mr President , I represent Northern Ireland in this House , a region which , as everyone will know , has suffered decades of vicious terrorism .
And from that experience , I have two points to make in this debate .
Firstly , terrorism should never be appeased ; it has to be defeated .
Start treating with terrorism , giving its prisoners special status and , ultimately , early release , and soon you will end up like Northern Ireland has ended up : with unrepentant terrorists at the heart of our Government .
Appeasement only whets the appetite - the insatiable appetite - of terrorists .
The second point I want to make is this : whereas state abuse is wrong , the naive belief , such as I find in this report , that lavishing so-called ' human rights ' on terrorists will neutralise them will , in fact , only strengthen their cause as they expertly exploit and misuse every such right to their own advantage , while they go on denying their victims the most basic right of them all : the right to life .
Because of the excesses of their murderous strategy , sometimes the defence of society requires a choice between the uninhibited rights of terrorists and the rights of the innocent .
In such circumstances , I have no difficulty in choosing the right of society to defend itself over the supposed human rights of the terrorist .
The battle against terrorism is a battle of good against evil , and , if needs be , the right of the terrorist is secondary to that of society .
( PT ) Mr President , Mr Vice-President of the Commission , ladies and gentlemen , I must start by reiterating that the unrelenting fight against terrorism must be pursued within the law , with respect for the rule of law and without infringing fundamental rights .
I am not sure whether terrorism is , as the report states , the main threat to the security of the citizens of the Union , but I agree with Mr Deprez that it is definitely one of the main threats .
I believe that underestimating this threat will prevent us from fighting it effectively and increasing the security of our citizens .
I will therefore vote against the proposed amendments .
Terrorism does not just affect the citizens of those countries which have suffered attacks ; it also threatens the security of everyone else . It spreads the fear and threat of terror .
Terrorism is an irrational manifestation of fanaticism which disregards the value of life and the dignity of human beings .
The Union and also Commissioner Frattini have placed the fight against terrorism at the top of their priorities .
We need a global strategy that can dismantle the terrorist networks .
This strategy must recognise the value of prevention , including the fight against the recruitment of terrorists and all factors favouring violent radicalisation .
It is important to analyse and understand the reasons , grounds and processes leading to radicalisation and terrorism , particularly among young people living in our Member States .
There have definitely been failures in the integration processes .
I agree that , within the law and with respect for the freedom of expression , the terrorist propaganda aimed at encouraging terrorist acts must be prevented .
To end , I must agree with Mr Mayor that a European initiative , particularly in this area , cannot and must not be used as a platform for the promotion of national electoral strategies .

( SV ) Mr President , let me begin by thanking Mr Deprez for the report and the much needed discussion on terrorism .
I also think that it has come at the right time , as we are now in the European Year for Intercultural Dialogue .
What I do not think the report conveys sufficiently well is the reason why people , mainly young men , become or are lured into becoming terrorists and place themselves outside democratic society .
If we look around us , we cannot ignore the poverty that is there and injustices that are manifest .
There are many young people to whom we cannot offer training , jobs , housing or hope for the future .
This is a breeding ground for fanaticism and the conditioning of young people into acting to secure more rights for their group or people .
An analysis of this is lacking in the report .
I urge you especially to vote for Amendment 12 , since terrorist propaganda today is usually spread on the internet , something which too few of us here see or can control .
It is a generation question , and we must increase and improve our knowledge of recruitment and become better at preventing it .
Otherwise I support the amendments of the PSE Group .
( DE ) Mr President , many thanks to Mr Deprez and Mr Guardans Cambó for their comments .

I think they are very much in line with our group 's position .
The report is entitled ' The factors favouring support for terrorism and the recruitment of terrorists ' .
Other speakers have welcomed the fact that we are talking about this issue , and they are right to do so .
However , we are not discussing it for the first time .
The European Parliament and the Union as a whole have talked about the preachers of hate and have taken preventive measures to cut off the flow of funds to terrorist organisations .
These are certainly useful measures .
In that respect , I think that the report largely hits the right note .
I think it would be slightly overstating the case to view the Internet as the root of all evil or as a safe haven .
It is undoubtedly a space which reflects social trends just as much as real life does , and I do not believe that we should be focusing all our efforts on quelling it once and for all .
We simply will not manage it .
The question , then , is what can we do instead ?
We have talked about audiovisual services , and the question which arises here is : why does the European Union not take action if certain channels are broadcasting hate programmes on EU territory that are aimed directly at children ?
In one of Hezbollah 's programmes , for example , a figure disguised as Mickey Mouse - in whatever form - attacks Jewish settlers .
This is intended to teach small Palestinian children about their history .
It is not the case that a Member State intervened to put an end to this problem .
Instead , the Walt Disney company asserted its rights over Mickey Mouse , and at the end of the series , Mickey Mouse was killed off by a Jewish settler .
This was broadcast on European territory !
Why is Hezbollah still not on the EU 's list of terrorist organisations ?
We have just had an interesting discussion with Dick Marty on this issue .
I believe that , in general , more building blocks are needed to curb terrorism as a whole .
This must certainly include tackling the roots of terrorism in the countries concerned , for example by creating healthcare systems , infrastructure and education systems .
We should not leave it to terrorist organisations like Hamas in the Gaza Strip or Hezbollah to provide these services , for these havens within society are the very places where these organisations recruit their supporters .
- ( ES ) Mr President , our proposal for a recommendation to the Council and the Commission today wishes to make a contribution to the efforts of the institutions and civil society to eliminate the factors encourage support for terrorism and the recruitment of terrorists .
Mr Frattini , the process to bring this to the House has been long and laborious , but there can be no doubt it will be well worth voting for the final result tomorrow .
The proposal focuses on the fight against Islamist extremism , a new phenomenon within the EU that requires a certain amount of reflection and the means to oppose it .
It may , however , be easily extrapolated to any other terrorist cause that may be invoked amid patriotism and flags .
We therefore wish to ask the Council to consider apologia as such as a crime in the framework decision against terrorism .
It would be desirable to extend harmonisation of this crime to the 27 Member States , although always , I repeat , always , with the most scrupulous respect for freedom of expression .
Repression and prevention of radicalisation must act in parallel .
If we wish to prevent radicalisation , we must provide education and integration for the 13 million Muslims living in the EU , and refrain from stigmatising this 3.5 % of the population .
In terms of the EU 's external relations , we call for dialogue and not a clash between civilisations .
It is for this reason that we refer to the ' alliance of civilisations ' adopted by the UN , and we fail to understand the gut rejection of certain Members .
This is the European Year of Intercultural Dialogue .
We have no wish to assist in the perversion of religion : we must encourage social participation and dialogue .
These are some of the achievements of the recommendation .
Are its suggestions so destructive that the speaker simply could not face them ?

Mr Weber , I must say that Mr Mayor Oreja showed a lack of parliamentary courtesy by not explaining to the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs why he voted against and subsequently rejected the report .
His obsession with conveying to Parliament the systematic opposition at national level says a great deal about the previous speaker 's democratic stance .
This kind of attitude will be of little use to us if we wish to make progress in terms of democracy , and this House operates with consensus , not blinkered postures .
Mr President , I believe that this is a good report and I subscribe almost entirely to the remarks of my chairman and political colleague , Mr Deprez .
But I disagree with him and others on the proper scope of the anti-terrorist laws .
I do not believe it is helpful to criminalise glorification of , or apologia for , terrorism .
I think the term ' justification ' is also problematic .
As many of us were earlier discussing with Dick Marty on the subject of terrorist blacklists and asset freezing , the law needs to be both just and effective if it is to remain credible and sustainable and have public support .
There is a profound risk that extending the criminal law as proposed , beyond actions and intentions and into the realm of opinion , commentary , and even fantasy , carries the danger of creating thought-crimes .
This would have a potentially chilling effect on free speech .
If I say I understand that the Kurds in Turkey have felt anger and disaffection at the suppression of their culture , language and identity and denial of their political aspirations , am I justifying PKK bombs ?
There is hardly a person in the House - unfortunately , there are maybe a few - who would not glorify Nelson Mandela .
But the ANC committed terrorist acts in fighting the utterly repressive apartheid state .
There are people , now statesmen , who have been honoured guests in this Chamber , who have a past as freedom fighters .
So am I just a woolly liberal , concerned only with free speech ?
No , because the law has to be effective .
We already properly criminalise incitement to commit terrorism .
And that gives wide scope to target behaviour and speech that has , as its purpose , the instigation of a terrorist offence .
Last week , the UK 's second highest court , the Court of Appeal , quashed the convictions of five men for possession of jihadist material precisely because there was no evidence of intention to encourage terrorism .
The original convictions in this case created resentment among those - mainly young Muslims - who wanted to discuss , debate and criticise the foreign policies of Europe and the United States .
That does not help combat radicalism .
But these cases have also , by their collapse , left the law in a state of confusion and disarray , and that is good for terrorists .
Let us stick to getting convictions on the basis of incitement .
Let us not stray into glorification and apologia .
- ( NL ) Mr President , I would also like to express my appreciation of the report now before us and also of the Commissioner 's words and of what he wants to do .
In my country too , the Netherlands , a lot of attention is being given to radicalisation and its tragic consequences .
We ourselves in the Netherlands were faced with a horrific murder of a Dutch TV producer committed by young people who came from these radicalised circles .
We are only talking about a small group , but what they do can have major consequences .
It is very important that we work together and that every effort is made to track down and isolate groups and individual young people who may turn to terrorist attacks .
However , as others here have said already , the prevention of radicalisation is also vitally important .
The point is to keep the group who may turn to violence as small as possible .
Nor does radicalisation always end in violence .
It is a bad thing in any case if young people feel totally isolated from society and do not want to have anything more to do with it .
In our experience it also comes down to the fact that the policy on tackling radicalisation is directed at local authorities .
Of course it is important to look at what you can do in the prisons and , more generally , in the area of education to look at what you can do to prevent misuse of the Internet .
However , it is still mainly the local authorities who are able to be active in the communities to tackle the causes of radicalisation and to trace the youngsters who are susceptible to it .
I think that the European Union , and the Commissioner in particular , can play an important role in bringing together the experience we have gained in various cities .
Last week our group made a working visit to Rotterdam , a city where a great deal is being done to tackle and prevent radicalisation and to reach groups that are susceptible to it .
It is also important to engage in a broader dialogue with the Muslim communities in our countries .
Some of the young people involved come from those larger communities and if we isolate that large group we will never be able to reach that small group .
It is important , therefore , to enter into the dialogue with the assumption that the vast majority of the Muslim communities who live in our society want nothing to do with what is a perverse interpretation of their faith , and that we invest a great deal in that broad dialogue of my group , this year too , the year of cultural dialogue .
( SV ) Thank you Mr President , Commissioner .
The EU needs to show clearly that the fight against terrorism is , both symbolically and practically , a demonstration of solidarity .
More resources are needed to enable Europol to cooperate with our national security services and achieve results .
This is shown , in particular , by the recent unrest following the rekindling of antagonism over the Muhammad cartoons .
As has been said here , the fight against terrorism must always be waged by legal and proportionate means .
The CIA flights in Europe , the use of torture , mock executions and waterboarding , which the CIA now acknowledges did happen , and the establishment of special secret jails must be vigorously condemned .
In these cases , Mr Frattini , the EU should have acted much more firmly than it did .
It is good that the report adopts a broader approach and addresses the factors which contribute to increased support for and renewed recruitment to groups which reject our models of society in favour of violence and sectarianism .
The fact that the perpetrators of the terrible outrages we have witnessed in recent years were born or grew up in Europe is a shrill wake-up call urging us also to look at our own societies with more critical eyes .
We need a dialogue and an honest discussion on our integration and visa policy .
Here we cannot and must not avoid difficult questions .
But , to me , one thing is self-evident .
It is our thinking on what should be the basis of our common legislation .
The current debate on sharia law in Britain shows that good intentions can often be more of a hindrance than a help .
We must also ensure that Community legislation does not jeopardise or set aside important constitutional principles , such as those governing freedom of expression .
The report speaks of introducing a new concept in the Framework Decision : ' justification of terrorism ' .
I believe that this is unfortunate .
Not because it is not a good idea to ensure that all Member States have good laws against incitement but because it is difficult , if not impossible , to arrive at a definition which could be applied uniformly and which would not lead to thorny problems of interpretation .
On the one hand , there is the important task of devising ways of combating terrorism and saving lives .
On the other hand , there is the principle of freedom of expression and the concern to maintain a high level of legal certainty in Europe .
It is a question of finding the right balance .
( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , by the time the fanatics have snuffed out innocent lives and carried out bomb attacks on democratic societies , it is already too late .
For that reason , no effort must be spared , especially - as Commissioner Frattini says - when it comes to prevention .
Dialogue , as the key to tolerance , must be at the forefront of our attention .
However , we also need better police cooperation and exchange of data ; indeed , all the tools which can be used both within and beyond the European Union should be reinforced .
I particularly welcome the fact that the Commissioner has drawn attention to the importance of helping victims .
It is not just about tolerance , it is also about practical measures .
Let me stress that there must be surveillance of the preachers of hate : that is a necessity .
However , the information must then be acted on .
Glorification of terrorism is never acceptable , so we need a zero-tolerance strategy towards crimes against our society .
I think it is most regrettable that on an issue which has always been a very serious topic of discussion in this House , the national polemic has once again loomed so large in relation to this report .
( DE ) Mr President , I have been asked by fellow Members from the ALDE group how the PPE-DE intends to vote .
Let me say again that the PPE-DE Group supports 95 % of what is in the report .
I would also like to underscore that I think it is very sad that both the ALDE representative and the PSE representative , Spanish colleagues , have attacked the PPE-DE today .
I think it is a great pity that domestic issues are preventing us from finding common ground in this Parliament .
Anyone who wants this House as a whole to achieve a major decision tomorrow should please vote for the PPE-DE amendments .
We are not changing anything of the substance of the motion , but we are removing the domestic policy aspect .
Anyone who wants to grasp the outstretched hand of the PPE-DE Group can do so tomorrow .
( DE ) Mr President , I am delighted that you have given us leave to speak again , as that has been handled differently in another debate .
Nonetheless , although Mr Pirker and I may not always see eye to eye - we often argue , and do so with great enjoyment and fervour - he is quite right to say that such debates should not be abused for national purposes .
It disrupts everything and it simply leads to false compromises .
I am sure that the Spanish colleagues here in the House will give a different answer .
I simply know from my own experience that this type of thing is very often dragged into the national debate .
I am also getting rather tired of the fact that - not for the first time - we are being used as a ping pong ball between the PPE-DE and the PSE on these matters .
However , I am glad that the Liberals have been able to mediate and are still up to the challenge .
Our colleague from Northern Ireland is unfortunately no longer present .
I find that rather galling because he said something that I view as quite incredible : he said that terrorists do not have the same basic human rights as everyone else .
However , that is precisely what distinguishes us from terrorists : the fact that we regard human rights as universal .
We should never give the impression that this House could ever take a different view .
Mr President , owing to the importance of this debate , I have a question for the PPE-DE Group .
The issue was raised that if the PPE-DE Group was to support the report , it would withdraw , and ask the other groups to withdraw , any element relating to internal Spanish politics .
I would ask the PPE-DE Group 's representative which amendment tabled by that group is linked to Spanish politics .
It would be very interesting to know , and then it could be made public which of the amendments of the PPE-DE Group concern internal politics .
Is it the reference to the United Nations in Amendment 1 which they want to delete ?
Do they want to delete a reference to the United Nations ?
Is that Spanish internal politics ?
One has to be coherent .
The only person who is trying to introduce internal politics is Mr Mayor Oreja , who did not even have the courtesy to attend this part-session .
Mr President , I would be extremely grateful if anyone who is supporting the amendments to criminalise glorification could be so kind as to try and answer the points that I raised , which are , first of all , that I fear a chilling effect on free speech and , secondly , that I do not know how they can be made operational .
What is the connection between glorifying an act of terrorism and another terrorist act being committed ?
It seems to me that there are legal problems , as was found in the UK Court of Appeal last week , because there is no direct connection between glorification and a new terrorist act , which there obviously is when there is incitement , or encouragement at least .
If you just ' glorify ' a terrorist act , then what is the straight-line connection between that and another act being committed ?
If you cannot establish that connection , you risk being undercut in the courts and then end up in a much worse position than before you started .
I would be very grateful if anyone who actually supports the criminalisation of glorification or apologia could perhaps educate me , because this is something I do not quite understand .
Vice-President of the Commission . - ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I too believe that this evening 's debate has been of considerable political significance .
I also believe that we must jointly come up with a widely shared political solution that will form the subject of a report acceptable to all of humanity or , if not , to a large majority of parliamentary groups .
I have no doubt that today 's terrorists are seeking to establish a new form of global dictatorship .
We experienced powerful dictatorships in the last century , but this one is a dictatorship based on violating the primary fundamental right , namely the right to life .
It is clear , in addition , that this strategy , along with violence and hatred , has regrettably become a global strategy .
That is why our reaction must consist not merely of cooperation among police forces and information services , but of a political response to avert and remove the causes that lead to terrorism .
I believe , and many of you have emphasised , that prevention means eradicating hatred and eliminating the reasons for hatred , without ever justifying violence , since the gravest risk we run is to begin justifying violence .
We must eradicate hatred without justifying violence .
Someone spoke of a conflict of civilisations .
In my view , that theory leaves a lot to be desired .
Personally I am not convinced that a clash of civilisations is underway .
I am convinced that an internal conflict is going on within the Islamic world , that is , a conflict between a minority which misappropriates the religious message and the vast majority of Muslims who , I believe , are absolutely peace-loving and want to live in a spirit of peace and tolerance .
If we are to provide a political response , ladies and gentlemen , I think the only option is to strengthen reformist , peace-loving Islam against that minority which is neither reformist nor peace-loving .
All of these are political measures ; they are not police or security measures .
I have referred to the rights of victims and I believe that more work is needed in this area .
Victims ' rights must be given greater consideration than in the past , so as to offer them practical help which - believe me , I am convinced of this - means not just financial help but in many cases assistance for them or their survivors , for the relatives of victims of attacks and murders , to help them reintegrate into society after the terrible trauma they have suffered .
Another right of victims is not to be left alone after having survived an attack or having lost a relative or loved one .
Someone said that we need to understand the causes of terrorism .
I agree , and have said so myself , but I believe that terrorist groups , organisations and methods must not be given legitimacy by our attempt to understand them .
Understanding is one thing ; lending legitimacy is another : there is a fundamental difference .
I should like to recall one last point .
The European Union would play a significant political role in the world , in my opinion , if it could achieve something that has not yet been achieved .
That something is to encourage the United Nations to adopt at long last the international convention on the definition of terrorism .
That definition still does not exist , which causes us a number of difficulties outside Europe .
Europe has its own definition of terrorism , but as you know some member countries of the UN General Assembly have still not endorsed either the substance or the procedure of a UN convention on terrorism .
I believe that if Europe really is united in this area , it could do something akin to what we did concerning the moratorium on the death penalty : make the United Nations take a stance on an important , consolidated European position , thereby giving global legitimacy to the response to terrorism .
If terrorism is global , our response must be absolutely firm but likewise global .
rapporteur . - ( FR ) Mr President , I would like to make three comments at the conclusion of this debate .
The first is that if we listen to the Commissioner and then listen to most of the contributors the first thing that really strikes us is that - as regards the analysis of the phenomenon , the seriousness of the threat and the balance that has to be drawn between measures aimed at prevention and those aimed at suppression - there is a great deal of common ground between us all once we start to discuss the operational side of things : what we need to analyse , what we need to prevent and what we need to suppress .
Secondly , and regrettably , I have the feeling that when it comes to certain elements that are more symbolic than anything else we shall not be able tomorrow to reach the consensus that is needed and I would regret this because after having examined the list of amendments it seems to me that most of the differences are symbolic rather than substantive in nature .
The problem is that these symbolic conflicts of interest could be alleviated if the parties decided to make a gesture , something that is not always a defining characteristic of the political groups that make up this Parliament .
Thirdly , there are several comments that I would like to direct at some of those present in this House , especially - and Mr Alvaro feels the same way - with regard to my fellow Member from Ireland , who considers that respect for human rights is not needed in the fight against terrorism .
I find that this attitude poses a risk , and a serious one at that , to the values on which our society is based .
There is a certain Head of State , and I heard him talk on the television one day , a European Head of State who said that he would take a knife to the terrorists and do for every last one of them .
Well that particular regime is now one that poisons its opponents , allows its journalists to be murdered and holds elections that may be free but may also be fraudulent .
To play with human rights in the fight against terrorism is to run the risk of an unacceptable slide in our democratic societies .
We have also been questioned directly by Mrs Ludford on the problem of apologia for terrorism .
I am unable to respond to her in any great depth but would simply say that I am the rapporteur for the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs , the terms of which are known to her , and that when I presented my views just now I was basing them on paragraph 10 of the report that was adopted by the committee , which states quite clearly , Mrs Ludford , that the committee , and hence Parliament , calls for open discussions on amending Framework Decision such and such in order to include the justification of terrorism within its scope , and so on .
I was not therefore making any kind of plea , I was simply expressing what had been agreed by the Committee on Civil Liberties ; nevertheless , I will respond to her directly .
When I speak of apologia for terrorism , apologia means incitement and I believe that incitement is a criminal offence .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Tuesday , 19 February 2008 .
Written Statements ( Article 142 )
in writing . - ( SV ) The fight against terrorism must only be fought in a way which is appropriate to an open , democratic and just society .
It is absolutely essential that threats to an open society are countered by the methods of an open society .
We must balance our action and the measures we take by safeguarding human rights and the rule of law and must not resort to measures which jeopardise personal integrity .
I have therefore decided to vote against Mr Deprez 's proposal for a recommendation to the Council on the factors favouring support for terrorism and the recruitment of terrorists .
, in writing . - ( RO ) The cooperation between the EU institutions on the fight against terrorism should be perfected , taking into consideration that this phenomenon has increased .
I believe terrorism has become the main enemy of European values , global stability and peace .
If we remember the events of 11 September 2001 or those in Madrid a few years ago , we have the perfect configuration of a picture expressing horror , fear and suffering .
The European institutions should have developed a strategy for becoming acquainted with , reducing and eliminating this phenomenon ever since that time .
It is necessary for us to start a study as thorough as possible in this regard : to show its causes , what keeps the terrorists so fierce and capable of giving up their lives in order to become martyrs , whose martyrs they are , how the recruitment is done , who finances it and how we can intervene in any way to discourage this phenomenon .
Therefore , in order to find out all these things and to control them in the EU 's interest , the European institutions should be concerned with drawing up this strategy .
In this way , the EU will give a signal of unity and strength to the entire world .
EU Market access for European Companies ( debate )
The next item is the report by Mr Guardans Cambó , on behalf of the Committee on International Trade , on the EU 's strategy to deliver market access for European companies .
rapporteur . - ( ES ) Mr President , during discussions on the Lisbon Strategy and all it meant for growth and competitiveness in Europe , unfortunately the issue of external trade did not receive the attention it deserved as a substantial part of a strategy for competitiveness , growth and employment within the European Union .
We have now moved on and the European Commission has corrected this situation , it has set things straight and it has clearly positioned external trade , access to foreign markets , as yet another pillar of the structure that must lead to growth and welfare in the European Union .
The export of goods and services is a basic component of competitiveness in our economies , and is thus a factor of employment and wealth in the European Union .
The main export access difficulties arise from non-tariff barriers in particular , rather than from generally recognised tariffs .
The Commission has already carried out a wide-ranging consultation , thereby demonstrating its intentions within the context of its broader strategy for a global Europe , intentions that we support .
This report , in fact , covers a good many of the replies received during the consultation , or some of them at any rate , which the Commission decided not to include at the time .
Globalisation is not an external threat from which we need to be protected . In my view , it is a huge opportunity to achieve what we could not achieve before , and a larger market is one way of creating wealth , in other words , creating employment and improve the citizens ' welfare .
Clearly , and here I am speaking to a certain section of the House , that what this report is calling for is market access , market access that must be enhanced , a strategy that can and must respect the circumstances prevailing in each country .
European leadership in this area respect the legitimate concerns of emerging economies , and must continue to do so .
One of the world 's most open economies , however , such as the European model , cannot allow itself to be carried away by certain dogmatisms .
The export of goods and services cannot be subject to unjustifiable barriers , nor can public contracts , and the Commission can and must do more in both these areas .
It can and must improve its instruments in Brussels , in the framework of the EU , through better coordination with the trade promotion bodies in Member States and regions , and with the actual businesses involved .
It is here , Commissioner , that the word subsidiarity ought to be understood in its broadest sense .
It is here that the Commission has a role to play that cannot be played by any other entity , a role that elbows no one out of the way and enhances every one of us , coordinating the work that others already do , perhaps less effectively than the Commission might .
Thus the report sets out a number of specific points , some very specific indeed , which the Commission can improve within the context of its market access strategy .
I do not intend to read them out here , but they are extremely clear and precise , and may be assessed with the same kind of precision .
We are also making an extremely specific request for the Commission to define ad hoc courses of action to defend and improve the presence of SME products in third country markets , since it is these products that encounter most difficulties when they have no protection .
The Commission also can , and must , secure better coordination of resources on the ground without offending sensibilities or excluding anyone .
Each state , each export support body , each trade delegation from a Member State : without offending anyone , the EU trade delegations can strengthen their role in third countries .
There can be no justification for the lack of communication between certain foreign trade actors , whom anyone who has made a visit will know .
Nor can we discard , whenever possible , a genuine multilateral approach with a view to improving standardisation , and the need to improve mechanisms within the WTO framework ; all this will prove extremely useful .
I therefore feel that we can all welcome the adoption of this report , presumably by a large majority .
I particularly wish to thank the secretariat of the Committee on International Trade , which helped with the drafting of the report , and the shadow rapporteurs in the various parliamentary groups who tabled amendments and improved the text .
This signals the start of a new political impetus .
It is not just a piece of paper to be approved , framed and hung on the wall .
This is the beginning of a strategy , as the name suggests , and a strategy requires a whole range of measures : these measures must be implemented and we must be able to ask the Commission at a later date to come back to Parliament and explain to us how they have been implemented .

Member of the Commission . - Mr President , I would like to thank the rapporteur , Mr Guardans Cambó , and the Committee on International Trade very much indeed for this very constructive report .
It confirms that we share a common vision , both on the importance of a proactive market access strategy for European businesses and workers , and on the basic principles that should underlie this strategy .
The priorities that are set out here - SMEs , barriers to services and investment , public procurement and IPR - are very much my priorities .
That is the same message that the European Council sent last June , and again in response to our progress report last month .
We have built a strong new consensus on the importance of this work .
At the heart of the global Europe strategy that we launched in 2006 was the commitment both to keeping our own markets in Europe open , and also to refocusing our resources on creating new opportunities for European workers and companies in the markets of our main trading partners .
We can do that above all through a successful WTO trade deal , but we can also do it through a new generation of free-trade agreements .
It also means taking a more hard-headed approach to modern trade barriers , and especially non-tariff barriers which operate not at the border , but behind the border .
Europe 's workers and companies can compete almost anywhere if they are given a fair opportunity and a level playing field on which to compete .
Our job is to support them and provide them with a platform to do that , which means focusing on the barriers , conditions and discriminatory regulatory practices that operate against them and deny them that fair opportunity to compete and to trade .
The challenge in 2007 has been to put this policy into practice .
In particular , we have focused on strengthening our resources on the ground in our most important markets by creating market access teams that bring together a business , a Member State and Commission staff and experts .
These are the people who really know the markets and who have a feel for the local politics and a clear sense of both what is necessary and what is possible .
This has produced good results .
In the last six months we have scored important successes in South America , Central Asia , South Asia , Japan and Russia .
We have also stepped up our cooperation with the United States on market access issues , which has been instrumental in some of these successes .
We have also introduced an on-line complaint register for EU companies and launched real-time and monthly reporting on market access work .
I therefore mildly disagree with the suggestion in the report that the Commission has not done enough to bring out the full potential of this partnership during the launch phase .
That does not mean either that I consider the collaboration to be perfect or that I feel in the least bit complacent about what we could do differently , and even better , than we are at the moment .
I agree that this new strategy is a dynamic process which requires constant vigilance and constant commitment .
Frankly , it also needs some more high-profile advocates of what we are doing and how we are setting about pursuing our objectives , both in this House and also among the Member States - people who believe in economic openness , but who are also not afraid to speak up for reciprocal market opening , especially amongst those emerging economies whose own growth is being driven by their access to our markets .
That is right , that is fair and that is the principle of international trade that we believe in - that whilst we remain open to others they too should progressively open their markets to us if the principle of international trade is going to be well and properly served .
I agree with the rapporteur when he calls on all stakeholders to participate actively in this partnership .
We are continuing to improve our coordination work on the ground with Member States and industry , but we need these experts to step up as well if we are to achieve our potential .
On the question of resources , I am grateful for the additional staff that the budgetary authorities have allocated to DG Trade .
We will continue to push for more resources for the most important markets in Asia and , for example , in Brazil .
In the mean time we have strengthened our staffing on market access activities in Brussels .
Finally , I also take note of your request to receive an annual report from the Commission .
Along with the regular reporting , I would be pleased to discuss the annual activity report with Parliament .
So , my thanks again to the rapporteur and to Parliament for its engagement in this very important work .
It is vital that we maintain our energy and engagement in 2008 and beyond .
This priority means a lot to me and to my services ; it means a lot to our businesses in Europe and for the employment they are able to create for our workers , flowing from increased market access and from the strengthening of world trade that is at the heart of our trade policy strategy for a global Europe .
( Applause )
Rapporteur for approval Committee on Industry , Research and Energy . - ( RO ) Mr. President , Mr. Commissioner , the European Union 's Market Access Strategy was initiated in 1996 .
The Commission developed a free service that provides the European exporters with an electronic , public , updated register regarding the market access conditions in approximately 100 countries .
In 2007 , in the euro zone , trade recorded a surplus of 28.3 billion euros , as compared to a deficit of 9.3 billion euros in 2006 .
In 2007 , the EU-27 recorded a deficit of 185.7 billion euros , as compared to a deficit of 192.1 billion euros in 2006 .
Therefore , at Community level , actions should be taken so that the Member States outside the euro zone would become more competitive .
We consider that the market access will be facilitated by promoting the European Union 's values and principles to third countries by promoting open markets , by approaching social standards and environmental standards and by ensuring the protection of intellectual rights .
Investments in research , promotional campaigns to make the available services and information public , improving the Community computer system regarding market access , interconnecting the specific databases and training specialists who would support the European companies should be part of the Commission 's partnership with the Member States and the European companies .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( NL ) Mr President , the new market access strategy of the Commission should really help to remove barriers in third countries .
It is , therefore , as the Commissioner says , an appropriate addition to the WTO and an important addition to free trade agreements .
I am very pleased with the positive report from Parliament , and would like to thank our rapporteur , Ignasi Guardans Cambó , who also managed to set out such clear priorities : better cooperation with European businesses and more support for small and medium-sized enterprises ; the help-desk at the Commission but also on the ground in the third countries .
I think that the European Institute in China for small and medium-sized European companies is an excellent Commission initiative .
It is a matter of reciprocity .
We open up our market to third countries and then the markets in those third countries should also be opened up to our European companies , especially in the emerging economies of China , India , Brazil and Russia .
We should therefore give this priority in the market access strategy , with market access teams that will assist European companies in those countries .
This means that we have to put in sufficient personnel to do this , including in those European embassies , as you already said .
European business is the biggest exporter in the world and we have to compete constantly against protectionist measures , even in those third countries .
Set your priorities for the areas that are important : services , public procurement , investments , intellectual property and customs procedures .
I am pleased that you have announced that you will report to us annually and it would be good to discuss the priorities once a year .
You have demonstrated ambition here and that is a precious thing to us .
I really hope that you also show ambition when it comes to adapting the trade defence instruments , the same ambition as you have shown in this strategy .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( ES ) Mr President , I wish to begin my speech by congratulating the rapporteur on his important work in terms of proposals and analysis .
This Parliament does not vote on explanatory statements , but if it did so on this report , I would vote in favour because it certainly justifies the main proposals for provisions .
Thus I feel able to announce the support of the Socialist Group , with a request that the rapporteur take into account some of the main amendments we have tabled , in due accordance with the ideals of a left-wing group .
Europe certainly is the world 's largest goods exporter and its leading service provider .
Moreover , in a globalised context we have a legitimate right to market as many of our products and services as possible , in the markets of emerging countries in this case .
Why not ?
It is logical and normal , and it is what our citizens would want .
Thus the proposals put forward in the report and set out in the Commission communication are correct , starting with the prevention of non-tariff barriers , a ' Hydra ' , as the rapporteur so rightly calls them : a Hydra working behind the scenes , not only preventing European products and services from reaching markets , but also preventing balanced development in those countries and markets .
I am therefore of the opinion that this report is on the right path , for what we must do is secure our Lisbon agenda and strengthen our social model . We also need to ensure that this model can penetrate the emerging countries with which we wish to trade .
I have no doubt this will be beneficial to both European workers and workers in the other countries .
We place a considerable emphasis on working conditions , security , protection of the environment and , above all , human rights .
Those are our principal amendments .
I must repeat our request that the rapporteur take account of these . Indeed , how do we actually achieve these goals ?
We achieve them through much more intense cooperation - I do not know if it can be called ' enhanced ' cooperation , since that creates confusion with institutional provisions in the new Treaty - between the EU , Member States and businesses , starting with support for SMEs . Congratulations , therefore , and good night .
on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , we are all aware of the sensitivity of this matter and how much attention is paid to it in our respective countries .
The UEN Group is very satisfied with the proposal put forward by Mr Guardans Cambó and the additional work done by the Committee on International Trade .
I would compliment the rapporteur on his analysis and European focus , and consequently his emphasis on the difficulties often caused by the unwarranted obstacles confronting European industry on international markets .
Improving competitiveness means doing whatever is necessary to ensure the success of the Lisbon strategy .
If we are able to give European industry better access to international markets , we will enable companies to grow , invest in know-how and technology , and create more jobs .
This is what many economic sectors in our countries are asking of us .
Various kinds of obstacles impede access to foreign markets by European industry .
These barriers consist of a number of different measures ranging from confused regulations and disincentives to investment or market access , to unfair trading practices , scant regard for intellectual property rights and widespread counterfeiting , which is detrimental to European goods , and , more generally , serious and systematic violations of the WTO rules and other rules governing international trade .
The Commission 's communication goes in the right direction and Parliament wishes to support the initiatives it sets out , aimed at improving access to foreign markets .
These include the formation of a stronger strategic partnership between the Commission , maintaining its coordinating role , the Member States , and European Union businesses , with a view to supporting economic operators and especially SMEs wishing to make contact with or export to third countries .
The Commission delegations in certain key countries need a stronger presence .
This should form part of a broader strategy carried out in conjunction with our main trading partners , such as the United States , Japan and Canada ; they have the same concerns as ourselves internationally and could join the Union in promoting a multilateral agreement in this field , backing WTO mechanisms that ensure a faster response to any new non-tariff barriers .
Multilateral action , the most effective type of action owing to the number of countries involved but also the most difficult , therefore needs to be accompanied by agreements identifying and resolving the inconsistencies connected with the existence of unwarranted obstacles in third countries .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( SV ) Mr President , when one reads the Commission Communication and , in particular , Parliament 's report , one might think that the poor little EU is being discriminated against by malign foreign forces .
This emerges especially from paragraph 4 of the report , which says that we urge the Commission to ensure that the European Union 's trade interests are defended against the abusive or unfair trade practices of third countries .
And again : ' when third countries unjustifiably restrict access to their markets by European Union companies , the European Union should react rapidly and firmly ' .
We should be careful when using that kind of language to former colonies .
They remember when Europe last acted firmly to defend its interests .
That kind of talk can damage us more than any trade restrictions .
Certainly the Commission has a point in that there are technical barriers to trade and unfair rules .
Of course we must discuss them with our partners calmly and reasonably and solve any problems there may be .
But invite , not only businesses , but also voluntary organisations , including those from third countries .
Then perhaps we can understand how the rules came about and understand whether they are reasonable or not .
I am uneasy about the ten-point list .
Restrictive export procedures for raw materials , a ceiling on foreign ownership in the services sector , restrictions on foreign direct investment , state procurement procedures and the application of state aid must be seen as barriers to trade which have their justification ; they arise from legitimate legislation and are administrative measures from public authorities .
They cannot be removed without public consultation and deliberation , if stability in those countries is not to be compromised .
Countries must have the right to protect health and the environment and have procurement procedures which ensure that their local businesses are not completely excluded from international competition , thereby creating mass unemployment .
Also we cannot be so unreasonable as to expect countries to protect our intangible property rights when they hardly have the resources to protect human rights .
We should promote freedom rather than set traps .
We must come down on those rules which seek to favour businesses in their countries which have foreign operations and which act against other foreign players .
That is where we can remove rules .
We should be able to turn a blind eye to rules which are directly or indirectly intended to protect the population or businesses active locally .
We ourselves protected our industries until they were strong enough to compete internationally .
Others must be allowed to do the same .
( SV ) To create market access means abolishing tariffs and non-tariff barriers to trade around the world .
It is an immensely important priority for the Union 's trade policy .
It creates not only business opportunities for European companies but also gives them access to better and cheaper products in other parts of the world .
It creates prosperity across the world .
It is also a matter on which I feel there is unaccustomed agreement in the European Parliament .
It is gratifying at a time when protectionism is on the march all around the world .
I therefore also think that the Commission Communication and Mr Guardans Cambó 's report are more welcome than at any other time .
They are really very good .
In this discussion I would like to draw attention to another question which we must not ignore - the other side of openness .
I think that they belong together .
European firms also need openness within Europe in order to be competitive on a global basis and make use of the market access which we can create in other countries .
In our globalised world , with ever more companies having global supply chains , our own tariffs can be just as damaging to our successful businesses as those tariffs we oppose in other countries .
I have a concrete proposal for the Commissioner , a proposal which may help a little in resolving this question .
When firms have problems trading within the EU they report them to Solvit , which is an excellent tool for increasing mobility on the internal market .
If a firm has a problem exporting to a country outside the EU , it refers it to the Market Access Database .
That too is immensely important .
Both of these systems provide a basis for negotiations on how trade can be facilitated .
Let us hope that we can also develop either the Market Access Database or Solvit in order to deal with problems which importing firms in the EU may experience .
If we do that , both we ourselves and the rest of the world can continue to move in a direction which is more conducive to free trade .
Then we can show that Europe is taking the lead in opening up markets , both abroad and at home .

( PL ) Mr President , the report by Mr Guardans Cambó deals with all the areas involved in strengthening partnership to allow European exporters easier access to third country markets .
Protectionist practices , unfair competition and the erection of bureaucratic barriers often restrict access to those markets .
Small and medium-sized enterprises create the most jobs in Europe but experience particular problems exporting .
Their opportunities are limited due to lack of resources needed for research , new technology , to gain a foothold in those markets and adjust their products and services to consumers .
The report rightly emphasises the need for European , governmental and diplomatic sources to offer meaningful assistance to SMEs .
The European Union should increase its logistic action and offer proper support to make it easier for these entrepreneurs to be active on third country markets .
( EL ) Like you , Commissioner , we are particularly concerned about the lack of reciprocal terms of access to the market and the unequal treatment of European products encountered by many partners .
In the textile industry and clothing sector , for instance , the EU applies an average tariff of 9 % , which is one of the lowest in the world .
On the other hand , many competitors impose tariffs of up to and above 30 % together with a host of non-tariff barriers .
Thus the emerging economies also need to accept , to a certain extent , the principle of reciprocity in concessions in line with their level of development and their competitiveness in a given sector .
The protection of intellectual property rights and geographical indications at global level remains fairly inadequate ; it neutralises the competitive advantage of the high added value of European industrial and agricultural products .
The harmonisation of international regulatory models and rules facilitates access to foreign markets and must not render the European regulatory framework of environmental , social , public health and consumer protection more flexible .
Quite the reverse : the object is convergence , but in an upward direction .
Of special importance is the classification of imports according to the relevant specifications and requirements , as well as the search for successful methods for tackling environmental and social dumping .
Finally , I should like to stress that small and medium-sized enterprises must be at the heart of the new market access strategy .
I congratulate the rapporteur and the shadow rapporteur as well the Commissioner .
We welcome the Commission 's initiative on the new market access strategy .
( CS ) Commissioner , I , too , am convinced that the Commission delegations and the new market access teams operating in third countries require a considerably stronger mandate .
The Commission should , in my view , reconsider its priorities in the allocation of human resources in the EU delegations and increase the number of delegation staff , especially those operating in China , India , Russia and Brazil .
The Member States should play a more substantial part in contributing to the human and financial resources of these delegations , proportional to their trade interests .
Moreover , the Commission and the Member States should improve cooperation with European chambers of commerce , trade associations and Member State agencies in third countries .
This is fundamental for the exchange of information among delegations , diplomatic missions and European business associations .
This would benefit SMEs in particular .
The main objective of our strategy , however , has to be reciprocity of trade relations , especially for example in China , and more rigorous enforcement of international trade legislation , rather than labelling this enforcement as protectionism .
Mr President , I was interested that the Commissioner was the only one who mentioned the World Trade talks .
Perhaps this is an opportunity to get some information referring to the new opportunities in the markets of our main trading partners that a successful WTO deal would give us .
But you also said , Commissioner , that perhaps a new generation of free-trade agreements might do it .
Are you conceding defeat at the WTO ?
Perhaps you could give us some up-to-date information on that , because I think that is a crucial part of this debate .
Could I ask you , also , to clarify some concerns in relation to the current situation on the agriculture part of the WTO ?
There are concerns about further concessions being made by the EU on import tariffs on sensitive products , and some large tariff-rate quota increases as being part of the agenda , because there is also the issue of what progress you are making at the WTO on access for non-agricultural goods and services .
I think we need an update , if you can give us that , as part of this debate .
( PL ) Mr President , as we take the floor in this debate we wish to draw attention to three issues .
Firstly , it is essential for the European Union to adopt a firm and unambiguous stance in every situation in which the export interests of a Member State are threatened as a result of unfair practices by third countries .
In this connection , we should recognise the stance adopted by the European Union in the case of the embargo preventing Polish meat and agricultural products from accessing the Russian market .
Unfortunately , this stance towards Russia was only adopted after more than a year of restrictions by Russia on Polish exports , and after Poland used its veto to hold up preparations for the EU-Russia agreement .
Secondly , opening up the Union 's markets to goods and services from third countries should be governed by the principle of reciprocity . The Union as a whole should therefore monitor whether exporters from third countries include in their manufacturing costs the contributions to be made to provide for compliance with environmental standards and social security for workers in their countries .
European products will always be beaten by their competitors on the world 's markets if the aforementioned costs are not taken into account .
Thirdly , great caution should be exercised when opening up the Union 's market for access of agricultural products from third countries .
If the market is opened up fully many sectors of European agriculture will simply disappear , which would threaten Europe 's food security .
( PL ) Mr President , open economies and markets are features of the contemporary market economy , the economy of the 21st century .
This is a first for the global economy . Not all economic entities are in a position to deal with competition , however , especially when competition is not always fair , and is dominated by the great and powerful .
Both large and small firms can import , but large firms have more opportunities to develop export .
This is because entering new markets requires substantial investment in promotion and in setting up the whole logistical system .
It therefore seems appropriate for SMEs to organise joint action to develop exports , especially to promote the latter .
A certain degree of aid and State support for companies in the area of export promotion should be allowed , notably in the area of know-how .
At WTO level , too , agreement should be reached on the development of trade between SMEs .
Accessibility of information on entities active on the global market is particularly important .
The quality of trade should be improved and priority given to creating equal opportunities for market access .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , I wish to thank you and the honourable Members for what has been a very constructive and useful debate on this excellent report .
I am particularly grateful to the Member who intervened to urge a reassessment of the staffing allocations of Commission delegations in key economies .
I thought this was an excellent proposal , and one that I will have no hesitation at all in communicating to my colleagues .
I could rehearse for you the details of the small number of delegation staff working , for example , on trade matters in China compared to the considerably larger numbers of staff working on what is a very small amount of development aid and cooperation in that country , set alongside the billions that are at stake for Europe in trade .
But I will not ; I will simply pocket the suggestion and pass it on .
It is certainly not the case that I am advocating free-trade agreements at the expense of the world trade talks .
Anyone who is familiar with the global Europe trade strategy that we presented in November 2006 will realise that my advocacy of deep , comprehensive free-trade agreements that really contribute to increasing the sum total of world trade , and not simply divert it , has been a feature of our approach alongside our commitment to the WTO talks - the Doha Round .
I can assure the honourable Member that I am continuing to work for their success rather than their failure .
Rumours about further unacceptable or inappropriate concessions on agriculture are unfounded .
Indeed , the only rumours that I have picked up about such unwarranted concessions actually came from the Irish Foreign Minister in the General Affairs Council today .
These rumours seem to be circulating within a relatively small community of interest .
The fact is that on agriculture - and other areas of the Doha talks - we will move as far as it is prudent for us to go in order to contribute to the success of the world trade talks , but ultimately this must be within the limits of the mandate we have been given on the basis of the 2003 CAP reform .
It is true that we have two new negotiating texts that have been presented by negotiating group chairs in recent weeks .
On agriculture , we have a text in which not everything is to our liking , but there is nothing that we cannot handle in that agriculture text or that will push us beyond our mandate .
In the case of non-agricultural market access - industrial goods - the situation , in my view , is not so satisfactory .
There , the new text presented by the chairman has created a greater fluidity in the negotiations , rather than more concrete foundations .
I regret that , but again it is something that we have to work with and negotiate our way through .
These debates would not be so enjoyable if it were not for Mr Schlyter 's contributions .
Whenever he intervenes I always feel reinforced in my personal commitment and conviction concerning free trade .
His interventions always reassure me that we are indeed on the right track .
It is not a question of the poor little European Union struggling against the mighty titans amongst the emerging economies , nor is it about a sort of fit of aggressive bullying that has taken over the Commission in the area of trade , in which we seek without consultation or consideration to impose our interests on others .
The fact is that those of us who believe in international trade are seeking balance and we are seeking reciprocity , but we are also seeking mutual advantage .
When we seek openings in the economies of others , we are not doing that in order simply to satisfy ourselves , or to serve our own interests and our own needs .
We are also contributing to the welfare and growth of the economies whose greater opening we are trying to bring about .
Of course , the liberalisation of economies is something that has to be achieved progressively .
It is an incremental process , rather than a big bang or a sudden shock .
The fact is that emerging economies benefit from greater opening .
This means useful competition to stimulate innovation and to spur productivity in those economies , it means lowering the costs of inputs to local industry , it means lower-priced goods for consumers in those emerging economies , and it means bringing capital , technologies , creativity and modern management skills to those emerging economies .
The fact is that this process of opening and integration to the global economy secures the growth and strengthening of those emerging economies to enable their businesses to grow , to create much-needed employment for their workers in these economies , and to generate products and services for export so that they can create and secure a growing share of international trade .
In other words , opening begets opening ; trade begets trade .
Our prosperity and our opportunities beget opportunities for those who live and work in those emerging economies .
It is , in other words , a virtuous process that we are talking about , and that is what the market access strategy which our rapporteur has presented such an excellent report on is all about .
In concluding , I would say that when it comes to local procurement it is indeed important to support and encourage the capacity of emerging economies and developing countries to supply their local procurement markets .
However , if this means higher costs for public procurement in those economies , if it means inefficiencies , if it means a lack of transparency , and indeed in some cases corruption in the operation of public procurement , who shoulders the costs of that ?
The answer is the very local people , the very local workers and the very local taxpayers in emerging economies and developing countries who can ill afford to shoulder those costs .
That is why it is important to bring openness and transparency to public procurement policies and behaviour in emerging economies .
It is not simply to please and to satisfy the ' poor little ' European Union .
rapporteur . - Mr President , there is not much more to say .
First of all , let me thank again all those who have enriched this debate , not just today but ever since the debate started , through their contributions , amendments and even the informal conversations we have had , which has resulted in a final text which is not the work of one rapporteur but of everyone involved .
We mostly shared the diagnosis , and I was very surprised at the tone of some of the comments from the Green corner of this House .
It would be interesting to have the colleague in question go and see the results and consequences of free trade in situ and also to go and explain to a medium-sized enterprise , say near Barcelona where I live , that this was a ' colonial approach ' .
I could quote so many companies who are fighting to export , with a great part of their activities depending on exports .
He might like to tell the employees of those factories that they are just acting as European colonisers in trying to enlarge the export market share of the product they are manufacturing , when if China introduces barriers which prevent them from exporting what they are manufacturing it is their jobs which are at stake .
This is not just about big words on big European companies being colonial , it is about something much more real .
Although everyone has the right to portray things as they wish , I must say that the idea of this being a ' colonialist ' report really surprised me and might be even be viewed as comic by a lot of exporters in my country .
It is clear , though , that we do , in general , agree on the diagnosis , and as the Commission has said it is something that was started by the Council , was followed up by the Commission and is today being supported by Parliament , which of course puts a lot of responsibility on your shoulders , Commissioner , because we do have a common approach .
Again , let me underline that this is a dynamic process and a fresh strategy , and some elements are indeed new and need to be followed up .
May I quote a point in the report which was underlined by our colleague and which you liked so much : ' We call on the Commission to reprioritise the deployment and eventually to increase the human resources available for European Union delegations , so that more staff are available to start up and ensure the successful functioning of market access teams ' .
The same is true , inter alia , of what the report says on SMEs .
There are a lot of new things in this report , and we wish you all the best in implementing them .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Tuesday , 19 February 2008 .
Written Statements ( Article 142 )
in writing . - ( FR ) The competitiveness of European industry needs to be placed at the heart of the Community agenda , for this alone will allow us to create skilled jobs , secure Europe 's economic growth , guarantee the survival of the European welfare system and ensure that the EU can remain a major trading power in the 21st century .
To ensure that this competitiveness is maintained we need to establish market access conditions that are fair , equitable and reciprocal .
In fact , the European market is one of the most open and competitive in the world , thanks mainly to the right of free competition , which guarantees open and fair trading within the EU .
Nevertheless , the European Union is still faced with numerous commercial obstacles when it comes to foreign trade , for the markets of Europe 's main trading partners do not present the same degree of openness and transparency as the Community market .
We therefore need to take urgent steps to re-establish reciprocal conditions for market access to third countries and , more particularly , to emerging countries , and to combat restrictive commercial practices .
We need to act quickly and firmly to ensure that our SMEs have full and unrestricted access to all markets , especially in the public procurement sector .
Reform of trade protection instruments ( debate )
The next item is the Commission statement on reform of trade protection instruments .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , it is my good fortune to be able to respond happily to two subjects in Parliament this evening .
I am very pleased that I made it all the way back from Kiev in order to do so .
So let me start by thanking Parliament for the invitation and the opportunity to make this statement on trade defence .
I would like to thank Parliament for its close interest in this dossier , evidenced by our discussions both in plenary and in the Committee on International Trade .
In 2006 , the Commission and the Council agreed on the need for a review of Europe 's trade defence instruments .
The intention of this review was to ensure that Europe 's vital tools were defending its workers and businesses against unfair trade and were continuing to work as effectively as possible , especially taking into account the dramatic changes in the global economy , where European businesses operate global supply chains , and where the mix of economic interests amongst European businesses is inevitably becoming more and more complex and difficult to judge and to call .
Following our review and public consultation , and with the backing of the College , I worked with my officials on a set of proposals for adjustments to the EU 's trade defence rules that would offer real improvements in accessibility , transparency and speed and clarity for businesses .
They would include , for example , greater access to documents , greater assistance for small businesses using the trade defence system and faster provisional measures .
We would also propose to clarify , through the drafting of guidelines , the application of EU rules in two important areas .
First , the considerations for determining what degree of production outside of Europe disqualifies a company from being treated as European for the purposes of our investigations and trade defence assessments .
Second , regarding the considerations that should be used in the Community interest test , which allows us to determine that trade defence action is indeed in the wider economic interest of the European Union - something which , as I say , is becoming increasingly complex and difficult to analyse , where situations are not quite as straightforward and not quite as black and white as they perhaps might appear on the surface , or indeed as was the case in the classic operation of trade defence machinery in the past .
The intention in both these areas is largely to codify established practice , which would create clarity and predictability for businesses and decision-making in contentious cases , which we have had experience of in recent years and which , I suggest , are going to increase , not decrease , in number in the coming years .
Whatever your position on the merits or demerits of anti-dumping , those , I think , are useful things to improve upon and to clarify and to issue guidelines upon , in order to give greater certainty and predictability to those who are appealing for the use of these instruments .
A set of proposals along these lines would be balanced .
It would reflect a middle ground of the debate among all the interested parties and the Member States .
There is no point and no advantage in trying to push the centre of gravity , in the design and operation of our trade defence instruments , to one side or the other in the range of opinions in the European Union that inhabit the subject of trade defence .
It is necessary to devise and to identify a route that takes you , broadly speaking , down the middle .
Although our attempts have often been portrayed by people as an attempt to go to one side or the other , these impressions can only have been formed by people who cannot have seen our preliminary conclusions and proposals , because there is nothing in such a package that weakens our ability to tackle unfair trade , and nothing which fundamentally alters the basis of the operation of our trade defence instruments .
However , it is clear from consultation that this issue is politically sensitive and continues to attract vigorous debate and , I have to say , some disagreement .
A package that balances the different concerns in the debate will not currently , in my view , attract the necessary support , and it is better to build on consensus than seek to reconcile presently irreconcilable viewpoints on what clarification and what reform should take place .
The political environment in which this subject has been discussed is not easy .
Some argue that , at a time when we are pressing partners like China to trade fairly , we must not risk even the perception that the EU will lower its guard on trade defence .
No such motivation , no such intention is present , but , nonetheless , some have argued that even risking the perception would be unwise at this moment .
Furthermore , the rules negotiations in the Doha Round , in particular the chairs ' text , have also put the international TDI environment into considerable flux , because of the text 's surprising and , frankly , unacceptable content .
I do not think there has been a chairs ' text in the history of chairs ' texts in the Doha Round that has attracted less support from right across the membership of the WTO than the current chairs ' text on rules .
But , above all , our objective has been to strengthen unity on the operation of trade defence instruments in order to make them more workable , and it is not my job as Commissioner to weaken that unity .
The reality is that , as of today , this unity that I would like to see is not sufficiently in evidence amongst our Member States .
That does not mean one side of this debate is right and that the other is wrong , just that both sides need to continue working towards a greater consensus and , frankly , a greater sense of solidarity in the operation of these instruments .
That is what I propose to encourage .
We will continue to consult on the ideas that we have floated and to build agreement by drawing on our experience .
I would finish by making this observation . The pressures that global economic change is exerting on our trade defence system are here to stay .
They are not going to go away ; they are actually going to grow .
The pressures are going to become greater .
Our ability to operate the traditional consensus and solidarity is going to become harder , not easier , which makes it all the more important that the role of the Commission grows in navigating our way through the different and competing interests and views that businesses and Member States have on this subject .
I believe that future cases will demonstrate the need for clarity and will demonstrate the need for the sort of guidelines that we have originally drafted .
The questions with which we started this review will still be present in six months , in a year and in two years , and I firmly believe that , in due course , they are going to have to be addressed .
Our challenge is together to find economically and politically credible answers , and the Commission will continue to work with that in mind .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( SV ) Thank you , Mr Mandelson .
When you stood here last , you spoke about the need for a reform of the trade protection instruments .
You spoke with conviction on how globalisation and global supply chains had changed the preconditions for the trade protection instruments and that they therefore needed to be updated in order to remain effective and take account of Community interests .
Everything you said then is still true .
We need a reform of the instruments .
Since then , however , it has proved tremendously difficult to bring about a reform .
The conflicts between European companies and between the Member States are considerable .
But that does not diminish the need for reform , on the contrary .
The fact that everything is so infected and that , in example after example , we see the same battle formations drawn up on the same predictable lines in my opinion shows that we need change .
We need a new focus on the instrument and a consensus which unites us .
Now reform is postponed and looks quite remote .
Certainly that is regretted by others as well as myself .
But to argue about whose fault it was , whether it was the fault of the Member States , whether it was the Commission 's fault or which Member States threw a spanner into the works , serves no purpose .
The blame game will not do anyone any good .
For , although the proposal has been halted for the moment , the ideas must not be buried .
We must not forget the matter .
We must continue to debate it and focus on what we are actually agreed on .
I think there is quite a lot .
It is about transparency and openness .
It is probably also about clearer rules on how we safeguard the Community interest .
Perhaps even about how to modernise the definition of Community industry .
But that presupposes that we keep the debate alive and continue to debate and make compromises .
I hope that we will do that here in the European Parliament .
I also hope that the Member States and the Commission will keep the debate alive .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( NL ) Mr President , I would like to start by thanking the Commissioner for his account and also for his honesty in setting out the dilemmas with which he is confronted when he speaks to his colleagues and with the Member States about reforming the trade defence mechanism of the European Union .
That is one thing , and I am also pleased that you are open in saying why you cannot come up with proposals right now , because it is simply very difficult to reach agreement in the European Union about what is the best way forward now .
What the Commissioner also emphasised is that it is important to find a way to build a bridge between those countries that mainly earn their money from trade and those which have to get most of it from production .
I myself come from a trading country , the Netherlands , but I understand very well the concerns that countries like France and Germany , which have a large production base , have about the development of global trade and protection .
For them there is also the need to protect their own industry .
It is thus very important to find that bridge and it is also important that the Commissioner wants to make a particular effort on this .
I think that this is a discussion that we need to have .
We must not be afraid to talk about the need for reform of those trade defence instruments because we are facing rapid changes in the international economy .
What do we need to discuss then ?
I specifically say ' discuss ' , because I do not have all the answers yet either .
We need to discuss transparency in the system , the greater flexibility that is necessary , a better definition of what a European company is , and the social and environmental aspects in terms of determining the interests of the European Community .
These are a number of points that we as Parliament should discuss and on which we should try to come to conclusions that we can then exchange again with the Commissioner .
I think that it is too soon , even from my own group , to come up with very concrete proposals about how this should go .
I am willing to start the discussion about the need for reform and then to think about how we can define a number of areas on which we would like to do more work .
That will take a huge amount of discussion in my group too , just as it will in the Council and the Commission .
Let us give it a try .
I agree with the Commissioner .
Whether it takes six months , twelve months or two years , let us at least get the debate going .
We cannot simply ignore the fact that changes are afoot in the world , including in the global economy , and our trade defence system has to be adapted to meet those changes .
That seems to me an important starting point for a discussion and I am pleased that the Commissioner has been so candid about the problems that he himself faces .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( SV ) Thank you , Commissioner .
Debates with you are always entertaining !
I am also comforted in my view that fair trade is better than free trade , and of course that trade on the basis of solidarity with a weaker partner is more important than formally fair and reciprocal trade .
But now to the TDI , the Trade and Development Index .
As for the rest , perhaps we should examine each other 's bookshelves and perhaps get to understand the background over a cup of rooibos tea sometime ?
Otherwise , you can come with me to the refuse tip where I became politically active and meet my street children in Brazil .
But back to the TDI .
What is a European enterprise ?
It is difficult to define now and therefore it may also be difficult to apply the concept .
What interest is a genuine Community interest ?
The consumers ?
The voluntary organisations ?
Small businesses ?
Large companies ?
It is not at all easy to define , which means that it is currently difficult to apply the instrument , except in certain obvious cases .
There is a dimension to all this which is entirely lacking , and I think it would be immensely interesting if you could return to it when you present new proposals .
Should not ecological and social dumping be equated with direct dumping ?
What is the difference if a firm evades environmental regulations and social provisions worth a billion euros , or gets a billion euros in state aid ?
It would be interesting if you could have a discussion with the WTO and see whether we can move forward on that question .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , to be quite frank , I am glad that the reform of the trade defence instruments proposed by you has failed .
You tried to push the TDI reform forward by taking up this reform in the Global Europe Strategy .
Even if we assume that this reform would have been useful , it is quite clear that we need to strengthen these instruments where they are going to be beneficial , rather than abolishing them altogether .
However , this latter aim was the purpose of your communication of November 2007 .
You bypassed the large majority who were in favour of retaining the existing system , with only a small minority being against its retention and in favour of progressively eroding it .
The way in which the reform project has ground to a halt at Commission level shows that the large majority of Member States and many of your own colleagues considered these proposals to be unacceptable and that they were actually geared towards a small but very vocal lobby .
Who would have benefited from this reform ?
Not the European workforce , who are at risk of losing their jobs because major companies have been able to make use of your much-vaunted comparative advantages in the emerging economies . Not the workers in those countries , who have to endure unacceptable working conditions , and certainly not European businesses - and I speak as an entrepreneur - which conduct their production operations in accordance with the relevant European legislation and have no plans to send their profits soaring by exploiting poor environmental and social standards in certain third countries .
These proposals had nothing to do with fairness and justice in global trade relations and between companies .
In fact , the main beneficiaries would have been the major importers , who are naturally annoyed by any attempt to curb their abusive practices .
The beneficiaries would have been the major wholesalers and distributors who ride roughshod over consumers ' interests and who prefer to draw a veil over the fact that consumers are also workers , citizens and taxpayers . The beneficiaries would be those in the EU whose main concern is their profits , forgetting that the European Union is supposed to be developed , first and foremost , on mutual solidarity and support .
The TDI system that we have in place is not perfect , but it is the one which works best compared with others around the world .
Incidentally , that is not just my opinion ; you - the Commission - undertook a study in 2006 which makes this same point .
We should wait and see what happens in terms of developments in the World Trade Organisation before we introduce any new reforms in this area .
Such a reform would have to consider what our trading partners are doing rather than unilaterally giving up any legal mechanisms to protect ourselves from dumping : legal mechanisms , incidentally , which are based on an internationally agreed set of rules .
Regrettably , I must add that I cannot endorse the Commission 's conduct in the application of the TDIs in 2007 .
Many Member States and other stakeholders have protested that the changes proposed by the Commission were put into effect before the Council and Parliament had the chance to reach an opinion on them .
DG Trade has , on its own initiative , quite simply suspended some of the established principles of interinstitutional cooperation in recent months .
As a result , absolutely no cases have been taken up .
I can only hope , and I would ask you to ensure , that this style of cooperation between the Commission and Parliament does not continue in future .
I would also ask you to bring your key proposals on the framework for the TDIs before the Committee on International Trade and have serious discussions with Parliament before they are put into effect .
( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , this issue has been too much for some people in recent days and weeks .
In the committee , some people nearly had a heart attack when they read the first draft report .
The Commission has halted the initiative because you , Commissioner , were apparently overwhelmed by the task of producing a reform proposal that was capable of securing a majority .
Our parliamentary administration was overwhelmed and put today 's debate on the agenda with the nonsensical title ' Commission statement - Reform of trade protection instruments ' , while the list of speakers says Reform of consumer protection instruments , which is not much better .
Looking at the public gallery , it seems that the members of the public are overwhelmed as well and have taken themselves off to a restaurant or gone home .
Perhaps somebody is at least watching on the Internet , and hopefully , we will maintain an overview here in the Chamber .
I find it most regrettable that the Commission has not managed to produce a reform proposal which could secure a majority in the Council and Parliament .
This is certainly not the right time for this type of reform , but no one here would have anticipated that the reform would fail so miserably .
What is important now ?
First of all , will the Commission inform Parliament in good time of its intentions to take up this reform again and involve us at every stage ?
Let me draw your attention specifically to the codecision rights under the Lisbon Treaty .
Secondly , will there now be a reform by the back door , without a decision by the Council and Parliament ?
Or will you , Commissioner , genuinely - as has just been said - attempt to restore confidence ?
The trade defence instruments must be applied according to the current rules and practice .
Thirdly , why are you undertaking staff changes in the relevant department at this particular time ?
We will be monitoring the conduct of the Commission and DG Trade very closely in the coming weeks .
( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , you certainly do not have an easy task .
You have one of the most difficult portfolios to deal with .
The area of trade / external trade is one which faces completely new challenges .
We have been talking about globalisation for years , but I think we are only now beginning to understand what it is about .
In your famous speech in Berlin , the Churchill Lecture , you said that Europe is exposed to new challenges and that since the end of the war , the challenges have changed because the frame of reference is no longer Berlin or Paris but Mumbai , Shanghai and the other major cities of the emerging economies .
We share your view .
You are absolutely right .
We see this just as you do .
We see the challenges which the European Union must face up to in a new international and global context .
China is real .
China is not just a myth or an image ; China has become a reality to all of us and is a symbol of change .
The question is , which conclusions do we draw from this ?
You conclude that we must change the instruments .
You conclude that we must face up to the challenges by adapting the trade defence instruments or other areas .
My group has not found the conclusive answer , but we certainly have many more doubts .
As you can hear , these doubts are shared in this House .
We have doubts because these defence instruments have proved their worth .
The defence instruments have a certain flexibility .
They can be interpreted in different ways .
They can take account of the different industry interests , and they can interpret the Community interest in different ways .
The test can be applied in different ways , and no , it is not always perfect .
Incidentally , I know that you have not made many mistakes .
I myself can identify two points where the evaluation was wrong , but I think that will be the case with new instruments as well .
Where are we going then ?
You say you would like to continue down this road and you would like to continue the consultations .
You have not yet closed the drawer .
Where should this road take us then ?
Where should the consultations take us ?
How would you like to conduct the consultations with this House and with the committee responsible ?
These are three questions which follow on from what my colleagues have asked .
I would be most grateful for some information from you , as I am receiving e-mails every day .
Are the changes taking place in your DG an indication that you are pursuing the restructuring with a view to your forthcoming communication ?
Are the technical changes which are apparently under way in your DG an indicator of this ?
Can the non-application of the trade defence instruments in 2007 also be interpreted as an indicator , or is it just coincidence , and other factors are in play ?
( FR ) Mr President , the Commission has decided to postpone the project for the reform of the trade defence instruments and , Commissioner , I welcome this wise decision , for it will help maintain the fight against unfair competition .
These instruments are indeed an essential part of the international trading system , for they ensure that companies , and more especially SMEs , which are the prime victims of dumping , are able to operate in a fair and stable competitive environment , which in turn ensures a healthy economy .
I would therefore repeat what Mr Verheugen said at a conference on textiles that was held in Milan at the end of last week : ' Trade defence instruments are beneficial for the competitiveness of our industries and can never be considered as instruments of protectionism . '
I believe indeed that this says it all .
These instruments are not a disguised way of protecting Community industry from the free movement of international trade , but rather are intended as a way of improving its competitiveness by re-establishing normal competition conditions , as and when necessary .
It is not therefore by weakening the implementation of these instruments that we will be better able to adapt the European Union 's trade policy to a changing global economy .
In fact , quite the contrary , for the interests of the manufacturers would have been diluted and the measures that would have been taken could have indirectly encouraged industrial relocation and the migration of our centres of research and innovation .
Europe has to play the role of protector in today 's globalised world .
If we are to stay competitive we must not lower our guard in our dealings with partners but must respect the rules of fair and equitable international trade .
( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , what has just been said demonstrates that your proposal was at the very least controversial .
At the start , however there was no debate to be had .
The Commission had launched an independent study and a public consultation , both of which indicated that there was a broad consensus on the efficiency and stability of the current system .
The only improvements sought by the various parties involved were for greater transparency , greater speed and better access for SMEs .
However , masking this reality , the Commission introduced a reform that will go down in history for the general opposition that it has created .
Trade unions and businesses alike , along with most of the members of the Council , protested against a plan that threatened the Union 's capacity to defend itself against unfair trading practices .
The Commission has withdrawn its proposal and I am very pleased about that .
The approach that it favoured was in fact dangerous and had sown seeds of division .
It is worth pointing out that the Commission 's role is to ensure solidarity between Member States and to respect the various interests that exist , not to be divisive by playing consumers against workers , or importers against producers .
Commissioner , may I remind you that any project for reform requires two things : it has to take account of the recommendations and results of its own investigations and it has to inform the Members of this House in advance of the precise direction the proposal is to take , especially when it comes to its more controversial aspects .

( PT ) Mr President , Commissioner , in one minute I can only congratulate Mr Mandelson on the decision not to proceed with the review of trade protection instruments .
Imagine that , in a system of raging rivers , there is a series of dams .
The sluices are managed according to common rules .
Is it acceptable to decide to alter one of the dams without anyone else doing the same , simply because some believe that the water will not reach their homes this winter ?
To unilaterally alter the rules of the trade protection instruments would be to weaken the dam in order to avoid managing the sluices .
This is not what Europe needs and the Commission did well to pick up on the very clear messages sent to it by this House and also by the trade unions , European industry and most of the Member States .
Free trade will not survive if the rules governing it are broken .
However , these rules must be modernised and must incorporate universal values , such as the protection of decent jobs , the environment and climate and public health .
In this respect , and in no other , Europe must use its political weight and trade strength in bilateral agreements with the world 's main producers .
It is only through reciprocal action and modern and universal rules that trade can help improve not only the living conditions of citizens outside Europe , in the world in general , but also the living conditions and survival of European workers and entrepreneurs who want to keep producing and living in and exporting from Europe .
This is what is expected of the Commissioner who represents Europe on the world stage .
Congratulations , Mr Mandelson .
Mr President , Commissioner Mandelson expressed delight that he was here for two debates , and I am quite delighted too , because I would request some clarification on his very useful response in relation to the WTO , and I thank him for the detail contained therein .
He suggests that the rumours about advancing too far on agriculture come from a very small community of interests ; I would suggest they ( I presume we are speaking of Irish farmers and agri-business ) are usually well informed , and I suppose that what I want to get clear before midnight is that they are wrong - I hope they are wrong - and that what you are telling us tonight is fact .
I would also note your comment in relation to the non-agriculture side of the WTO .
You also expressed regret about the text that is there .
My original question is , given your comments about WTO and free trade agreements , are you less confident now than at any other time that you will conclude a deal at the WTO ?
It is a bit direct , but an answer would be helpful .
Mr President , we face a dilemma between the free trade we believe in and the fair trade that is violated .
If the fairness is not fulfilled , we have to protect , at least temporarily , those who act in a just way .
I would like to present the position of the Polish Government , which is , at the moment , against the reform , saying that , in the Caspary report , it was mentioned that what we had was enough .
Why is it so ?
There is an assumption that some countries have companies based in China , for instance .
And protection would mean that they were favoured more than other companies in the countries of Europe , so this is not fair .
I think that free trade in textiles taught us a lesson in 2005 , and I think that now we should approach the new reform in a very wise way .
I hope the Commissioner will make every effort to run it in a good way .
( PL ) Mr President , the extent of trade is indicative of the level of economic development .
High exports are a feature of developed economies , but this ought to be a two-way street and imports should flow the other way too .
If the movement is largely one-way , it leads to imbalance , lack of partnership and an increasing gap in the level of development .
It is therefore necessary to establish some kind of principles to help define relevant quality standards and regulations , thus creating stability and partnership in the area of trade .
It is all too often the case that we talk of mutual solidarity and equality , when in fact we are intent on protecting our national interests to the detriment of those we have in common .
It all too often the case , too , that we promote the development of exports and the possibility of investing in certain countries without checking whether democratic principles and human rights are respected there , not to mention the situation regarding environmental requirements , wage levels and social protection .
Trade protection instruments must provide for justice and equal opportunities .
( NL ) Mr President , Commissioner Mandelson , thank you for your candid explanation of why you have not been successful in this .
When I listen to some of my fellow Members , I hear that they are pleased that you have not succeeded in reforming the trade defence instruments , and I think that is because they are afraid that you will abolish them .
That is not what I have heard you say , but would it not be much fairer to say that you have perhaps been too ambitious , that you wanted to go too far with the reforms ?
I am referring , in particular , to the reform of the balance between the industrial countries and trade interests .
Because this has been unsuccessful , we will not now manage to implement a number of necessary changes in the field of access for small and medium-sized businesses that enjoy widespread support .
Moreover , the necessary changes in connection with transparency , speed , accessibility of documents , which are broadly supported , will not now come in the next two years unfortunately .
Can we find a way to make sure that these changes do come in and that we debate the more far-reaching proposals properly some time ?
( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , if you are considering a new reform project that is close to the original version , how can you imagine defending before the WTO a policy that penalises dumping when it is practised by foreign companies but accepts it when it benefits European businesses ?
The problem is knowing not who produces the goods that are arriving in Europe but rather whether they are being exported under fair and equitable conditions .
We cannot accept that a company claiming to be European , and that practises dumping , would become unchallengeable simply because it is European according to your new definition .
What is more , given that this debate is to be held on a multilateral level , why not be even more visionary and include social and environmental dumping within the scope of the trade defence instruments ?
It would serve Europe well , and be greatly to its credit , if it were to be in the vanguard of this campaign .

( PT ) Commissioner , further to the question that I asked you previously or the comment that I made previously , I must say that , in terms of Europe , the cases that were pursued in relation to textiles and footwear brought about , particularly in my country , changes that have prevented any unemployment . However , this was in no way a protectionist-type movement and the companies concerned have moved and relocated their factories outside Europe and are now creating jobs outside and inside Europe .
It was therefore an interesting movement .
However , despite this , it appears that during 2007 no new cases were initiated by the Commission .
Therefore , what I want to ask you is this : was the Commission 's intention in not initiating any cases ( not Portuguese , but from other countries ) , in not initiating any anti-dumping or anti-subsidy investigations , to wait for a decision on the review process in hand or was its intention to shelve those cases which it had already started to investigate ?
That is my question to you .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , I am afraid I did not catch the interpretation of all of the last question that was put to me .
I got just the last fragment , which seemed to suggest that we had suspended the operation of the trade defence instruments and that we were no longer initiating or pursuing cases .
I do not quite understand the premise of the question , because any examination of DG Trade 's website will be able to yield the information that the Member wants about cases that are currently being initiated and investigated and on which proposals will be brought forward in the ordinary way .
I do not complain about being accused of being unduly ambitious - that is the benchmark for what I do and how I set about my job .
If a Commissioner lacks ambition , then he or she is going to be judged , I think , by pretty low standards .
I am , however , not sufficiently ambitious to embrace straight away my friend Mr Schlyter 's proposal of moving from my inability to propose consensual reforms of trade defence instruments against the low cost of production dumping to a new concept of organic or ecological dumping .
I think we will continue to concentrate on the former before we shift our focus to the latter , but I hope he does not take that as a sign of any lack of ambition on my part , only great realism .
Mr Caspary seemed to suggest that he was disappointed that proposals were not being brought forward .
Well , I can understand his disappointment , but I am really not sure that even this Parliament would have shown any greater ability to arrive at a simple consensual view about what reform should take place than the Member States have been able to achieve .
Mr Arif has suggested that my motivation is to play off consumers against workers and to play off importers against producers .
I am not playing anyone off against anyone - it is just that , in the real world , people do have different interests , and they have different viewpoints and different needs .
We do not yet live , I am afraid , in an ideal socialist society , where no one has a different view , no one has a different need and no one has a different interest .
I am afraid that we have to operate in the real world and we have to navigate our way through these interests and needs and arrive at a fair and equitable and acceptable outcome in our attempts to steer these policies forward .
I thought that Ms Mann 's understanding of the dilemmas that we face in this policy area was very realistic .
It is not that I was seeking greater flexibility per se .
What I was seeking to do , in approaching this review , was to arrive at a set of trade instruments that were not fundamentally different or changed from those that we have at the moment , but that operated within a framework that was clearly understood , that were clearly predictable and clearly reasonable and balanced in their impact on the range of different businesses , which are trading in increasingly different circumstances in the global economy in the 21st century .
And I make no apology for doing that .
I would just say in conclusion , really in response to Mr Markov : yes it is probably an accurate summing-up that the system of trade defence that we have is not the best , but it is the one we have got .
I think that is a fair description of our system .
The questions that I had to put and that remain to be answered were not whether our system is the best - it probably is not , but it is , nonetheless , the one we have got and it is in reasonable working order .
I had to ask , will it remain workable , in the way that it is now , in the future ?
Will it become increasingly controversial and contested amongst European businesses in the future ?
Will it fit the changing production models and supply chains of increasing numbers of European businesses that are becoming far more internationalised and that will continue to do so more than ever before ?
Those are the questions that I put .
They have not yet been satisfactorily answered , but answers , I think , will remain to be found and we need to continue seeking them .
The debate is closed .
Written Statements ( Article 142 )
in writing . - It is ten years since the trade defence instuments were revised .
They need modernising to ensure that they remain relevant to the global commercial enivoronment in which EU business operates .
Open markets benefit everyone and should be our goal , but it is true that trade defence action remains necessary to protect us from unfair trade .
However , in deciding what is unfair trade we must also take into account a wider Community interest than the present rules allow and we must avoid damage to European countries that set up global supply chains .
We must also make sure that the interests of millions of consumers are weighed carefully against the sometimes narrow interests of a few producers .
I hope the Commission will soon find the political environment suitable for it to bring back proposals for reforming our trade defence instruments .
Agenda for the next sitting : see Minutes
Closure of the sitting
( The sitting was closed at 11.10 p.m. )
Opening of the sitting
( The sitting was opened at 9.05 a.m. )
Documents received : see Minutes
Debate on cases of breaches of human rights , democracy and the rule of law ( announcement of motions for resolutions tabled ) : see Minutes
Situation in Gaza ( motions for resolutions tabled ) : see Minutes
Accreditation and market surveillance relating to the marketing of products - Common framework for the marketing of products - Application of certain national technical rules to products lawfully marketed in another Member State - Safety marking on consumer products ( debate )
( FR ) The next item is the joint debate on the following reports :
report by André Brie , on behalf of the Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection , on the proposal for a regulation of the European Parliament and the Council setting out the requirements for accreditation and market surveillance relating to the marketing of products - C6-0068 / 2007 - ,
report by Christel Schaldemose , on behalf of the Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection , on the proposal for a decision of the European Parliament and the Council on a common framework for the marketing of products - C6-0067 / 2007 -
and the report by Alexander Stubb , on behalf of the Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection , on the proposal for a regulation of the European Parliament and the Council laying down procedures relating to the application of certain national technical rules to products lawfully marketed in another Member State and repealing Decision 3052 / 95 / CE - C6-0065 / 2007 - ,
as well as the following oral question :
oral question to the Commission by Arlene McCarthy , on behalf of the Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection , concerning safety marking on consumer products - B6-0009 / 2008 ) .
rapporteur . - ( DE ) Madam President , Commissioner , representatives of the Presidency , ladies and gentlemen , the subject matter and legal intricacies of the Regulation on accreditation and market surveillance are complex , and it has all the appearances of a very dry and largely technical instrument .
There can be no doubt , however , that it has highly significant political implications for consumers and for the European economy as a whole .
The problems which prompted the Commission to draft its proposal and which underlie the numerous amendments and decisions adopted by the Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection in the course of its debates are plain for all to see .
I shall confine my remarks to three specific issues .
Firstly , accreditation has not hitherto been regulated on a European scale , although it is practised in most Member States and significantly affects the performance of market-surveillance authorities .
Given the internal market and free movement of goods in the EU , it is extremely important to consumers that the evident differences in the quality and effectiveness of market-surveillance authorities should be harmonised upwards by means of European rules governing accreditation bodies .
To this end , the European Parliament has gone beyond the Commission proposal with a view to imposing distinctly more stringent obligations on these bodies and on the Member States .
The Regulation clearly prohibits the commercialisation of accreditation bodies , stipulates that they must operate on a non-profit basis and must not compete with other bodies and enshrines their independence and their status as public authorities .
Secondly , although the safety and protection of consumers and the environment are regulated by numerous European guidelines and other binding standards , last year 's case involving the US toy manufacturer Martell , and not only that case , showed that current practice is unsatisfactory in many instances and , moreover , that there are wide divergences in the enforcement of the rules at Europe 's borders and within the European market , surveillance in some cases being inadequate .
There is , of course , a need for changes and improvements to individual directives , such as the Toy Safety Directive .
The main objective of the Commission in its proposal for a regulation , however , was to improve , strengthen and harmonise the system of market surveillance .
The European Parliament not only shared this position but also developed many aspects of it , substantially fleshing out and tightening the obligations on Member States and market-surveillance authorities , including the requirements relating to cooperation with customs authorities .
In our view , that also implied a strict disclosure obligation for the authorities and provisions on public freedom of information .
I am pleased that the Council and the Commission have responded to this concern of Parliament .
Thirdly , I personally believe that Parliament 's greatest success and the most significant improvement we have achieved has been the inclusion of consumer goods .
The advantages of this Regulation , which lie in its strictly binding nature , can be combined with the advantages of the General Product Safety Directive , which include highly detailed consumer-protection measures , albeit with minimal binding force .
This was the most difficult area of our discussions and negotiations with the Commission and the Council in both legal and technical terms .
The fruitful outcome was undoubtedly due to the fact that , although the three institutions favoured different approaches , they agreed on the aims of greater protection of consumers and more effective market surveillance .
For this reason I would also like to thank Commissioners Kuneva and Verheugen , the Commission staff and our negotiating partners from the German and Portuguese Presidencies and particularly from the Slovenian Presidency for their intensive , constructive and considerate cooperation .
May I also take this opportunity to record my gratitude to the late Michel Ayral , who was involved in organising most of this cooperation , which makes his recent death an even greater loss for us all .
I can endorse the view of the Presidency that the outcome could scarcely have been achieved by now without the overarching cooperation of the three most recent incumbents of the Presidency .
The legal basis for consumer health and safety , for protection of the environment and for appropriate product quality has been significantly reinforced by this Regulation .
It is up to the Member States and the Commission now to take the opportunities it offers to achieve tangible improvements for consumers .
Let me also express my special thanks to the shadow rapporteurs , Christel Schaldemose und Alexander Stubb , for their exemplary cooperation in the preparation of this package .
Rapporteur . - ( DA ) Madam President , Commissioner , President-in-Office , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to begin by thanking you all for the fantastic collaboration we have had in connection with the work on this package .
It has been exciting in many ways .
As the shadow rapporteurs know , this has been my first report during my time in Parliament and it has been a good learning experience .
It has also been very challenging to work on three reports and therefore also with other rapporteurs .
It has been exciting !
The fact that we have had three reports that have overlapped in certain areas has ultimately benefited our work , as we now have a coherent piece of legislation for the internal market , which will strengthen this market .
There is considerable discussion concerning better legislation , and although the Commission has undoubtedly scratched its head at times during our negotiations , I would nevertheless venture to say that our work here is an example of a good process .
We have all worked together very effectively and achieved a good result from this .
We have , on the other hand , also had very many meetings to reach this point .
I would like to highlight three things that we have campaigned for from Parliament 's side in connection with this framework for the marketing of products ; three things that we have worked through and that are important in enabling us now to support the compromise we have reached and be quite satisfied with it .
Firstly , I think that it has been a great victory for consumers that we have strengthened the requirements imposed on enterprises throughout the supply chain .
Everyone who comes into contact with a product will be responsible for ensuring that that product is safe and meets EU requirements .
This applies equally to the manufacturer in China , the importer in Cologne or the distributor in Copenhagen .
This also means quite specifically that an importer will no longer be able to claim that he is not responsible if a product that is imported proves to be dangerous or does not meet EU regulations in general .
Secondly , right at the finishing line we have agreed on how to reinforce the CE marking .
It has been clear right from our very first debate in committee that it has been somewhat difficult to determine how we can solve this problem .
What is the marking exactly ?
How can we reinforce controls ?
Is it really a credible guarantee for safety at all ?
The solution we have arrived at allows us to retain and reinforce the CE marking .
In future Member States will prosecute companies and producers that misuse the CE marking .
At the same time , we will also have strengthened market control , not least as a result of Mr Brie 's report .
Overall , this means that we as consumers will in future be able to have much greater confidence in the products that carry the marking .
However - and this is the third point - in the proposal we have also committed the Commission to follow up the functioning of the marking .
The CE marking is not necessarily the solution to all our safety problems within the internal market .
The marking is aimed primarily at organisations and authorities concerned with market surveillance .
Therefore , through this decision we have requested that the Commission carry out an investigation into how the market operates and undertake a thorough assessment of consumer safety markings in general .
The Commission is in the process of carrying out this work and we are very eagerly awaiting the results .
This decision is not legislative in a legal sense , but it does contain a clear political obligation , which will mean that future product legislation will be based on the framework that we have created through the decision .
In concrete terms , this means that when we begin work on the Toy Directive , we will take these definitions and these provisions concerning enterprises and incorporate them in the Toy Directive .
This means that we will actually have a much safer internal market .
I am entirely certain that through this we will improve safety levels within the internal market for the benefit of consumers , and also for the benefit of enterprises .
Thank you to everyone for your collaboration and especially to Mr Stubb and Mr Brie .

rapporteur . - Madam President , I have four minutes , so I would like to make four points .
My first point is not that it is Malcolm Harbour 's birthday , but it is , so we should congratulate him .
The first point is a vote of thanks because , where a legislative package such as this one is concerned , there is no way one can push it through alone .
So my first thanks go to Mr Brie and Ms Schaldemose , whom I would almost call my co-rapporteurs .
Working with you has been a lot of fun .
This was a first legislative package for me as well , and has shown that things can work quite well .
I would also like to thank my shadow rapporteurs , especially Ms De Vits , Ms Rühle and Mr Manders .
Working with you has also been a lot of fun .
Then I would like to thank the three Presidencies that have been involved .
The first was Frank Wetzel and the German Presidency .
They did an excellent job .
The second was Fernanda and the Portuguese Presidency .
They too did a fantastic job and then , thirdly , the Slovenians have shown why new Presidencies and small country Presidencies are so fantastic .
You did a great job as well , so thank you very much , Vinka .
I would especially like to thank the Commission , Commissioner Verheugen and Simon Mordue , on the political side , and then on the floor , so to speak , I would like to thank Hans , Liliana and especially Mr Ayral , to whom André has already referred .
Unfortunately , Mr Ayral passed away rather suddenly .
If I had a choice I would call this the Ayral package in tribute to his work , because he was a fantastic European civil servant , of the type we need .
My final thanks go to Luca from the Legal Service , to Patricia from the Secretariat and especially to my assistant Tuomas , who has worked so hard that he has a knee injury .
In other words , his left knee does not mutually recognise his right any more and he is not able to be here today .
He has been the soul behind this whole package .
My second point is to ask what the background is to mutual recognition .
To put it simply , we had the Cassis de Dijon decision in 1979 .
Since then we have had 300 court cases to show that mutual recognition does not work .
Seventy-five per cent of goods are harmonised , and twenty-five percent are not .
The harmonised proportion amounts to EUR 1 500 billion , or in other words EUR 1.5 trillion , and the non-harmonised proportion to EUR 500 billion .
Of that EUR 500 billion , there are problems relating to EUR 150 billion .
The Commission tells us that , if mutual recognition worked , our GDP would go up by 1.8 % .
The Commission brought forward a good proposal .
Unfortunately , the Member States tried to water it down , but fortunately we in the European Parliament protected the interests of the internal market and pushed through an ambitious package .
The third point is to ask what we did .
What were the procedural matters that we changed ?
To put it in simple terms , until now it took a small , medium-sized or large company two to three years to fight a case on mutual recognition in court .
That is not really necessary any more , because we have shifted the burden of proof to the Member States .
Basically , in a procedure lasting 20 to 60 days , the Member State has to provide - and I stress the word - evidence that a particular rule does not apply in another Member State .
So we have shifted the burden of proof .
What I want to say to all small and medium-sized businesses in Europe is that there is no need ever again to fill in a form to apply to enter the market of another country .
No , the goods move freely .
Call us , call me , if you have a problem .
You should not be having to apply .
The fourth and final point I wanted to make is about practical cases , and the areas to which this applies .
The answer is bicycles , scaffolding , fire alarms , bread and plant-based products , and so forth .
The principle of mutual recognition applies to a huge market .
So my final point , having said my thanks and given a background to procedural changes and practical cases , is that European firms should never again have to let a product be prevented from entering another country 's market .
( Applause )
As entertaining as ever , Mr Stubb !
author . - Madam President , I , too , want to commend to Members the excellent work that has been carried out by our rapporteurs for the goods package , Mr Brie , Ms Schaldemose and Mr Stubb , who , I think , are all legislative virgins .
I think it is the first report they have done in this Parliament and , I have to say , they have done a very good job , together with staff .
We have to thank the Commissioner himself , who has demonstrated commitment and dedication to this issue , and the Council and the Presidency again , which have made all this happen .
I think we have managed to achieve an agreement which will free up circulation of safe products on the internal market , while introducing a tougher regime to detect dangerous goods and prevent them from coming onto the market and obviously maintaining tough rules , which we already have in place for food safety , medical equipment and blood products .
With the adoption of this package , business and SMEs will find it easier , as Mr Stubb said , to sell their products - common household goods , bicycles , ladders , tanks , containers etc . - while consumers should reap the benefit of a wider choice of high-quality and safe products .
But we have said very clearly that free movement of goods must not compromise safety .
On the contrary , our rapporteurs have sought to strengthen the safety and enforcement regime with essential requirements in this package , by making it clear that all products placed on the market , including imports from third countries , must comply with the law , whether it is a Toy Safety Directive or the Directive on electrical equipment ; by making it clear that all economic operators are legally responsible - and , indeed , liable - for placing products on the market and for the accuracy of the information they provide ; by strengthening the current CE marking system to help consumer knowledge and confidence in products ; and by increasing the coordination and cooperation of the market surveillance authorities , in particular to react faster in emergency cases to detect and withdraw unsafe products .
I go back to the example of toys .
While I would stress that US toy safety legislation on testing requirements and standards is weaker than the European Union 's , and their problems with defective toys were greater , nonetheless the recalls for the same product occurred in July in the US and it took Member States until September to take action to withdraw defective toy products from the market in the EU .
That is why the changes that have been made by our rapporteurs for swifter action are , indeed , essential .
If we are to engender consumer confidence , then we must ensure that there are no loopholes for defective or dangerous products .
I think that the message this Parliament will give today by voting through these new measures is that we want goods to move freely , we want to increase competition and consumer choice , but we will not compromise on safety and , therefore , we have stepped up enforcement surveillance and given the CE mark the legal protection it deserves , to ensure that importers and manufacturers can be legally prosecuted if they fail in their duty of responsibility to protect the consumer .
So , Commissioner , I want to thank you for the constructive and intensive work that you have carried out .
We welcome the fact that you have now brought forward the new Toy Safety Directive .
It is only one of many directives covered by this package of laws that we are putting through today and , as chair of the Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection , I therefore want to ask you to address some of the key future issues to enhance consumer confidence and to ensure consumer safety and awareness .
I have two products here today .
One is a toy seal ; one is an electric kettle .
One has no CE mark and one has a CE mark , so the former is probably not covered by the Toy Safety Directive and the latter , we assume , is covered by the Electrical Equipment Directive .
However , consumers are confused .
They believe that this also means that this kettle is safe .
It does not mean it is safe .
It means it conforms to the Directive on electrical equipment , and that is why , today , we are putting to you three requests : to examine the concept of a supplementary marking to enhance consumer information on product safety , to carry out an in-depth study in order to clarify the feasibility , the possible benefits and the potential drawbacks for such a marking for all stakeholders , including business and consumers , and to examine the possibilities for reinforcing the credibility of the CE marking through measures for stronger customs control inside and outside the European Union , to make sure we end the consumer confusion as regards the CE marking .
Vice-President of the Commission . - ( DE ) Madam President , President-in-Office of the Council , ladies and gentlemen , the great aim of this initiative , which we presented almost exactly a year ago , was to optimise the free movement of goods within the European internal market while increasing consumer and business confidence in the rules governing the internal market .
I wish to thank you all today for embracing this aim so wholeheartedly .
The fact that this complex and sometimes very technical-looking package has been brought to a successful conclusion in such a short time is truly remarkable .
This success is due to the extraordinary commitment of all parties , and I should like to express my special thanks to the rapporteurs , Mrs Schaldemose , Mr Brie and Mr Stubb .
I am very grateful to the three rapporteurs for paying tribute in their speeches to the leading role played by our departed colleague , Michel Ayral .
He , in fact , was the architect of this package , and I must confess that I sometimes had the feeling he was the only one who fully understood it .
I also thank the Slovenian Presidency for making this project one of the priorities of its agenda .
The fact that we are able to adopt this package today is a fine feather in the cap of the Slovenian Presidency .
I would also be the first to admit that the quality of this comprehensive legislative package has been enhanced by its passage through Parliament , and I am pleased that this is the case .
It is a textbook example of the way in which the European institutions are supposed to interact .
We are therefore able to present a package that will benefit all participants in the internal market - businesses , especially small and medium-sized enterprises , and , above all , consumers .
The Regulation on mutual accreditation will make it easier in future for companies to market their products throughout Europe without stumbling over obstacles in the form of diverse national rules .
All of us here are aware that these diverse national rules are very often historically rooted in nothing other than pure protectionism .
In this respect the main winners will be small businesses , for it is they that experience the greatest difficulty in surmounting these administrative obstacles .
This last aspect , in my view , is particularly important in the context of the general political situation .
We now have more than 23 million small and medium-sized enterprises , or SMEs , in Europe .
They account for 99 % of all European businesses .
Indeed , there are only 44 000 firms in the whole of Europe that do not fall into the category of small and medium-sized enterprises .
What is rather surprising is the fact that only 8 % of our businesses export beyond their national borders , whether within the European internal market or further afield .
In other words , more than 90 % of all our European firms confine themselves to their domestic markets and make no use whatsoever of the benefits offered by the internal market .
I do believe one of the main reasons is that the day-to-day application of the rules governing the internal market poses too many practical problems .
That is precisely the point from which our proposals proceeded .
The Regulation on accreditation and market surveillance will perceptibly increase the effectiveness of our rules for the internal market , and one of the main purpose of those rules , of course , is to guarantee the safety of products .
The new rules will also ensure that compliance with the product standards we shall have , with the safety and quality requirements , can henceforth be properly verified .
In this way we are supplementing the technical rules of the internal market for the first time with a common market-surveillance policy , thereby taking a giant step in the direction of improved product safety .
During the preceding deliberations and in today 's debate too , the question of the CE marking has received particularly close attention .
Let me say first of all that I am pleased to see Parliament reinforcing the CE mark with a view to ensuring that it can play its role more effectively in guaranteeing the safety of products .
Nevertheless , I definitely agree with Mrs McCarthy that this CE mark raises a number of issues which have emerged over the many years since it first came into use .
One example is the question of a uniform European safety mark , to which Mrs McCarthy also referred .
I am in the fortunate position of being able to tell you not only that the Commission is prepared to present the study requested by Parliament but also that we have already begun our preliminary work on it , because I see this project as a matter of urgency , and that we shall present the study as soon as possible .
As you know , the CE mark was not created at the time as a source of consumer information .
That is a misunderstanding which recurs over and over again .
The CE mark does nothing other than confirm that a product complies with all the relevant current legislation .
The CE mark , of course , means nothing to consumers unless they are familiar with the provisions that apply to the product in question .
This , I need hardly say , is clearly asking too much of consumers .
It is true that the CE mark is , in most cases , a safety mark too , but not always and not exclusively .
Yet the most important information consumers want to know is whether their product is actually safe .
For this reason I entirely agree with Parliament , and the Commission also sees the need to put the entire system of CE marking under the microscope .
Consideration is also being given to the question whether it is possible and expedient to introduce an additional mark .
There is a need to examine very carefully whether that is feasible and what consequences it would have for all stakeholders .
In any case , the Commission has an entirely open mind on this question and is willing to cooperate in any way with Parliament and the Council .
As part of our ongoing work , it goes without saying that we are also examining the cost involved in introducing a new system and in adapting existing systems and - even more importantly - how each could help consumers , manufacturers , dealers and public authorities by providing better value for money .
Another question of great import that is currently under examination relates to the connection between any specific mark for consumers and all other markings , including the CE mark .
With regard to the matter of enhancing the credibility of the CE mark through more stringent checks on products from outside the EU , the Regulation on accreditation and market surveillance will make a major contribution to the resolution of that issue as soon as the Member States have transposed it .
I believe it is particularly important to remember that people see product safety as an indicator of the credibility of the whole internal market project .
The decision on a common legal framework for the marketing of products assumes particular importance in relation to future legislation .
This decision sets standards that will apply to our future legislative acts .
On the one hand , it is designed to guarantee a high level of safety , an aim reflected in provisions such as those on the accountability of importers .
On the other hand , it will help to make the whole body of provisions more coherent , thereby making it easier for businesses to adhere to the rules in practice .
The first specific fruit of this decision has already been presented to Parliament in the form of the Toy Safety Directive which the Commission has already adopted .
Other examples will follow shortly .
The Commission is more than happy with the political outcome that is emerging here today .
I thank you for your active interest and your contributions , which have ensured that this package relating to one of the key European integration projects , namely the creation of a truly effective internal market , represents a genuine leap forward , taking the internal market to a new level of quality .
In this way , we are coming as close as possible to the complete realisation of the internal market .
I use the term ' as close as possible ' advisedly , because I wish to emphasise that there will never be full harmonisation of the European internal market , nor do I think we really want that .
In view of the widely diverse traditions and needs of member countries of the European Union , a degree of latitude must also be maintained for the satisfaction of those needs and the preservation of those traditions .
We must strike a careful balance here , but , as I said , our provisions take us as close as is humanly possible to the complete realisation of the internal market .
I believe that is another major contribution to more growth and employment in Europe and that it therefore provides another answer to those who ask how Europe is responding to the economic challenges of the 21st century .
( Applause )
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on International Trade . - ( DE ) Madam President , President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , the Committee on International Trade is fully satisfied with the content of Mr Brie 's report .
He and his fellow members of the Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection have done a very good job and have set out a balanced position on this complex but important issue .
At first sight , the effects of this Regulation on external trade are minimal .
I do believe , however , that an increasingly close link is developing between the internal market and external trade .
The opportunities and risks arising from the growing openness of our market must be carefully assessed and addressed .
The European Union has a major role to play in guaranteeing the proper functioning of the internal market , and it must not allow this to be jeopardised by players outside or inside the Community .
I am delighted that the lead committee has accepted the proposals made by the Committee on International Trade regarding the restriction of market access for products with false or misleading CE marks , for this will make it easier to ensure that information given to consumers is reliable and transparent as well as creating broader scope for action against abusive practices that infringe national and EU legislation .
At this point I would like to emphasise that greater attention must be paid to surveillance of products from non-EU countries .
This is not a matter of protectionism ; the fact is that , even though rules are in place , they are infringed far more often in countries where inspection practice is less rigorous than in the European Union .
This is another means by which we must ensure that no advantages are accorded to manufacturers who , besides possibly being located in countries outside the EU to profit from low production costs , also try to save money by circumventing technical and legal requirements imposed by the EU to safeguard its citizens .
By the way , some of the perceived benefits of locating in low-cost countries may be appealing in business terms , but such locations have an extremely harmful environmental impact and are totally unacceptable from a social perspective .
Returning to the report , another gratifying aspect is the fact that the Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection has adopted the motion tabled by the Committee on International Trade regarding the availability of stiffer penalties in the event of repeated infringements .
We are also very happy with Mrs Schaldemose 's report .
It certainly reflects the spirit , if not always the letter , of the amendments tabled by the Committee on International Trade .
It is worth emphasising that this new proposal provides for the same distribution of burdens for all market players involved in trade , whether they be producers , importers or merchants .
Another important element is that importers of products from countries outside the EU are required to ensure that the goods in question satisfy the applicable Community requirements .
Underlying our amendments was the desire to ensure that importers , together with foreign producers , bore responsibility for all loss or injury resulting from products that were dangerous or infringed the rules .
The purpose of this proposal is to make importers check more carefully whether manufacturers are honouring their legal obligations ; we intend to do this by signalling that placing goods on the internal market without thorough checking can be an expensive error .
This will not only contribute to fair competition in the European Union but will also reduce the incentive to relocate production facilities in non-EU countries where the laws and regulations are less strict than they are here .
I also support the recommendation made in the report that Member States be made responsible for establishing a robust , efficient and responsive system of market surveillance in their respective territories and that they be required to make available an adequate pool of skills and resources for that purpose .
Proper enforcement of the proposed provisions is imperative if we want our market rules to be correctly applied and European consumers to be protected from products that are dangerous or infringe Community law .
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety . - ( DE ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I speak as the rapporteur of the Environment Committee on the Brie report and intend to focus primarily on market surveillance , which has been a major concern of ours in the Committee .

Over the past few months people have often asked what ' CE ' actually means , what those two letters stand for .
As we know , they actually signify compliance with European rules , but in the course of the CE discussion a joke has been doing the rounds that CE actually stands for ' Chinese export ' .
It is a sad fact that the CE mark is being used by manufacturers who do not adhere to the rules .
That is not always the case , but I am afraid abuses are rife in the Far East .
This practice is unacceptable because it poses risks to consumers , to public health and to the environment , but it is also detrimental to the companies that play by the rules .
Let me say quite clearly that compliance with European rules must not make any company less competitive , nor should any company stand to gain by flouting them .
For this reason , the Environment Committee has argued in the past , for example in connection with the Eco-design of Energy-using Products Directive , for more rigorous market surveillance .
It is therefore gratifying that the Commission has made this proposal .
We believe it has taken too long to do so , but better late than never .
Accordingly , we welcome the fact that rapid agreement has now been reached .
Just like the Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection , the Environment Committee takes the view that the transitional periods proposed by the Commission were far too long .
We should ensure that these rules enter into force as soon as possible .
The compromise date of 1 January 2010 is not what we wanted , but at least it is an improvement on the Commission 's proposal , as is the case in many other areas .
I appeal to the Member States to make the necessary manpower available and to enact the requisite measures so that market surveillance really is improved quickly and we do not have to use the transitional period .
We must act very swiftly for the sake of consumers and for the sake of honest companies .
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety . - ( DE ) Madam President , may I add my congratulations to the many that have already been expressed to the rapporteurs .
I have rarely experienced such a non-confrontational debate in this House on a proposal providing for greater protection of consumers as well as for benefits to businesses .
I drafted the opinion of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety on the Schaldemose report .
The Committee rejected the Commission 's proposal for a decision because we do not know to this day why it opted for that particular instrument rather than proposing legally binding rules on such an important matter .
Let me nevertheless express my thanks and best wishes to the rapporteur from the Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection .
There was also a great deal of scepticism about the broad application of the method known as the ' new approach ' , because it means that the conformity of goods is attested by the manufacturers themselves , and the new approach also weakens market surveillance by reversing the burden of proof .
We therefore very strongly advocate the compromise whereby the new approach is only to be applied on the basis of a case-by-case assessment .
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy . - ( CS ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , first and foremost I would like to express my appreciation for the excellent work of all the rapporteurs on this package .
As the draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy on the report presented by Mr Stubb , in my contribution I will deal with a group of roughly 25 % of products , which are subject to the so-called principle of mutual recognition of technical rules among the Member States .
The goods market in question is worth approximately EUR 500 billion .
This category includes construction products , precious metal products , baby and childcare products , and much more .
Despite the fact that the European Court of Justice established the mutual recognition principle in the Cassis de Dijon ruling nearly 30 years ago , the reality does not always reflect this : hence the importance of this legislation and the need for it .
Member States frequently abuse their position and systematically obstruct products lawfully marketed in other Member State markets from entering their own market .
Apart from the financial losses suffered by SMEs , particularly affected by this legislation , these Member States ' practices represent an extra administrative burden for the entrepreneurs in question .
If they wish to import into these Member States entrepreneurs have to obey national bodies and authorities , and undertake additional demanding administrative procedures .
Unless their products are adapted to the non-harmonised field they have to refrain from exporting them .
A more effective enforcement of application of the mutual recognition principle will be achieved by establishing a clear procedure , burden of proof , deadlines and responsibilities for both the entrepreneur and the authorities opting for an exception to this principle .
This will contribute to achieving the free movement of goods , which is one of the four fundamental freedoms .
It will also be remedy the imbalance between entrepreneurs and authorities responsible for market access .
I am confident that the main objective of this proposal will be fulfilled and that the European consumer will become the main beneficiary of the effective enforcement and application of this principle .
Draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy . - Madam President , I was rapporteur for the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy 's opinions on two of the three reports in this package .
Prior to the vote in our committee we received strong external representations .
At first glance these seemed to be reasonable under the pretext of ensuring safety and quality , but they were , in fact , thinly disguised protectionism against competition from imports into the EU .
As believers in a free market European Union , in , hopefully , a world of free markets , and as believers in the importance of free trade for the development and enrichment of both the European Union and of our trading partners , we must be very careful about going willy-nilly down this protectionist line .
The committee 's opinion was toned down in this respect , and I am glad to see that , thanks also to efforts in the Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection , most of the excessively protectionist aspects have been mitigated .
Importers and distributors will still have the right to modify products to suit the EU market , in which case they justifiably become responsible for compliance .
On the other hand , I notice they are still required to ensure - I quote , ' ensure ' - that the products they put on the market without modification are compliant with EU legislation .
I consider the word ' verify ' would be more appropriate than ' ensure ' , and I would be interested in the Commissioner 's view whether ' ensure ' , in this context , is consistent with WTO stipulations and , in general , with the EU 's commitment to free trade .
I am also glad to see that there is no longer a reference to the General Product Safety Directive ( GPSD ) .
As I understand it , consumers will continue to be protected against dangerous products via the GPSD , whether or not it is incorporated into this specific legislation .
Introducing it would just increase unnecessary bureaucratic burdens for the production and assessment of products that are not even aimed at the consumer market .
It is also important for European industry that the true meaning and import of the CE marking is understood , and I believe this does take a step forward .
But I am glad the Commissioner has said he is considering what may be further desirable , so long as whatever is proposed is always practicable for EU industry and for exporters to the EU .
In all , I believe the tenor of this report is now acceptable .
Indeed , I expect even my Industry Committee colleagues from the Socialist and Liberal Groups will appreciate that this is a reasonably happy and acceptable outcome .
When implemented , we on the Industry Committee look forward to the effective completion of the single market in goods with high and effective consumer protection standards .
This is a major achievement for the European Union , with almost unimaginable economic benefits for our constituents .
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Legal Affairs . - ( FR ) Madam President , colleagues , as draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Legal Affairs , I should like firstly to applaud the quality of the work done by our colleague Alexander Stubb , with whom - I would add - we enjoyed close cooperation .
I am pleased to see that , in line with our proposals , clear definitions have been included of what constitutes a technical rule and of the exclusions , and I am particularly glad that the tricky problem of language has been resolved .
We are all aware , too , that the primacy of the General Product Safety Directive has been recognised in one of the recitals , and I will touch on that in a moment .
Moreover , in the Brie report , we have an assurance that industrial products can be made as safe as possible .
With regard to reversing the burden of proof , which is the basic principle of the text on mutual recognition , we have also succeeded in placing responsibility on certain economic operators , and not just on administrative authorities .
Lastly , in relation to the deadline for making the regulation applicable , I think that nine months is a sufficiently long time .
Those are the main points that have been taken on board from my opinion .
Considering the three texts as a package , I would say that - thanks to the three rapporteurs and to very thorough discussions in all our committees - they successfully reconcile opening the internal market , in other words removing barriers , with the concern for safety which has become so evident especially since last summer .
With regard to mutual recognition , intelligent solutions have been found in relation to precious metals and to weapons , both of which had been problematic .
With regard to surveillance and product marking , the possibility of revising the General Product Safety Directive in the next five years is , in my view , essential , as are the insistence on rules for national marking and the call for a study of European marking .
I believe that what we have before us , Madam President , is a first-class legislative package .
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Legal Affairs . - ( DE ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I am the draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Legal Affairs on the proposal for a common legal framework for the marketing of products .
We all agree - and the Commissioner also touched on this point - that product safety is a matter of credibility .
Credibility creates confidence , and credibility and confidence will create a better internal market .
With regard to this Regulation , the attention of the Committee on Legal Affairs was focused on three main points .
The first is that the design and manufacture of products must satisfy current requirements .
This is not merely a matter of dealers ' responsibility ; no , it is primarily about the responsibility of producers .
Dealers and consumers must be able to rely on the economic players who put products on the Community market .
Dealers ' obligations should be confined to specific checks .
Our second focal point , and one that was of particular interest to me , was the role of importers , who bear particular responsibility .
Importers have no control over the design of products or the way they are manufactured but are nevertheless bound , since they are placing goods on the Community market , to guarantee that the products comply with all applicable legal provisions .
The third point was a clear definition and demystification of the CE mark , which is not a quality label but only a mark indicating that products comply with all the relevant provisions of Community law .
We thank all those involved in this process for their cooperation and welcome the reports that have been presented for our approval .

on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - Madam President , my colleague , Mr Stubb , did let slip that it was my birthday today , so I want to thank all the rapporteurs and all Members , because , as an unashamed enthusiast for the single market and its future , what could be a better birthday present than the approval of this package today ?
So , we are unwrapping it today , and I thank you for that opportunity - we are unwrapping it from the point of view of consumers and citizens .
My colleagues have paid tribute to everyone involved , and I do not want to take up a lot of time repeating that .
However , I want to thank the President-in-Office , in particular , for being here today .
That is a clear sign of the importance that the Presidency attaches to this .
I also want to thank him for his very strong engagement with the work of this committee in Parliament - it has been very much appreciated .
Similarly , this package has resulted from a huge amount of effort by the Commission .
I also want to pay personal tribute to Michel Ayral , with whom I have worked not just on this but on many other dossiers .
He was also a big enthusiast of the whole better regulation project , which is really part of this as well .
This is very much a scene-setter , in a way , for our debate on the Lisbon Strategy this afternoon , because nothing could be more important to the strategy for jobs and growth than to have a really effectively functioning and competitive internal single market .
We want competitive companies and confident consumers , in order to sustain the level of jobs and economic growth in Europe , and that will be achieved by having a really effective single market .
We want , as far as products are concerned , regulations that are very clear for businesses , whereby their teams who work on products can get on with the job of producing brilliant designs and high-quality and safe products .
Let us not forget that the vast majority of companies have people with that in mind and they are deeply frustrated by the fact that , in many cases , they have to redesign products or reapply for mutual recognition as it stands at the moment - that is a major step forward .
However , consumers are entitled to expect those quality products and expect us to have the testing procedures to ensure that the products on the market have been through those sorts of approval procedures .

I just want to make a comment in line with what my colleague Mr Purvis was saying , particularly in response to Mr Liese , who is not here : there are many , many companies now which are achieving brilliant standards of design and quality , but are working with Chinese or other suppliers .
I just mention to you in the context of my birthday - because one is thinking about nice things - that I recently went to a company that makes well-known brands of model trains : Fleischmann and Rivarossi , which my colleagues from Germany and Italy will know about .
They are wonderful , high-quality model trains .
Products under those brand names are actually designed in England but made in China , and anybody who doubts that China can produce good-quality products should visit their local model train shop at the weekend and , maybe , like me , buy a present for their grandson .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( DE ) Madam President , Commissioner Verheugen , Mr Vizjak , allow me to begin by wishing Malcolm Harbour a happy birthday .
I am delighted that we are able to give him this fine birthday present .
We could actually call this Internal Market Week , and of course it is very important to devote attention to the internal market .
Yesterday we had two good major reports from Mr Newton Dunn and Mrs Fourtou on the Customs Code and customs cooperation , which also play an important role in the context of today 's agenda .
We can also say for sure that we have one or two adjustment knobs here for the market and for consumers which are now being integrated into a coherent control panel .
That is a good thing .
The three reports on the table and the oral question that Arlene McCarthy asked on behalf of the Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection are a piece of work that reflects well on the European Parliament .
For this we should express our thanks to the rapporteurs and all Members of this House .
I would also like to say a special word of thanks to Mia De Vits and Barbara Weiler from my Group , because they have not been mentioned yet , and of course to our own rapporteur , Christel Schaldemose .
To you too , of course , Mr Stubb - there is no way I could forget to mention you - and the same goes for Mr Brie .
I believe that through this package we are making a valuable and essential contribution to the completion of the legislation governing the internal market .
At the same time we are enhancing consumer protection within the market .
The Socialist Group attaches particular importance to the pursuit of that goal .
We are , however , far from finished .
We must continue to keep a vigilant eye on the safety of the products traded in the internal market .
In this respect may I convey my special thanks to Commissioner Verheugen for the very clear and unequivocal approach to the future of the CE mark , in other words to how we can achieve better marking of products in the internal market and in the European Union .
That is a very important aim if the consumers and citizens of the European Union are to regard and respect it in a true sense as their Union .
That is a very important point in this context .
We keenly await the findings of the study and their aftermath , and I am very pleased that you so clearly stated , Mr Verheugen , that this study is very high on the list of priorities of the European Commission .
That is good news , for the confusing CE mark has often served to deceive and misinform consumers , and that is quite wrong . We certainly must put a stop to this .
I am also pleased that , in the reports before us and in the agreement we concluded with the Council , we have managed to ensure the continued existence of national quality marks - subject , of course , to the proviso that these national marks actually enhance consumer protection and are not misused or misinterpreted for protectionist purposes .
The second condition - and we are well on our way to fulfilling it - is that we should eventually have a European safety mark which is at least equal if not superior to these national symbols .
Only then can we talk about abolishing the national marks .
It is also important that we are holding this vote today , and I reiterate my sincere thanks to the Minister , Mr Vizjak .
I know how difficult it was in the Council too , because we certainly exerted heavy pressure on the Council .
It would have liked more time for negotiations with Parliament - I am fully aware of that .
I appreciate that you went all out to ensure that we could still vote this week , and that is a good thing , because it makes the situation clear-cut .
For that I would like to express my very special thanks .


on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( FR ) Madam President , I must , of course , begin by thanking the rapporteurs , Mr Stubb and Mr Brie , and especially Ms Schaldemose for her efficiency - that cheerful efficiency which I think we have all appreciated .
On the committee 's behalf , I would also like to thank Mr McMillan , for making himself so unstintingly available , and the Slovenian Presidency for injecting the impetus required to get this package through at first reading .
The ALDE group is satisfied with the compromise that has been reached because our concerns have been addressed - the main points being importers ' liability and the CE marking system .
We are all concerned to have a sound market , with sound economic operators selling safe products .
So the ALDE Group supports the provisions requiring importers to be more attentive to product marketing , by giving them a share of responsibility for it with all that that entails .
In relation to the CE marking system , we are satisfied with the distinction between the provisions of the regulation and those of the decision .
On a personal note , I am sorry that we have not yet entirely resolved the problem of affixing national marks .
This is a recurring issue .
You will remember that when we voted on adoption of the Machinery Directive in February 2006 , we asked the European Commission for a statement to the effect that it would ' clarify the conditions for the affixing of other markings in relation with the CE marking , whether national , European or private ' .
The Commission has done what it undertook to do , but we - the Members of the European Parliament - and the Member States have , I think , lacked the political will to take a clear-cut position on the issue .
We can only regret our failure to do so , but I do welcome Mr Verheugen 's announcement that the matter is to be the subject of in-depth study , for that is certainly what we need .
The ALDE Group will support this compromise in its current form and we welcome the work that has been done on the text .
on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( PL ) Mr President , the discussion about safety marks has been going on for years .
Since states are duty bound to protect their citizens against life- or health-threatening products , some of them introduced regulations subjecting certain categories of goods to various requirements such as markings and certificates , and the relevant national authorities were made responsible for monitoring and supervision .


In the European Union the CE mark is compulsory for a large group of goods .
It certifies that the product is safe , and it must be affixed equally to an iron costing only EUR 5 and to one that costs EUR 50 .
So there is not much point in adding a plus / minus symbol .
The procedures for affixing the CE mark meet with no great objections .
The problem is the unlawful introduction of changes to products already marked by manufacturers , the unlawful affixing of the CE mark and the addition - without a proper certification procedure - of similar products to certificates already obtained .
What the EU needs , therefore , is better synchronisation of the measures taken by all consumer protection institutions .
Its borders must be sealed to ensure that uncertified products do not reach the market , an efficient monitoring and information system must be established , and a more stringent and uniform system of penalties introduced to ensure that circumvention of the CE system does not pay off .
Given the high cost of certification , small and medium-sized enterprises in the European Union should receive support in obtaining the relevant markings .
The UEN Group supports all measures designed to ensure consumer protection and the efficient operation of the European market .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( DE ) Madam President , may I wish Mr Harbour a happy birthday .
Here 's to our continuing fruitful cooperation !
And of course I want to thank all three rapporteurs .
As you may know , I was the shadow rapporteur for my group on all three reports , which is why I know how untiring your efforts have been to improve key aspects of this proposal from the Commission .
At the same time I would like to thank Commissioner Verheugen , who pointed out once again that the proposal is leaving Parliament in better shape than it arrived .
I think that is a significant comment , for we have all worked hard on this legislation .
We have truly done our best to improve conditions not only for businesses but for consumers too .
This package has three elements .
The main purpose of the Regulation on the mutual recognition of lawfully marketed goods is to remove non-tariff barriers , which could also be termed protectionist barriers .
In committee , however , we maintained a balance , to which Mr Verheugen referred and to which I also attach great importance , although it has sometimes been overlooked in this debate .
On the one hand , non-tariff barriers are to be removed , while , on the other hand , it should remain a matter for the Member States , naturally enough , to determine whether certain conditions apply .
In Germany , for example , we have an issue with Nazi symbols .
So if there are particular problems with certain products that cannot be recognised in individual Member States for ethical reasons , those Member States must retain the right to ban such products .
The balance has been maintained .
I consider this very important because it is the only way in which wide acceptance of the internal market and the principle of a single market can be engendered among consumers as well as among the relevant entrepreneurs .
In this respect we have taken a giant step forward .
I also consider it important to have established contact points but also to have demonstrated that these will not create any additional red tape , given that contact points have already been set up under the Services Directive and in connection with the mutual recognition of vocational qualifications .
The more contact points we establish , the greater could be the burden for individual Member States .
In this respect too , we have acted very responsibly .
Another important thing , in our view , was the need to say - as , of course , we did - that mutual recognition could only work if the conditions governing market access were the same in all Member States .
There were undoubtedly diverse conditions in the Member States .
Some were inclined to privatise or partially privatise market surveillance ; some opted for certification , the certification body being more or less private .
We have made it crystal-clear that market accreditation cannot be anything other than a public responsibility , and we have given greater responsibility to the individual Member States .
I regard that as a very important step .
Market surveillance , of course , is also the key to establishing and maintaining product safety in the European Union .
When we talk about tightening directives and regulations , we should always be well aware that a directive or regulation is only as effective as the instruments that ultimately verify its observance , in this case the market-surveillance mechanisms in the Member States .
In this respect the Member States will now be under a greater obligation to develop , fund and staff their systems of market surveillance .
I believe this is a very important condition .
In the coming years , Parliament must continue to exercise vigilance so as to ensure that tighter market surveillance does actually materialise .
Another important aspect is the toolbox , for which Mrs Schaldemose was responsible .
This framework decision gives us a toolbox for future directives , which will ensure greater legal consistency on key issues , establishing a clear and coherent position on the CE mark in particular but also on the status of importers in the trade chain .
We have increased the responsibility of importers throughout the European Union .
That was another very important step forward .
On the whole , we can be very content with the package on the table today .
It also enjoys broad support from all the political groups .
Let me conclude by expressing my thanks to the Slovenian Presidency of the Council .
Without the strong support of the Slovenian Presidency we should never have managed to conclude this matter within the short time available to us before first reading .
My special thanks go to the Commission and the secretarial staff of the Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection .
Without them we surely could not have kept to the timetable and produced a genuine compromise in time for first reading .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( CS ) Ladies and gentlemen , unlike many other economic disciplines , marketing is a true science and as such it has its own definite laws and rules , which remain the same regardless of those involved in them .
Among these rules is the definite technical specification of the product , the emphasis on finding specific distinctions between similar products and the effort to protect in clearly specified circumstances the geographical indication .
The latter , however , usually does not have anything in common with the technical parameters of the product .
One of the aspects of the single market is the effort to avoid limiting the sale of products in another state 's territory by imposing non-tariff barriers , such as quantitative restrictions , the obligation to repeat certification in each country , non-recognition of patents , specific packaging and labelling requirements of products outside common market customs , etc .
A first step , which could help to eliminate confusion or perhaps even artificial barriers to the free movement of goods , is raising awareness .
I therefore welcome the effort to establish in individual states one or more Product Contact Points .
Their main task will be to provide information on the technical rules in use in other Member States .
The proposal further focuses on the burden of proof .
In this context it deals , too , with a technical procedure , which can result in denying a product access to the market in another Member State , in spite of the fact that it is legally marketed in another country or in the Member State of origin .
The procedure as a whole relies on improving dialogue between the competent authorities of individual Member States .
More effective communication is the main element involved in preventing risks connected to a ban on the sale of a product in the market of destination .
The difficulty with the otherwise commendable initiative is the attempt to cover an entire range of products in the Directive .
It would be naive to assume that a similar or even identical approach can be applied to industrial products , for example cars , and to clothes , shoes and food products .
While fully in favour of a unified approach , I am convinced that for individual products specific approaches will have to be maintained .
I do not foresee any difficulties arising in the harmonised field , but rather in the case of products where the requirements have not been harmonised , in other words outside the harmonised field of products .
The regulation sets a 20-day deadline for economic operators to reply to decisions of the competent national authorities , based on the so-called public interest , which requires a product to be withdrawn from the market or to be banned or in some cases for changes to be made before the product is allowed onto the market .
A positive aspect of the proposal is the emphasis on the possibility of a review of decisions by the national judicial authorities .
In my opinion , the only unclear aspect of the proposal , which I support in its entirety , is the reference to the Treaty .
For example , Article 5.2 of the financial statement is entitled ' Value-added of Community involvement and coherence of the proposal with other financial instruments and possible synergy ' .
If the proposal refers to the Lisbon Treaty , I would consider this to be inappropriate since ratification of the Lisbon Treaty has only begun .
In conclusion , I would like to state that , in my opinion , the regulation will help to tackle the issue of constant duplication of tests and certificates , which arises because one country considers the certificates issued by another authority to be insufficient .
In the past , as a representative of an export company , I experienced these difficulties on the ground and I believe that the proposal in question will help to remedy them .
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - Madam President , I think I can be forgiven for thinking I had stumbled across a Hollywood Oscar nomination ceremony a little bit earlier on : everybody congratulating each other , slapping each other on the back , absolutely marvellous !
Mr Stubb managed to thank just about everybody , but I think he forgot his grandmother .
Yes , Mr Stubb , you missed out your grandmother !
Well , interesting , is it not ?
We harmonise , we homogenise , we regulate , we legislate .
It is as though this institution somehow has a manic desire to prove its worth by sheer activity : good , bad , indifferent .
We must be seen to be busy .
The assumption here is that the European citizen is some sort of backward child , and we are the well-meaning but authoritative parents : we know all and we control all .
Yet we do not , do we ?
The level of commercial experience in this Chamber is pitiful .
Political placemen , journeymen , with no real understanding of the outside world at all , manically producing flawed and dangerous legislation , while we greedily suck at the public teat with our ludicrous posturing .
The emerging countries such as India and China , who take over our manufacturing production even as I speak , must stare in wonder at us .
World competition in trade is not unlike a football match .
They watch us line up on the field , the whistle blows , and we assiduously start to kick the ball into our own goal .
How they must laugh behind our backs .
Not that this Chamber has any legitimacy left as the new Constitution is railroaded through , against the will of the people .
But their day will come , and it will be into the courtyard for all of us to the rattle of rifle bolts , and we will have richly deserved it .
( FR ) Madam President , while wishing Mr Harbour a happy birthday , I have to say that we appear to have travelled back in time here to the 1990s .

Back then we were busily churning out legislation in preparation for the single market , and apparently we are still at it , because today we have before us two further regulations and a decision for ensuring the free movement of goods .
There is no getting away from facts , and the fact is that governments are keen on protection - not to say protectionism .
Technical standards and form filling and safety requirements all make for non-tariff barriers .
In car-producing France , for example , we had years of insistence on yellow headlamps instead of white ones as a means of limiting the number of foreign vehicles on our roads .
Now we have the Commission proposing a common framework for the free marketing of bicycles and ladders - for dads to fall off ; toys that place children in mortal danger ; kettles for scalding their mums ; and various appliances on which grans and grandads can get themselves electrocuted .
We were under the impression - 23 years after the signing of the Single European Act - that it was all done and dusted : that the Cassis de Dijon judgment in 1979 , followed by a couple of hundred more Court of Justice rulings , had ensured mutual recognition of everyone 's products by everyone else .
Well , we were wrong !
The single market is still a multiple market and so , to eliminate all the regulatory and technical niggles that have the effect of subtly re-erecting borders , the Commission suggests we adopt the principle that importers bear the cost : importers are to be responsible for the safety of the products they import , and the burden of proof is to be reversed .
That said , the texts before us are an exercise in stating the obvious : they reassert the concept of mutual recognition ; they bow to the mania for labelling - which is termed marking - with the CE logo , its approved dimensions and sanctions for its improper use ; and low and behold , 15 years after the dismantling of borders and customs controls , our rapporteur André Brie demands more resources for customs officers .
Reinstating customs officers in a free-trade zone is quite something , although apparently Adam Smith , that doyen of free trade , did spend his last days strolling round his hometown in his father 's customs uniform !
So I say , let 's do it : let 's bring back customs officers complete with traditional peaked caps .
We will probably need to import the caps from China but at least we will make sure they are safe . After all , we wouldn 't want to be responsible for any members of the Commission catching sunstroke !
( DE ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I too should also begin by thanking the rapporteurs and the other Members who have worked their way through this complex dossier , but on this occasion I wish to start on a different note .
One person I shall certainly make a point of not thanking is Mr Bloom , who has contributed nothing constructive to the substance of this debate through his intervention .
In that respect he has failed in his own quest to remove burdens from the shoulders of Europe 's citizens .
I hope you will nevertheless allow me to reiterate the birthday wishes I expressed yesterday evening to my friend Malcolm Harbour .
Whether this package will be a good birthday present remains to be seen .
We shall have to wait and see how the Member States implement the decisions we have now taken jointly with the Council .
May I convey my sincere thanks to you , Mr Vizjak , for your efforts in this matter , which we spoke about in Slovenia , and may I also thank Commissioner Verheugen .
Much will revolve around a clause crafted by Mr Stubb , who deserves credit for its smooth passage through Parliament .
I refer to the reversal of the burden of proof in the non-harmonised area of the internal market .
That is a principle which will make life far easier in the internal market , especially for small and medium-sized enterprises , with minimal bureaucracy .
I hope that all Member States have understood what they are letting themselves in for here .
It is no longer the owners of small businesses or manufacturers who will have to ask governments whether products can be imported but rather the Member States which will henceforth have to demonstrate that all the provisions they have enacted are necessary and proportionate .
I can guarantee that some Member States are in for a rude awakening in this respect .
None the less , it is an encouraging signal for the internal market as well as for the small and medium-sized enterprises that operate in the internal market .
I am also most grateful to Mrs McCarthy and Mrs Fourtou for informing us that the CE mark and its significance did not just begin to exercise this Parliament when the framework legislation on the new approach was adopted but that , whenever a directive relating to the CE mark has been discussed in recent years , we have repeatedly asked whether the CE mark - which , as we know , was originally intended purely as a marking for market-surveillance bodies - really tells consumers what they want to know when they buy a product .
It goes without saying that it is very difficult to draw the line between consumer goods and industrial goods .
We are aware , of course , that we need a low-cost solution which is virtually free of red tape .
At the same time , we are grateful , Mr Verheugen , that you intend to have a study conducted , a study which our entire committee unanimously supports .
We hope that this study will come up with sound evidence which might indicate that the CE mark in its present form does not give consumers all the information they need .
( DE ) Madam President , Commissioner , President-in-Office of the Council , ladies and gentlemen , about a year ago , on 14 February , the European Commission proposed this new package of measures for goods with the aim of injecting fresh impetus into trade in the internal market .
The fact that we have managed to bring the package to a conclusion today , in little more than a year , is indicative , I believe , of the very fast and efficient work of the team entrusted with its passage through Parliament .
No part was played by the Members up there in the back - on the far right , if I may put it that way - and their contribution left me with the impression that they do not know to this day what the package is all about .
What struck me during the course of this debate was the huge number of obstacles that still exist in the internal market , given that it was back in 1992 when Jacques Delors introduced the single market .
It is astonishing to see the real difficulties that face small and medium-sized enterprises when they try to enter the market in other EU Member States .
According to the Commission , this package contains measures that will impact on 22 industries with an aggregate annual output in the region of EUR 1 500 billion .
We have managed to ensure that future improvements to the system of market surveillance will be based on uniform criteria , and that is essential .
When a market is open , there must also be surveillance mechanisms in place .
Dangerous goods can be more easily detected and made safe , and more clearly targeted investigation of fraudulent operations and prosecution of fraudsters can be carried out .
As other speakers have said , not only producers but also importers will be held responsible in future . This will not be a dead letter , for there will also be a liability provision with penalties for non-compliance .
This system of market surveillance is also a major gain for players who already abide by the rules , because it considerably improves the means of detecting the bad eggs among manufacturers and importers .
I was astonished to learn that customs authorities and market-surveillance bodies have hitherto known next to nothing of each other 's activities .
This secrecy and the supposed protection of corporate interests will be stopped here and now .
In connection with the CE mark , I am pleased that Parliament has gone its own way .
We did not accede to the hasty calls from consumer organisations seeking the abolition of the CE mark or to the Commission 's call for unwarranted upgrading .
These were not the right paths to choose .
I believe we have now opted for the best way ahead .
In the face of opposition from some quarters , Parliament also secured the preservation of national safety marks - not only the German one but others too - until such time as we find the ideal alternative .
As a Social Democrat I am also proud that one particular principle is enshrined not only in our resolution but also in the Regulation itself .
The formula in question was somewhat contentious until the very last minute , but we succeeded in laying down that accreditation bodies must not compete with each other and must keep their public mission sacrosanct , as it were .
I believe this was the consensus view too .
What was important to all of us was the need for greater transparency .
It is astonishing to note how little cooperation still takes place , and I believe this package will pave the way for better cooperation among public authorities too .
Let me conclude with a word on the package as a whole . It represents a gain for Europe 's businesses as well as its people .
Many things will be easier , many processes will be less bureaucratic - and thus less costly , of course - and yet we are still creating a higher level of safety for consumers .
To borrow an expression from the business world , this can rightly be termed a win-win situation .
( NL ) Madam President , my warmest thanks to the rapporteurs Mr Stubb , Mrs Schaldemose and Mr Brie for the swift and constructive way in which they have completed their tasks .
This is the way law-making ought to be - fast and solid .
My thanks too to the Commission and the Council Presidency .
Europe was founded for just this kind of legislation and it is good to be giving an enormous boost to the economy , specifically to SMEs .
We get a lot of complaints from small businesses that their export and business operations are hampered by the fact that borders remain closed despite all the talk about the single market .
This will mean a more solid basis for the European Union .
Small businesses are after all the mainstay of our economy and this is also the sector that provides the jobs we so sorely need in the European Union .
For Member States too this will create a sounder basis because it will save us a great deal in administrative costs , 150 billion a year .
The budget for this year is 120 billion .
So let us not have any Member State saying that the European Union costs too much , because they actually have money left over .
We don 't have hordes of media folk standing outside to report this joyful news , but I think it bears mentioning .
As liberals we are of course very glad to see the single market strengthened .
A more dynamic economy means a more prosperous Europe , and that is good for businesses and for consumers , so good for the European Union too .
I shall not use all my allotted time because many other speakers have already praised the substance of this package .
So I shall not go into the technicalities .
It is a fine piece of work .
I hope we can approve it by a unanimous vote and that it will come into effect very soon .
Now that we also have a reversal of the burden of proof , the measures which the European Commission takes when Member States abuse the procedures for protecting our markets are pretty good .
Action is taken fast and properly in such cases .
So I think this will work well .
( PL ) Madam President , the European Union is a manifold collection of values , experience and historical - as well as social - diversity .
We often differ not only in our past experience but also in our present laws and obligations , which are carried over to European institutions , workplaces and citizens .
We live in a period of profound social , economic and cultural change that unfortunately has certain negative effects .
But it has also given rise to many good and positive developments , among which the liberalisation of capital , goods and services , and the free movement of persons , must certainly be counted .
While these developments create suitable conditions for economic activity , we can also see that capital often takes precedence over people , endangering their health and even their lives .
We must therefore strengthen all possible control procedures . The CE system must be reinforced both on our borders , as some Members have said , but also in our internal markets , and especially in the commercial networks .
The range of goods now produced by supermarket and hypermarket chains defies imagination , and that important fact must be taken into account .
We must bear in mind not only the marking system but also the other available means to us of boosting consumers ' knowledge and ability to choose between goods .
Madam President , these reports seek to improve regulation of the market in products , especially by tightening up recognition of the CE label and banning misuse of the label .
All this is good , but in my contribution to this debate I am going to divert a little to an aspect that is overlooked by these reports but which I feel is highly relevant to the discussion on products .
The aim of the various proposed measures is to encourage people to buy products and , when they buy , to purchase European ones .
How can we square this encouragement of increased consumerism with the need to use resources wisely ?
That is , to understand that these must be shared , not just globally but with future generations ?
Some Member States are primarily concerned with building their economies , but for others the issue of responsible environmental stewardship ranks with trade .
Those countries are seeking ways to square the circle of competitive trade and maintain a good , sustainable standard of life and product usage .
Energy efficiency , use of recyclables and low-toxicity materials are all a step in the right direction , but an important addition is the elimination of planned obsolescence .
Planned obsolescence is the deliberate creating of products that will not last and that are not repairable .
When I bought my first microwave I deliberately bought a good one that would last .
It lasted two years .
When I brought it back I was told it was not worth repairing and that there was no one to repair it .
So I bought another good one .
It lasted two years .
Now I buy a new microwave every year - the cheapest I can find - and it is then thrown away .
We have to be careful with our harmonisation that we leave responsible countries the option to ban products that have built-in planned obsolescence , and that we encourage countries only to allow in products that will last and are repairable , because it is those countries which are stuck with mountains of waste at the end of the cycle .
( SK ) Ladies and gentlemen , I have been enjoying today 's very good atmosphere during the debate on the internal market and I would like to thank all those who have contributed to it .
Of course democracy demands that we listen to contradictory views as well , such as those expressed by my fellow Member Mr Bloom .
I have a son Andrej , which is why I know that the name Andrej means someone who is strong and powerful .
The bearer of this name , Minister Vizjak , lends this debate a very powerful dynamic .
I would like to note that it is not usual for the Council to be represented in such debates .
The basic precondition for a properly functioning European internal goods market is the removal of obstacles to economic operators and the creation of favourable conditions for companies , in particular for the 23 million small and medium-sized enterprises .
As to the number of products from developing countries , we have to find solutions to the challenges of globalisation .
One such solution is the presence of clear legislative rules to ensure that all products imported to the European market comply with the same safety requirements as the products that are manufactured within the Community .
The basic principles of the legislative package on the marketing of products are the manufacturers ' responsibility for ensuring that their products comply with the existing European laws on the one hand , and the responsibility of Member States , which must ensure surveillance of the European Union market , on the other hand .
I must admit that the subject of European standardisation became close to my heart when I was the European Parliament 's rapporteur for the financing of European standardisation , and I still feel the same way about it now here in the European Parliament .
I do realise the great importance of this significant European Union policy and I welcome Commissioner Verheugen 's involvement .
As rapporteur for PPE-DE Group , I also focused on amendments to the report by Mrs Christel Schaldemose on increasing importers ' responsibilities , decreasing the administrative burden on small and medium-sized enterprises and retaining the new approach as a basic framework for the marketing of products .
I also pointed out the need for more effective information campaigns in order to increase consumer awareness : this is the cornerstone of increasing consumer confidence in the EU 's internal market .
In my amendments I concentrated , in particular , on the consumer and on the importance of ensuring that consumers are protected from products posing a danger to their health .
I also highlighted the need for more effective information campaigns in order to increase consumer awareness : this is the cornerstone of increasing consumer confidence in the EU 's internal market .
On the practical front we can see that at present the CE marking does not offer sufficient guarantees that a product really is safe .
That is why we have tried , by means of this legislative package , to make the CE marking more meaningful , to introduce sanctions for its abuse , to tighten up rules on award of the marking and to make the system of market controls significantly more powerful .
The compromise that was agreed includes the transfer of some of the articles relating to the CE marking into the regulation .
This is a very positive step .
In conclusion , may I thank Mrs Christel Schaldemose and the other rapporteurs for constructive cooperation that has helped us to unify the terminology , processes and models of assessing compliance so that we can use them in the revision of sectoral directives , in particular the long-awaited Toys Directive , to the satisfaction of all European consumers .

( NL ) Madam President , Commissioner , Mr Vizjak , ladies and gentlemen , my thanks to everyone for their input on this but especially to the rapporteur , Alexander Stubb , who was very helpful in including us , the shadow rapporteurs for his report , in all aspects of the discussions .
Thank you for that .
Approval of the goods package marks a serious advance towards achieving the single European market in goods and the three proposals together are necessary instruments if we are to have a single market in goods that works properly .
We have the principle of mutual recognition , but it exists chiefly on paper .
All too often the principle is ignored .
The single market today is not working as Jacques Delors had envisaged it a quarter of a century ago .
The European Commission calculates that it costs companies 2 to 10 % more to sell their goods in another Member State , because the principle of mutual recognition is incorrectly applied .
Indeed , as you too have worked out , Mr Stubb , this means an extra cost to the Union as a whole of EUR 150 billion a year .
That is bad news , for businesses and their employees , but also for consumers who have to pay higher prices as a result .
So it was high time to dust off the principle of mutual recognition and apply it properly .
Hence this rigorously designed procedure with a reversal of the burden of proof , which requires the Commission to be informed of the Member State 's decision at the end of the procedure .
I hope the Commission will also take action at the end of the procedure if it transpires that there are still a few little rules that are not based on objective criteria .
One or two things for the future : strict quality criteria for national supervisory authorities is a step forward but ultimately we need to improve cross-border cooperation when it comes to supervision .
Our Committee on the Internal Market went on a tour of the port of Antwerp , where we saw the customs services demanding more funding - a matter for Member States - but also calling for more cross-border cooperation , which is something we need to work on for the future .
Secondly , we have greater clarity surrounding the CE mark but I agree with Mrs McCarthy and Mrs Gebhardt that we need to work on a real safety label in the future .
I welcome the positive reply given by Commissioner Verheugen on this .
Mutual recognition has to work better , and all parties on the ground have to accept their responsibilities here , Member States and the Commission too .
But it remains the second-best solution .
We want to see harmonising legislative initiatives in future to complete the single market in goods .

( FR ) Madam President , with all due respect to Mr Bloom , who has since fled the Chamber , I should like to add my voice to the chorus of praise for our three co-rapporteurs , to thank them for the time they put in and for their perseverance in achieving what is a fair compromise and a win-win solution for European manufacturing and for consumer safety .
Given that I have only two minutes and that I am speaking as a member of the Environment Committee , you will forgive me for focusing on key points , and particularly on the question of the CE marking system .
Seven months after the Mattel incident and the withdrawal from the market - as we have already heard - of more than 20 million Chinese-made toys that were CE marked , the Union has been under more pressure than ever to improve the marking system .
In recent years it had advocated a flexible , voluntary system based on the New Approach - a method which undoubtedly has its advantages but which , used in isolation , may be less than fully effective if certain manufacturers affix the CE mark in disregard of the rules , thus placing consumers at an obvious risk in terms of safety .
That is why this package of measures is essential for giving the authorities that deal with the problem - namely approval and certification bodies and customs services - the weaponry they need to combat abuses of the CE marking system .
It is no coincidence that the European Parliament has already spoken out on more than one occasion - most recently in the resolution on toy safety of September 2007 - in favour of tougher market surveillance .
Our rapporteur , Mr Brie , placed considerable emphasis on that point .
As long ago as January 2004 , with the support of Peter Liese , Karin Scheele and also Claude Turmes , my report on the Eco-design of Energy-using Products Directive deplored the obvious safety failings of very many products and the unreliability of certain labelling systems both compulsory and voluntary .
Four years on , it would seem we have made little progress , and I must say - speaking on behalf of the very many professionals who have approached us on the subject - that is a matter of regret .
All measures that make for greater legal certainty and give additional assistance to industrialists and SMEs are , of course , welcome .
I am thinking here of the local product contact system announced in the report , as well as Alexander Stubb 's announcement this morning of his own personal info point .
I don 't know whether or not he 's planning to call it Stubb / SMEs.com , but I wish him every success with it and I must say that I share my colleagues ' caution , as expressed in the oral question , on the subject of additional marking and its compatibility with the existing system .
I fully support the concern voiced by Arlene McCarthy , with her instructive example of the kettle this morning , and I am grateful to the Commissioner for indicating significant movement on that question .
In conclusion , Madam President , I would point out that the rules we are laying down here will be worthwhile only if they are observed , as they obviously should be , by European manufacturers and distributors and also - crucially , as Mia De Vits has just noted - by economic operators from third countries , especially importers .
( PL ) Madam President , in the last few years there have been more and more cases in which goods that do not meet EU standards have been introduced into the EU market .
It is not just a question of Chinese toys .
Pesticides , plant care products and even medicines are being pirated that not only fail to protect or cure but in many cases are actually harmful .
The three reports before us - by Mr Brie , Mrs Schaldemose and Mr Stubb - deal with the introduction of goods into the EU market , the application of technical rules to products lawfully marketed , and arrangements for accreditation and market surveillance .
They do not infringe the basic principle of the free movement of goods in the EU market , but make it possible to protect that market and at the same time protect our citizens .
As the rapporteurs say , we must ensure that exceptions are eliminated and the proposed regulations and decisions are applied and operate as widely as possible .
If possible , it would be desirable to produce a single document on the model of other regulations of this type , dealing with the problems in a comprehensive fashion .
We would thus avoid numerous repetitions of arguments and terminology that could give rise to conflicting interpretations .
The drafts and reports submitted to us are an excellent basis for a comprehensive homogeneous document .
( PL ) Madam President , I congratulate all three rapporteurs on their excellent , constructive reports .
The introduction of goods into circulation on the territory of the Union is without doubt a very serious issue .
We all remember the recent problems caused by the introduction of unsafe toys into the EU market .
Those toys were not discovered by the EU control authorities since , as in many other cases , the monitoring system proved ineffective .
It happens more and more frequently that manufacturers affix the CE mark to their products without any control , despite the fact that the goods in question do not meet EU criteria .
Moreover , the CE mark is repeatedly counterfeited .
These and other reasons lie behind the Commission 's proposed package on the introduction of goods into the EU market .
I would like to make a point concerning one of the three components of this package : Mr Brie 's report on accreditation and market surveillance .
The issue of the CE mark dealt with in this report seems to me of particularly importance .
I am pleased that Members have taken a position in support of the CE mark as a major guarantee of compliance with EU standards and - most important of all - that they are in favour of strengthening its position .
An important issue discussed in this connection has been the problem of other national marks existing in the EU market .
I would like to point out here that , in joining the EU , Poland was told repeatedly that it was not to incorporate the safety marks of other countries into its national system .
We complied with this instruction , even going so far as to eliminate our own B mark , which was the Polish symbol of product safety .
So it was important for us that the EU approach be followed and the principle of non-discrimination be respected in the new legislation through the inclusion of a prohibition on the introduction of new safety marks other than CE .
I am very pleased to see that the Council , the Commission and Parliament have stuck to this position by deleting the relevant clauses and maintaining the status quo .
I nevertheless consider that we should work together on the European CE mark with a view to removing other marks from the market in the longer term , although an initiative to that end will have to wait until the Commission has looked into the matter .
( SV ) Thank you , Madam President .
I also want to thank the rapporteurs very warmly for their very good work .
It was tremendously exciting to follow them in their progress .
Although I am in favour of cooperation that is more intergovernmental in nature , I realise that there are cases in which we need our laws to be as uniform as possible in the Union .
The legislative package on the marketing of products on the internal market is such a case , since what we produce in , and import into , the EU circulates freely on the internal market .
For me the safety of consumers on the market is paramount .
I therefore welcome the rapporteurs ' proposals in the legislative package , which in many instances improve on the Commission 's proposals .
For example , Mrs Schaldemose wants the importers to bear responsibility for ensuring that the products they import comply with EU rules .
I think this is particularly important , now that we are also to review the Toy Safety Directive in the light of the problems on the toy market which have been in the spotlight recently .
I think it is self-evident that importers should be accountable and risk penalties if they import dangerous products .
Who else ?
We must also amend and strengthen the CE marking system .
Although it is precisely that question which has been most sensitive , I think that the rapporteurs have made good progress .
As Mrs Schaldemose said , the CE marking system is not the solution to all our safety problems on the internal market .
But many consumers currently believe that the CE mark means that products are safe , not least where it concerns toys and gadgets .
We saw Mrs McCarthy demonstrate that with a kettle and a toy .
It is our responsibility to ensure that the marking system is strengthened and that market surveillance really works in all the Member States .
Finally , I would stress once again that our consumers must take pride of place , for without secure and confident consumers we shall not have a flourishing market .
( RO ) Allow me to make a few observations regarding the CE marking .
At present , this applies to any product that is covered by a European directive .
As long as manufacturers can mark most of the products without any inspection from a third authority or an independent body , this marking will not be efficient .
This is the first problem .
Therefore , we all agree that the current CE marking system for products is not able to represent a guarantee of safety for the European consumers .
In fact , it has not even been designed with the intention of representing a safety marking .

Dear Commissioner Verheugen , last year you said that we would never have 100 % product safety .
This is why I request the European Commission to take into consideration , besides more careful market supervision and more severe customs controls , harsher penalties for the companies manufacturing or importing products that do not comply with the EU norms and directives .
Let 's not forget that most of the European consumers believe , without being informed , that a product bearing the CE marking is manufactured in Europe or was certified by a European independent body .
This is the second problem .
Even Commissioner Verheugen believes that the current CE marking may be a little confusing .
This is inadmissible and , for this reason , I request the European Commission to launch campaigns informing the European consumers so that they would not mistake the CE marking for a quality and safety mark .
Mr. Commissioner , dear colleagues , we all agree that there should be a marking to attest the product safety .
Either the current CE marking will be improved or there will be an additional marking ; the solution must be found as soon as possible .
The internal market involves , besides the free movement of products , taking efficient actions for consumer protection .
( CS ) Commissioner , the dynamic development of the EU internal market and the even more dynamic import of harmful goods , especially from China , force us to modernise the rules on the marketing of products , including those that have not been harmonised .
This triple legislation package will simplify paper work whilst making it easier for Member States to improve surveillance on the EU market , which does not work at just one level today .
That is why , after an extensive debate , we are tightening the requirements on the whole supply chain starting with the producers in the EU or China to importers and distributors in the EU .
We are harmonising the rules for the accreditation of bodies and mutual recognition of certification .
Besides surveillance bodies , the role of consumer awareness is becoming more important : informed consumers should also be able to distinguish between products by how they are labelled , hence our efforts to strengthen the significant of the European CE marking , which indicates to surveillance authorities and informed consumers that the products fulfil the European quality and safety criteria .
We need to combat its exploitation , too , including such deliberate confusion with other markings such as China Export .
I discovered that the European marking has not as yet been registered , so I asked the Commission to register it .
Although the Commission advised that the registration process had been initiated , in the published notice the application for registration was not mentioned .
I would once again call on the Commission to take action in relation to this issue .
Commissioner , I would also strongly urge you to register the European marking for international markets .
Both these measures will facilitate further legal steps against abuse , including those leading to compensation .
I consider delays in this regard to be inexcusable .
I want to express my appreciation for the excellent work of the Commission on the preparation of this ' goods package ' , and in particular for the thorough work of all the rapporteurs , whom I wish to commend for the excellent result .

( ES ) Madam President , some thirty years ago the Court of Justice established the principle of mutual recognition in its judgment in Cassis de Dijon .
One of today 's rapporteurs , Mr Stubb , says that this package of measures is an attempt to apply the Cassis de Dijon judgment on a legislative level .
The judgment , however , cannot be replaced by a legislative text because in fact the judgment is an instrument used by the Court of Justice to impose harmonisation of the internal market .
The current package is a substitute for a greater need which has been demonstrated in this debate , namely the need for genuine harmonisation of production within the European Union .
The current system of mutual recognition means we are open to chains breaking at their weakest link .
This was what happened with , for example , mad cow disease when the British Government decided to deregulate the procedure for the manufacture of meat-and-bone meal .
It has also happened recently in another field , with Equitable Life , when the financial sector was inadequately regulated .
The package indicates a forward step , but only a small one , because it is only natural for Governments not to relinquish protecting their citizens - Mrs Hedh summed it up exactly - for as long as firstly , there are Governments which fail to establish the highest level of control , and secondly , there is no control system operated by the European Union .
In short , this is a poor substitute for genuine regulation at European Union level to replace the 27 national sets of rules .
The European Parliament will probably approve this package and I believe it to be a good one , but we cannot rest on our laurels because without genuine Community regulation , without genuine certification of quality which puts the minds of citizens throughout the European Union at rest , we will not make great progress in constructing the market for European products .
( Applause )
( DE ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the fact that we are able to adopt the goods package at first reading speaks volumes for the excellent cooperation that has taken place within the European Parliament as well as between Parliament and the Council .
This is an important legislative project , both for those involved in trade and , more especially , for consumers .
Through this package we are removing obstacles to trade that have resulted from differing technical rules in the Member States .
At the same time we are guaranteeing the quality of the products that are traded on the European market .
The new legislation will ensure that products which do not comply with EU law or which are unsafe are quickly removed from the market or do not reach the market in the first place .
Dangerous products are to be reported to the Commission without delay so that they can be taken out of circulation in all member countries .
Cooperation with countries outside the EU - one need only think of China - will be improved under the Regulation by measures such as joint programmes and exchanges of technical expertise .
Through these new provisions , we are ensuring efficient market surveillance and better scrutiny throughout Europe .
That , after all , is what really counts .
In all our discussions and negotiations we focused primarily on the consumer .
The CE mark , for example , signifies the manufacturer 's compliance with European requirements for the product in question .
Now , however , importers are to bear a greater share of responsibility alongside manufacturers .
In particular , false or misleading CE marks are prohibited , and those who use them will face criminal prosecution in the Member States .
All of this protects consumers , but it also safeguards honest entrepreneurs who observe all the rules .
One of our main successes has been the preservation of the tried and tested national safety marks such as the German ' GS ' symbol .
Consumers are familiar with these marks and trust them .
On Thursday we shall adopt a set of rules that promotes trade in goods in the internal market to best effect while at the same time - and this is so important - protecting consumers by means of better surveillance .
( FR ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , European consumers expect the products they buy to enjoy better safety protection .
All too often we hear on the TV news that such-and-such a product from a country outside the European Union poses a risk to safety or health .
This package of measures is an impressive response to such problems , and I should like to highlight the work done by our three rapporteurs during the negotiations , in insisting on the importance of consumer protection .
In the current product-safety climate , new legal instruments are an absolute necessity .
I would draw your attention , in particular , to the oral question that is to be asked concerning revision of the rules on use of the CE marking .
The marking has , until now , been seen by European citizens as a sign of confidence and an assurance of safety , whereas it is actually no more than a declaration by the manufacturer that the product complies with European legislation .
This means it has too often been affixed willy-nilly and used improperly .
We have only to think back to the Mattel toys affair .
I am very keen to see a proposal from the Commission for an additional mark that would give the system greater credibility and improve consumer information , with a view to making imported products safer .
I have no doubt , however , that Commissioner Kuneva is committed to addressing this matter .
She has always indicated her support for improving consumer confidence .
What we need - and what Mrs Schaldemose 's report proposes - is tighter market surveillance to prevent abuses of the marking system and to clarify the responsibilities of importers and manufacturers , because ultimately they alone bear the responsibility for putting on the market products that are safe , and we are well aware that cooperation between national market surveillance authorities and customs services is very uneven .
The overriding priority is to make importers directly liable for the safety of the products they import .
Currently it is very hard to take sanctions against them because in some cases , by the time that problems come to light in Europe , manufacturers have closed their factories and disappeared .
It is a situation we can no longer accept .
I would like to conclude by thanking Mrs Schaldemose for taking account of the circumstances of small and medium-sized companies in relation to conformity assessment procedures .
The challenge is to strike the right balance between procedures that could be burdensome and over-costly for micro-enterprises , including the craft sector , without absolving them from their responsibilities .
( DE ) Madam President , Commissioner , Mr President-in-Office , I should like to express my thanks for this report and remind the House that the CE mark of the European Union means that a product complies with European standards of quality and reliability .
There must be no doubt whatever that in future imported products will have to match exactly the same standards that we apply to goods produced in the European Union .
Only then shall we have a level playing field .
It must also be possible , however , to continue marking products visibly with the Member States ' recognised symbols , because we are aware that these inspire great confidence among hosts of consumers .
In conclusion , let me say that great importance also attaches to additional markings for regional specialities and for organic food products , since we know that these too are widely recognised and trusted both within and beyond the European market , and such goodwill must be nurtured .
( PL ) Madam President , I welcome the package submitted to us today as a step forward , both for consumers and for European entrepreneurs .
I would like to say a few words about the principle of mutual recognition .
I don 't know whether you are aware , ladies and gentlemen , that it is already 30 years since the European Court of Justice handed down its judgment on that principle .
Regrettably , the situation regarding Member States ' implementation of the principle of mutual recognition , which is so fundamental to operation of the common market , is far from satisfactory .
It has become common practice for firms to be subjected to burdensome administrative procedures before they can put goods on the market .
As an entrepreneur myself , I have experienced this red tape at first hand for many years .
I do not know whether you realise that the costs borne by firms in the European Union as a result of non-compliance with the principle of mutual recognition are enormous , and the Union itself incurs losses of some 150 billion euros .
So if we are still intent on making the European economy strong and competitive in the framework of the Lisbon Strategy and , in the not-too-distant future , vis-à-vis India , China , Brazil and other powers , we must accept this principle as common to us all and give it proper recognition .
President-in-Office . - ( SL ) Ladies and gentlemen , let me share with you a few final thoughts regarding the importance of this agreement on the three items of legislation which we have nearly finalised and which will significantly help to improve the operation of the internal market .
Mr Ayral would certainly have been happy today .
He is greatly missed .
Following the extensive work carried out by our German and Portuguese colleagues on behalf of the Council before Slovenia took over the Presidency , the task of final harmonisation between the European Union institutions was left to the Slovenian Presidency .
I welcome the substantial cooperation we have received from everyone in completing this - some would say - difficult task relatively efficiently and quickly .
We joined the European Union less then four years ago and , in taking over the Presidency , we took on an immense challenge that carries a huge responsibility .
That is why we are particularly pleased to have been involved in completing this great task which is so important for all the Member States of the European Union .
In my view , the application of the package will enable us primarily to ensure the following . First , we will do away with the protectionism that exists in some markets within the European Union , and this will certainly boost the competitiveness of the economy within those markets .
I think protectionism is the greatest obstacle to the development of competition and competitiveness among economic operators in those markets .
Secondly , we will secure uniform treatment and mutual assistance between national authorities for the surveillance of marketed products , effective safety checks on products manufactured by European companies and those entering the EU from third countries , and , of course , more coherent future technical legislation .
The final result will be a friendlier environment for economic operators , especially small and medium-sized enterprises .
Furthermore , and of greatest importance to our citizens , it will ensure high safety levels for products in the European Union market .
I am therefore convinced that this package will be an important first step in our future efforts .
Today we have talked at length about those future steps forward , which are also important challenges for the work we are to do .
Vice-President of the Commission . - ( DE ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , allow me to begin by adding a few comments on the direct economic implications .
It is indeed the case that the rules on mutual recognition apply to 21 % of all European industrial production , which is truly a sizeable volume .
Moreover , if this system of mutual recognition worked perfectly , in other words if it were fully applied everywhere , the result would be a 1.8 % increase in Europe 's GDP , which certainly represents a significant macroeconomic impact .
The opposite is also true , in that the potential value of the internal market would fall by about 10 % in our estimation if mutual recognition did not work , that is to say if recognition were not practised ; that would , in fact , amount to an annual shortfall of some EUR 150 billion .

Mrs Roithová asked a question about the registration of the CE mark .
In fact , we could not do that until last year , because it required an amendment to the relevant European legislation .
The process is under way , and I assume that today 's decisions will help us to expedite it .
It is not entirely in our hands , but we are doing what we can to complete this registration as quickly as possible .
Mr Csibi mentioned - with a critical undertone - that I had said last year that 100 % product safety was not possible .
Let me therefore re-emphasise that there is no such thing as absolute guaranteed product safety .
Even if we had all products certified by an independent third party , such a body could not possibly check every single item in a production run .
The testing is always confined to a prototype , and problems do not occur when the prototype is presented but in the normal routine of mass production .
Even in the case of products for which we have the most stringent of safety rules , such as prescription medicines and motor vehicles , we hear recurring reports of manufacturing defects and of product recalls .
The idea that we can offer consumers the prospect of 100 % product safety is an illusion .
For this reason , we must insist - it is our only option - that all those who bear responsibility in the chain are held fully accountable .
That begins with suppliers of production inputs , then it relates to manufacturers and , in the case of imported goods , importers too .
That is also the answer to the question from Mr Purvis : what we are doing through these new rules is to spell out that importers in Europe are responsible for ensuring that the products they import are safe and that they meet any applicable standards .
In other words , European importers assume liability for the safety of products from outside the EU , and anyone who suffers loss or injury caused by a dangerous or faulty product has no need to track down some manufacturer or other in some country far beyond the bounds of the European Union but can press his or her claim against the European importer .
I can assure you that this rule will have profound practical effects .
So much for the specific questions that were asked .
Let me take this opportunity to thank you once again for the positive and constructive spirit in which this debate has been conducted .
If Malcolm Harbour is still here , let me tell him that , as far as I am concerned , every day could be his birthday if all his birthdays are crowned with such signal successes .
( Applause )
rapporteur . - ( DE ) Madam President , there has been so much consensus that I can only express my thanks for the discussion , and there is nothing I wish to repeat .
The one or two dissenting contributions were devoid of substance , and for that reason I shall disregard them .
Allow me nevertheless to put today 's evident harmony into perspective .
I believe that what we are about to adopt are good legislative instruments .
In recent years , however , it is not so much our legislation that has posed problems as its application in the Member States .
Of course it is not always like the Mattel case that was mentioned earlier , in which millions of toys had to be taken off the market , but such delays , whenever and wherever they occur in the European Union , indicate that market surveillance is simply not working .
Take the RAPEX system , which highlights wide divergences between European countries ' systems of market surveillance . Such divergences are no longer acceptable either .
I therefore appeal to the Member States to ensure that the instruments we are adopting here , as well as the market-surveillance mechanisms that already exist for the safety of consumers , are really put into practice .
Allow me to make one final personal remark . We have thanked very many people today .
During the drafting of my report , I had the marvellous experience of working with fantastic colleagues from the secretariat of our Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection .
Without them we could not have produced this report .
Allow me , therefore , to express my special thanks to Peter Traung and Luca Visaggio .
rapporteur . - ( DA ) Madam President , I would also like to say thank you for the many positive and good comments that have been made during today 's proceedings .
It simply goes to show that we have actually done an excellent job over the past year and have ensured that as many viewpoints as possible have been incorporated , which gives me great pleasure .
However , I have a couple of comments to make in response to some of the points that have been raised during today 's proceedings .
These concern the CE marking .
It is absolutely true that it is confusing for consumers and we need this study on a possible consumer safety marking .
However , I would also strongly emphasise that with this package the CE scheme will be greatly improved through increased market surveillance and the obligation for Member States to prosecute in the event of misuse of the CE marking .
The CE marking and the CE scheme will be significantly improved compared with what we have today .
The situation will be better in relation to the market surveillance authorities that use the marking as a tool .
When a producer consciously uses the CE marking , he is saying that he abides by EU rules .
If he does not do this , then he may be punished .
He cannot allege that he was unaware of what he was doing .
It is a marked improvement .
The matter that we are failing to address is the relationship with consumers , to which the Commissioner has responded very positively by stating that an enormous amount of work will be carried out in this connection .
There has been some discussion regarding whether it was right or wrong to prepare a first-reading agreement .
I feel that today 's debate has simply illustrated that many people have been involved , because it has concerned three reports with many shadow rapporteurs etc .
A very large number of MEPs have been involved in the work and have therefore also had the opportunity to express themselves .
I also feel that we can be quite satisfied with the result .
Finally , I would quickly like to mention the names of the shadow rapporteurs and acknowledge that I also greatly appreciate their work : Mrs Rühle , Mr Brie , Mrs Fourtou and Mrs Pleštinská have made a very significant contribution , as of course have to the secretariats of both groups and the committee secretariat .
Many thanks .
It has been a great pleasure to be involved in this work .

rapporteur . - Madam President , I should like to finish this debate with four points and , unfortunately , I have to start with Mr Bloom , from the UK Independence Party , who criticised , amongst others , myself for being thankful to people who worked on this whole package .
I do not know what he was taught at home , but I always thought it would be good manners to thank those people who had made this package possible .
Perhaps he should not thank his speech-writer - because , of course , he was reading directly from a piece of paper - because obviously the speech-writer did not understand what this package was all about .
My part of the package was about mutual recognition , with free movement of goods and with not harmonising everything .
So perhaps what Mr Bloom , or his speech-writer , is suggesting is that Marmite or Branston Pickle should not move freely , or Rolls Royce , or Church 's shoes , or Burberry clothing - I do not know how much good that would do for the UK economy .
Therefore , I would recommend that , if you want to be a credible EU opponent , at least read the papers on which you are going to make comments .
My second point is that this is probably a European record in terms of efficiency , because I do not know of a major legislative package which was introduced on Valentine 's Day - 14 February - 2007 by the Commission and approved by Coreper on 13 February 2008 - one day under a year .
So , to all those people who were afraid that after enlargement we would become a little stiff and inefficient , I would say that this is a good example of a case where we have taken very fast decisions .
I would also argue that this is probably the biggest package relating to the free movement of goods since the 1992 Delors package , if you remember .
Therefore , in that sense , this was remarkably fast and , once again , I want to thank all the people who were involved in this , because it shows that the machinery works .
My third point relates to when Ms Ries said that companies hereafter will contact alexstubb.com to send their complaints if mutual recognition does not apply ! If you will allow me , I will put a direct link to the Commission home page from there .
Just get in touch with the Commission if you have problems with mutual recognition .
That should and must be done .
My final point is that this is the first big achievement of the Slovenian Presidency ; this is the first big legislative package that the Slovenian Presidency has pushed through , and I would like to congratulate it on a job well done .
I know it was not easy in Coreper and I know it was not easy in the working groups , but the Presidency did an excellent job and , hopefully , it will be as successful in the final months of its Presidency .
On that very harmonious note , the debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Thursday .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
in writing . - ( IT ) At this plenary session we have discussed the ' goods package ' which sets out a common framework for the marketing of products within the European Union and reaffirms the principles of reciprocity .
As matters stand at present , the European Parliament would like to make the CE ( European conformity ) marking more effective because it provides guarantees of the safety of products and makes it possible to identify goods from non-EU countries .
For some years , however , there has been another mark which is graphically almost identical to the CE marking , apart from the spacing between the two letters , which means something quite different : ' China Export ' .
Citizens are calling for initiatives and sanctions , and for customs controls to be stepped up , to prevent the European CE marking from being improperly exploited .
Counterfeit imported products which seem , at first glance , to meet the requirements for their introduction into the market are being marketed throughout the Italian regions .
This is also due to the confusion brought about by the similarity between the two marks .
This regulation means that goods may move more freely in the EU , thereby increasing choice and consumer trust and simplifying the sale of goods .
( The sitting was suspended at 11.30 and resumed at 12.00 )

Mr President , I would like to make an unreserved apology to the President of the European Parliament , to colleagues and to the House for any offence given by the remarks I made on 31 January when opposing the new powers granted to the President over the Rules of Procedure .
I realise that the reference I made offended many in this House .
I hope you will accept this apology in the spirit in which it is made .
( Applause )
Thank you very much , Mr Hannan .
Your apologies are accepted and noted .
1 . (
2 . (
3 . (
- Before the vote :
rapporteur . - ( SV ) Thank you , Mr President .
With reference to the letter which the European trade union organisation sent to all its members last week , I should like to say that I can understand the views of the trade union movement regarding the question whether any consultation took place between the social partners and the Commission .
However , it is beyond our capabilities to do anything about that .
The content of this Directive will not change in any way .
What will happen is that its implementation will be postponed for four years .
The reason is that it may not be possible to use some incredibly important medical equipment if implementation takes place in April .
Studies are currently in progress to determine how this equipment can be made compatible with the Directive .
We therefore gave our backing to the postponement of the Directive with the full agreement of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs .
Vice-President of the Commission . - Mr President , on behalf of the Commission , I would like to give the following explanation .
In proposing postponement of entry into force of this directive , the Commission was reacting responsibly to new scientific evidence - I repeat , new scientific evidence - namely a study commissioned by the Government of the United Kingdom and published in June 2007 .
This new scientific evidence showed that the potential entry into force of the directive in its present form in April 2008 would have a major unintended detrimental effect on the practice of magnetic resonance imaging ( MRI ) , the best performing and safest imaging technology in contemporary medicine .
I would like to add , because I am responsible for that sector , that , without this technology , thousands of patients in the European Union would not get the best possible treatment .
I would also like to add that our producers are world leaders in this sector .
Mr Andersson mentioned the question of consultation .
I would like to say that the workers ' representatives have been fully informed and were involved in the discussions that took place with the social partners before the adoption of the Commission proposal .
The difficulties which may arise from the implementation of the current directive and the future intentions of the Commission were highlighted and discussed at the level of the Advisory Committee on Safety and Health at Work created by the Council .
This advisory committee includes three full members for each Member State , the national governments , trade unions and employers ' organisations .
4 . (
- Before the vote :
rapporteur . - ( DE ) Mr President , ladiesand gentlemen , the following three codifications include an innovation , in that we shall also be voting on the joint proposals from the legal services of Parliament , the Commission and the Council .
This is the first time that Parliament will have voted on the same text as the Council .
Setting aside these votes , which I support , I should like to point out that we are regulating matters here which should not be regulated by the European Parliament .
This is not decision-making close to the people ; it only makes us look ridiculous in the eyes of the general public when we legislate on matters such as the installation of lighting and light-signalling devices on wheeled agricultural and forestry tractors .
( Loud applause )
It would be far more logical to adopt a directive on tractors enshrining general requirements and safeguards .
The details could then be specified in standards .
In Europe there is the Brussels-based European Committee for Standardization ( CEN ) and the European Committee for Electrotechnical Standardization ( Cenelec ) , which is also based in Brussels .
The standards organisations of thirty countries , including all the countries of the EU and EFTA , are members of CEN and Cenelec .
This principle of adopting general directives in which reference is made to European standards has already been applied in more than 25 other sectors .
Why should we not apply it to tractors as well ?
I presume that our Commissioner in attendance , Mr Verheugen , takes the same view .
We want better regulation , and we Members of Parliament should be setting a good example .
( Applause )
5 . (
6 . (
7 . (
8 . (
9 . (
10 . (
11 . (
12 . (
13 . (
14 . (
15 . (
16 . (
17 . (
18 . (
19 . (
- Before the vote on paragraph 35 :
rapporteur . - ( ES ) Mr President , I should like to propose to the House an oral amendment to paragraph 35 .
If carried , it would render amendment 24 irrelevant .
In English it would read as follows :
' Invites the European Union 's trade partners to progressively reduce or dismantle barriers restricting market access for goods '
( ES ) The remainder of the text would remain the same .
Instead of asking for all barriers restricting market access to be immediately removed in full , it asks for them to be reduced gradually or , where necessary , for them to be dismantled .
( Parliament agreed to accept the amendment )
That concludes the vote .
Voting time
We shall now proceed to the vote .
( For the outcome of the vote and other details : see Minutes )
Explanations of vote
Oral explanations of vote .
( CS ) Mr President , land and sea frontiers have shifted with enlargement , increasing customs officers ' work from simple custom duties checks to combating counterfeiting , money laundering , drugs , and evasion of antidumping duties or health measures aimed at consumer protection .
For this reason I have welcomed and expressed support for the Commission 's proposal , which will allow a greater degree of coordination of Member States ' bodies , including close cooperation with Europol , Frontex , Interpol and the World Customs Organisation .
We would also ask that the third country authorities that will obtain commercial and personal data from the Member States be required to guarantee data protection standards equivalent to those in the EU .
I thank the Members for having supported our Group 's proposals today in full .
I also want to thank the rapporteurs for their meticulous work .
( NL ) Mr President , I voted for the Musotto report because it is not afraid to speak frankly about many aspects of fraud and measures to combat fraud .
And I get that déja vu feeling when the report mentions the millions of funds wrongly paid and non-eligible expenditure claimed .
Think , for example , of the hundreds of millions of euros in European funds which have already disappeared into the bottomless pit of the corrupt socialist-dominated Walloon state .
A state in which numerous officials have been involved in scandals , in some cases for misappropriation of funds .
When the report talks about the fragility of Commission scrutiny , I automatically remember the words of my Walloon colleague Mr Deprez who talked at the beginning of the month about bad projects which are the fault not only of Wallonia but also of the Commission because it approves these projects .
( DE ) Mr President , the report that was originally presented was a good one , because it provided for clearly defined measures to support the fight against terrorism , such as necessary steps to improve prevention , closer police cooperation , more exchanges of data and assistance for the victims of terrorism .
Today 's votes , however , have completely changed the report .
Key elements of the report have been voted out .
Jihadist terrorists , for example , are suddenly no longer considered dangerous .
Other positions - unacceptable positions - have been voted into the report , with the result that I have had to vote against it , as the majority of the House has done .
It is a pity about the original draft , because it would have been good to have a better set of political and technical instruments with which to combat terrorism and improve security .
( NL ) Mr President , needless to say I voted against the Deprez report because I fundamentally disagree with the notion that jihadist terrorism is actually just a consequence of discrimination and the social isolation allegedly suffered by Muslims in Europe .
To be honest , I know quite a few of my own people , quite a few people of non-immigrant stock , who really do suffer social isolation in Muslim neighbourhoods in our big cities but who do not turn to the crime of terrorism , absolutely not .
So I am not going to say mea culpa on that one .
It may perhaps be politically correct to lay the blame on perfidious Europe , but it is not ' correct ' in the true sense of the word , anything but .
When in God 's name is Parliament going to understand that Islamist terror has nothing to do with discrimination or social exclusion , but flows directly from the world vision of Islam itself ?
Mr President , I think we need to recognise , when we are talking about regions trading with each other , that it is not countries that trade with each other , but people and businesses that trade with each other .
One of the errors of this particular report was that it failed to recognise the substantial trade barriers that stand in the way of entrepreneurs who wish to trade with the EU from third countries .
That is why I am pleased to announce a cross-party campaign , involving NGOs and civil society organisations , as well as grass-roots campaigners , called the Real Trade Campaign , which has five main aims : to abolish agricultural tariffs on imports ; to abolish agricultural subsidies ; to liberalise the rules of country of origin ; to put more emphasis on aid for trade ; and to encourage low income countries progressively to lower their trade barriers to each other in the hope that they will be part of the world community when it comes to trade and , eventually , trade more with us .
This report was unbalanced in not recognising that those barriers exist from the EU perspective , which is why I voted against it .
Written explanations of vote
in writing . - ( PT ) I must say first of all that our vote against is a protest against postponement of the entry into force of a directive on workers ' health and safety , a directive that in this case was adopted in 2004 which lays down the exposure limit values of workers to electric , magnetic and electromagnetic fields , and prevention , information and training measures .
The European Commission is now proposing a new directive with the sole aim of postponing the transposition of that directive by four years .
It is truly odd for the European Commission to be tabling this proposal for a postponement .
It claims in justification that the medical community has reported its concerns on the implementation of the Directive and that various studies have now been commissioned .
It is a pity that similar concern regarding the effects of this Directive is not shown in relation to the effects of other legal instruments and policy guidelines which seek to liberalise public goods and services and to deregulate labour relations and workers ' rights .
Only when workers ' rights and health are being protected does the European Commission ask for more studies to postpone implementation .
It is unacceptable .
in writing . - I welcome the report on exposure of workers to the risks arising from physical agents .
The possible consequences which the transposition of the 2004 directive , outlining minimum safety standards for those using physical agents , could have on the development and use of Magnetic Resonance Imaging ( MRI ) in medicine make the recommendations of the report sound and logical .
With the emergence of new studies calling into question the basis on which the directive 's recommendations are based , we must allow time for this new information and the directive to be analysed .
I therefore support the call to postpone the deadline of 30 April 2008 by four years , and have voted in favour of this report .
in writing . - ( SK ) I would like to stress that the demand for improving the health and safety of workers in the workplace is based , first and foremost , on risk assessment .
In cases where workers are employed in an environment where they are exposed to agents that pose a health risk , a risk assessment is one of the employer 's fundamental duties .
If a risk assessment reveals that there may be a risk , it is necessary to implement measures that will either eliminate the risk or reduce it to the lowest possible level .
In my opinion , it is important to implement these measures at source .
Other steps that can be taken are , for example , offering a choice of different working methods , technical measures to reduce the emissions , changing the design of workplaces and workstations , limiting the duration and intensity of exposure , making adequate personal protection equipment available , etc .
I agree that if a worker 's medical examination shows that there is a specific health risk , it is the duty of the employer to provide health care for such workers .
Preventive medical check-ups are part of the health care package : their goal is to identify at an early stage changes to one 's health and to prevent damage to one 's health as a result of exposure to electromagnetic fields .
Depending on the results , the risk assessment may be reviewed and additional measures may be implemented .
In conclusion , I would like to say that as a doctor I am pleased that Directive 2004 / 40 / EC of the European Parliament and of the Council lays down requirements concerning the establishment of action values and exposure limit values for individual electromagnetic fields , as well as requirements for the protection of the health and safety of workers exposed to electromagnetic fields in the course of their work .
in writing . - ( FR ) Artificial electromagnetic waves have a significant impact on the health of Europe 's citizens , and above all on the health of workers , who need to be protected from electromagnetic fields just as they are already protected by two EU directives fixing limit values for exposure to noise and vibration .
The electromagnetic fields emitted both by radios and electronic appliances and by various telephonic devices - portable transmitters and telephones , fixed-base and wi-fi mobiles - are by no means harmless !
That is the finding of the recent BioInitiative report , and its conclusions are indisputable : the risks include forms of cancer , Alzheimer 's disease and nervous problems caused by chronic or excessive exposure to electromagnetic waves .
It is a health risk that has recently been highlighted by the European Environment Agency .
This is why I voted in favour of the report by Committee Chairman Jan Andersson , which aims to protect workers ' health while taking account of the medical community 's concerns about the compatibility of Community law with magnetic resonance imaging ( MRI ) technology .
MRI scanning is an essential medical procedure for certain patients , and in my view it should have been made the subject of a derogation , instead of postponing application of the entire directive for four years !
in writing . - ( PT ) Although this is a codification procedure that does not alter existing legislation in any way , the underlying question raised is the need for a set of Community directives on a set of issues concerning tractors and other motor vehicles and their trailers , as can be seen from the codified version of several reports put to the vote in Parliament today .
This is an area in which I believe Community legislation is excessive .
The existence of general legislation on motor vehicles covering general aspects would probably suffice , without the need to reproduce directives relating to each of these areas , as happens now , examples of which are : the suppression of radio interference produced by agricultural or forestry tractors ( electromagnetic compatibility ) ; driver-perceived noise level of wheeled agricultural or forestry tractors ; rear registration plate lamps for motor vehicles and their trailers .
The vote in favour of codification does not alter this opinion in any way .
in writing . - ( PL ) I fully support the report under discussion , which will play a major role in the simplification and ordered arrangement of Community law .
This is especially important for the development of civil society , since transparency and accessibility of European legislation provides the individual citizen with new opportunities to take advantage of specific entitlements .
That goal cannot be achieved as long as a large number of repeatedly amended regulations remain dispersed and have to be consulted partly in the original legislative act and partly in subsequent amending acts - a task that requires laborious comparison of many different legal instruments in order to determine the rules in force .
Frequently amended regulations need to be codified in order to render Community law clear and intelligible .
I therefore fully support the codification of Council Regulation ( EEC ) No 1210 / 90 of 7 May 1990 on the establishment of the European Environment Agency and the European Environment Information and Observation Network .
in writing . - ( SV ) We Swedish Social Democrats voted in favour of this codification report , which is an important part of the work on increasing the clarity and transparency of Community law .
The report does not involve any change of substance but brings together a number of different directives into a coherent text .
We are of course in favour of such a simplification .
It should be emphasised , however , that our vote in favour does not mean that we are satisfied with the formulation of the current legislation .
We want to see raised minimum taxes on tobacco in the future and a real simplification of the regulatory system .
In addition , it is important to ensure that the tax levels for different types of tobacco have a competition-neutral effect .
in writing . - ( PT ) This regulation replaces Regulation ( EEC ) No 2913 / 92 , which established the Community Customs Code .
The justifications submitted are the amendments that have been introduced in the interim .
The Community Customs Code ( CCC ) was established by Regulation ( EEC ) No 2913 / 92 .
At that time it was already a long and technically complex document which regulated Community customs matters .
Each specific aspect of the CCC was discussed by specialists in the relevant area , and CCC issues were addressed by the relevant Committee .
In a world in which trade is dominated by the large multinationals , this draft Code would have to reflect and serve the interests of those multinationals , reducing the travelling time of goods and simplifying customs procedures .
Whether measures seeking to combat customs fraud were also adopted with that simplification is another matter .
Simplification appears to have been favoured to the detriment of combating fraud .
It is moreover no coincidence that Community documents and / or their translations often refer to ' facilitation ' rather than simplification .
That is a revealing slip of the pen .
in writing . - ( SK ) Counterfeit operations and goods smuggling today use methods that to be detected require an integrated approach to solving the new tasks facing customs authorities ; similarly , customs officials need to be professionally trained officials .
The EU is a customs union , which is why the Community Customs Code is one of its most important instruments .
Modernising the Community Customs Code means a complete revision of the original document that entered into force in 1992 , in accordance with the demands of the e-customs and e-commerce environment .
What will the modernisation of the Community Customs Code bring ?
Most importantly it will modernise the control mechanisms and will result in electronic data exchange and inter-operable customs systems .
It will simplify customs regulations and administrative procedures for both the customs authorities and economic operators .
Centralised clearance is a new feature : it strengthens the cooperation between the Member States and the European Union .
Simpler , faster and , most importantly , centralised clearance at a single location has great potential to reduce bureaucracy .
After three years of intensive institutional work we can proudly credit the European Parliament with a significant success in customs modernisation .
I would like to take this opportunity to praise the difficult work done by the customs officials , without which the protection of the Union 's external borders would be unthinkable .
I believe that today we prepared a practical present for the 40th anniversary of our customs union , which will be celebrated on 1 July 2008 .
I am glad I was able to contribute through my vote to the modernisation of the Community Customs Code .
in writing . - ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to support the Dunn report .

The purpose of the proposal is to bring the current Regulation ( EC ) No 515 / 97 into line with the new powers of the Community in the field of customs cooperation , stepping up cooperation and exchanges of data between the Member States and between the latter and the Commission .
That regulation provides the legal basis for requests for assistance exchanged by the competent authorities in order to combat irregularities and fraud .
Despite the good results which have been obtained up to now , there are various reasons for amending the text , linked in particular to changes in the institutional context and balance .
The aim is therefore to deepen coordination at Community level , in the light of the new instruments provided by European law , bearing in mind that at the time at which Regulation ( EC ) No 515 / 97 was adopted , the Treaty did not yet contain an article on customs cooperation ( Articles 135 and 280 ) .


in writing . - ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I welcome the report presented by Mr Pomés Ruiz , as it represents a further measure to make the European institutions more accountable and transparent , and is designed to enable all citizens more closely to scrutinise and monitor the decision-making process surrounding the use of EU funds , thereby enhancing the basic principles of our democratic system .
The Parliamentary initiative expressly calls for publication of the beneficiaries of EU funds , whether this involves grants , contracts , agricultural or structural expenditure or other types of financing .
The EC is also asked to assess the feasibility of an ' information system ' for the wider public , able to provide full details of imports and of the individual beneficiaries of the complex financing work of the EU .
As it also sets out ethical standards for the holders of public offices and a blacklist of fraudsters , and makes provision for publishing the names of lobbyists and all the experts assisting the Commission , the Ruiz report should make it possible to create an efficient and transparent system for monitoring the management and effective use of EU funds .
in writing . - ( PL ) I support this initiative , aimed at achieving transparency with regard to EU budget expenditure .
The sources of information on expenditure must be transparent and , above all , they must be arranged in a practical manner .
I frequently hear comments from Polish entrepreneurs that access to the relevant sources of information is very dispersed , which makes it much more difficult for users to compare and evaluate , and to draw the right conclusions concerning their own projects .
The lack of transparency regarding EU budget expenditure leads to many injustices .
In the new Member States , including Poland , where potential beneficiaries have relatively little experience in obtaining EU funding , clearly presented information can be extremely helpful .
in writing . - ( PT ) Apart from one or two aspects that give a little cause for concern , we believe that on the whole the report raises a number of very important and topical questions .
Following the so-called European Transparency Initiative , launched by the Commission in November 2005 , the report reaffirms the need to introduce a fully operational system of information for the public on , for example , the final beneficiaries of the various structural funds .
The report suggests that the different beneficiaries may receive EU funds from several programmes or sectors of EU activity , and therefore recognises that it may be instructive to be able to identify all the amounts paid to an individual beneficiary across all sectors - such information being invaluable , for example , in the case of company relocations , according to the workers .
The report also addresses other important aspects , such as the declaration of financial interests of public office-holders in the EU institutions , suggesting that standards should be adopted , and that the composition of the ' expert groups ' ( formal or informal ) the Commission decides to set up to assist it in its initiatives , particularly legislative initiatives , should be disclosed .
in writing . - I voted in favour of my own group 's amendments on the Pomés Ruiz report , which were all adopted .
It is important that the membership of Commission expert groups is fairly balanced and that the process for selecting such groups is fully open and transparent .
It is to be hoped that the Commission takes heed of today 's call from this institution .
in writing . - ( PL ) Mr Pomés Ruiz rightly argues that transparency depends on whether the information concerning beneficiaries is easily accessible and reliable , and lends itself to further research , comparison and assessment .
I agree with the request that the Commission should explicitly indicate the addresses of the websites containing information on the beneficiaries of EU funding managed directly and centrally by it in all documents relating to the EU budget and / or projects and programmes under its responsibility .
in writing . - I welcome the report on transparency in financial matters .
Any move to improve the quality and availability of information , especially on agricultural policy and Structural Funds ( which has proved difficult for the public to obtain ) , is a positive step towards the EU assuming its democratic obligations .
in writing . - ( DE ) This is a step in the right direction , designed to bring some light into the aid jungle and to facilitate access for ordinary people or at least give them some understanding of largely opaque processes .
Care must be taken , however , to ensure that on this occasion highly paid lobbyists are not the only beneficiaries of such databases , but that they also enable SMEs and ordinary people , through easy-to-follow logical processes , to obtain the grants and other forms of support that interest them .
As far as a code of ethics for institutions is concerned , that is certainly to be welcomed .
A body empowered to award public funding must be entirely above suspicion , if only for the sake of people 's trust in public administrative authorities .
There is , however , a need for caution , because scrutiny cannot extend to laying an institution and its members entirely bare and creating transparent people .
Within the bounds of data protection , however , such an arrangement , namely the enshrinement of a kind of ethical code , is undoubtedly welcome .
The establishment of a ' blacklist ' surely needs more discussion regarding the means of implementation , for this is another area in which data protection has a key role to play .
in writing . - ( PT ) People who administer public funds are expected and required to exercise the utmost rationality in managing them , the utmost rigour in presenting the results of the activity carried out , and total transparency .
Taxpayers - since they are ultimately the financiers of all public funds - have the right ( which they must exercise ) to know who spends the funds made available to EU interests and how they spend them .
I therefore voted in favour of this report , which is supported by a European Commission Communication that puts forward a number of proposals , the majority of which we agree with .
I need only add that I believe that the principles and rules applicable to Community funds , particularly those managed directly by the European institutions , must also apply , mutatis mutandis , to the other public funds , namely Community funds managed by the Member States .
in writing . - ( PL ) I am voting in favour of Mr Pomés Ruiz 's report on transparency in financial matters .
The rapporteur deals with a number of very important issues concerning the management of EU finances , such as disclosure of information concerning the beneficiaries of EU funds , declaration of financial interests of public office-holders in the EU institutions , and governance within the institutions and their annual activity reports .
We must strive to achieve continuous streamlining of procedures for the management of EU finances and the control of expenditure , with particular regard to the role of the European Parliament as the institution that grants a discharge in respect of implementation of the budget .
We must put our money on transparency and the accurate accounting of financial resources .
in writing . - ( PT ) The fight against fraud and misappropriation of public funds , in this case Community funds , must be a priority in each Member State .
It is therefore essential for each state to be equipped with the human and material resources necessary to allow it to perform this function properly .
It should be emphasised that at the same time as Member State responsibility for protecting public interests is reaffirmed - as it is in the report - policies are promoted in parallel that devalue and withdraw from Member States functions which should be theirs , particularly by dismantling government services , the constant disqualification and laying-off of their workers and the use of private companies to perform some of those functions .
In our opinion the report should also examine the consequences for public fund management of transferring public service functions to private enterprises .
The extent to which the excessive complexity and inadequacy of the rules and the delay in awarding funds contribute towards the irregularities identified must also be assessed .
Instead , however , the report essentially focuses on punishment , namely by suggesting infringement proceedings and the suspension of interim payments to Member States .
in writing . - I supported the Musotto report on the fight against fraud .
Misspending and mismanagement of Community money is something which regularly features in the press and media across the EU .
It is essential that fraud is tackled effectively and in this regard the Member States have a huge roll to play alongside the various EU bodies .
in writing . - ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I shall vote for the report by our esteemed colleague Francesco Musotto .
Both reports highlight the fact that greater attention needs to be paid to certain countries which are lagging behind in terms of providing information in electronic format , and complying with management and monitoring systems .
I agree with the rapporteur , who has stressed that it is important to pay particular attention to developing the activities to counter Community fraud which are being run by countries which evidently do not have monitoring systems which are effective enough and , in some cases , have a low level of compliance with European standards .
In my view , careful monitoring of Community expenditure is fundamental .
The fight against improper payments is even more important , bearing in mind that the money paid by European taxpayers must be used further to enhance standards of living .
in writing . - ( SV ) We Swedish Social Democrats voted for the Deprez report on how the Union and the Member States should proceed in their action to rein back support for terrorism and the increase in recruitment of terrorists .
The EU needs to consider these aspects in its action to combat terrorism and improve knowledge of the reasons for terrorist acts and radicalisation , which is currently limited .
But this must be approached with strict respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms , and in a manner which is appropriate to an open , democratic and just society .
Constitutional rights , such as freedom of the press and freedom of expression and association , must not be restricted in any way .
in writing . - I will be supporting Mr Deprez 's report on the factors favouring support for terrorism and the recruitment of terrorists .
Nevertheless , I want to make two points .
First , I want to raise the ' Nelson Mandela ' question .
We must distinguish between those fighting oppression and vicious authoritarian regimes like the apartheid regime in South Africa , and the nihilism of the 9 / 11 bombers .
I would not have supported the Rivonia bombing , but neither would I , if Nelson Mandela had fled to Europe , have supported his extradition to a South Africa where he faced the death penalty .
Second , the West has to recognise that on occasion our actions or inaction in the Middle East , in Palestine and elsewhere contributes to rising hostility and terrorism towards ourselves .
Sometimes we can be our own worst enemies .
in writing . - ( FR ) Two things alarmed me in the Deprez report on terrorism .
The first was the absence of any mention of what is a primary cause of the terrorist threat in Europe , namely the unbridled influx of migrant groups who have no wish to integrate or assimilate but seek , on the contrary , to live by their own laws within their so-called host societies , and indeed to impose those laws upon them .
The second alarming thing was the apportionment of blame : according to you , Europe can never do enough in terms of renouncing its very essence , its national identities and its shared civilisation .
It can never do enough to compromise its values in the name of tolerance and the so-called ' right to difference ' .
It can never discriminate enough against its own people and in favour of foreign nationalities , cultures or civilisations living on its territory .
Ultimately , it is to blame for what happens to it .
Yet those responsible for the terrorist attacks in London were British citizens , British-born , employed in jobs that many people would have been glad to have !
They were not excluded ; they were not victims .
Yet they were called to arms !
The fact is that the multicultural , compartmentalised societies to which you so earnestly aspire are , by nature , societies prone to multiple conflict .
And by denying realities , we merely fuel hatred and contempt .
in writing . - ( PT ) Although the report contains aspects we value and consider to be positive in the light of the deterioration in the global situation , among other things , it does not identify or denounce the real objectives and consequences of the ' fight against terrorism ' , particularly as a factor promoting and encouraging terrorism in itself .
The report refers , albeit conditionally , to the fundamental need for the diplomatic and peaceful resolution of conflicts around the world , though it does not indicate that the major factors that encourage terrorism include the spiral of violence fuelled by the militarisation of international relations , attacks on the independence of states and the sovereignty of nations , state terrorism , violation of fundamental freedoms , rights and guarantees , unbridled capitalist exploitation , the inhuman widening of inequality and injustice , and the existence of millions of human beings living in desperate situations - such as in Afghanistan , Iraq or Palestine .
We believe that a serious analysis of terrorism - in all its forms , including state terrorism - will require it to be set in its political context , thereby revealing its underlying causes and the policies giving rise to it , such as the ' fight against terrorism ' being waged by the USA and its allies .
Hence our abstention .
in writing . - I supported today 's amendments stating that radicalisation should only be seen in terms of a clear link to violence and that civil liberties should be of paramount importance .
The latter should not need repeating - we describe ourselves as a Union based on human rights and civil liberties .
Indeed , the majority of the proposals in this report are already EU policy , which makes me wonder why we need yet another report .
I voted against the final report , not because I support the PPE position or the narrow Spanish domestic debate which so frequently poisons our discussions on tackling terrorism in this House , but because we have decided to consider the inclusion of the justification of terrorism in our anti-terrorism package .
This may seem a small thing but we already know academic freedom , political debate and anti-radicalisation work are being limited by fears engendered by such legislation .
Young Muslims have told me that they are frightened to discuss issues such Palestine or Iraq in case their criticism and explanation of how they feel are interpreted as justification or glorification and they end up in court .
Parliament could have voted this paragraph out but chose not to .
in writing . - ( FR ) This report on eradicating terrorism takes its place in an endless series of texts glorifying human rights and the battle against discrimination .
Yet the fact is that over-cautiousness about possible infringements of fundamental freedoms - particularly freedom of expression and freedom of religion - actually erodes the resources we need in order to fight terrorism .
It must be obvious by now that the European Parliament is more concerned with protecting rights of every hue , and with doing what is politically correct , than it is with the security of European Union citizens .
So it is that this report , about factors favouring support for terrorism , contains not a single reference to mosques although , as we know , they are nothing less than recruiting centres for future Islamic terrorists .
Nor is there any reference to the imams of France , Belgium , the Netherlands or Denmark , who are effectively recruiting agents for Jihad-minded Islamic youth .
Let us not shock anyone ; let us not ruffle any religious sensibilities ; let us be non-discriminatory : it hardly amounts to an effective recipe for tackling the ever-growing threat of Islamic terrorism !
What it does amount to is actually quite the reverse .
in writing . - ( FR ) This report reflects substantial amendment work by the members of the PSE , Verts / ALE , GUE / NGL and ALDE Groups in the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs .
From a text that initially stigmatised Islam and Muslims in a quite disgraceful way , the progressive , centre-left majority managed to craft a balanced document highlighting the whole range of factors ( economic , social and so on ) that favour support for terrorism , asserting the need to respect fundamental rights , and emphasising the importance of combating discrimination and promoting equality of opportunity , especially in education , training and employment .
There are , however , two or three points in the report that I find dubious , notably the references to ' moderate Islam ' and to ' monitoring of all the locations where propaganda is being disseminated that aims at persuading people to commit terrorist acts ' .
Nonetheless , while I may be unable to give the report my wholehearted support , rejecting it would mean surrendering to the right and consigning months of effort to the waste bin .
That is why the best course , in my view , is to abstain and to explain the reasons for doing so .
in writing . - This report sought to outline a set of European norms and principles in the fight against terrorism .
The opposition from the right to the report means that aid to victims , making the support of terrorist activity a criminal offence in all Member States and encouraging the need for political dialogue , will not form part of a coherent European anti-terrorism strategy .
I voted in favour of the report and regret that agreement on what one would feel are issues that normally benefit from wide consensus was not achieved .
in writing . - ( DE ) Combating terrorism will be the challenge of this century .
Resolute action against the machinery of propaganda is therefore the first small step in a bid to curb the spread of terrorism among the autonomous Islamic subcultures that exist throughout Europe .
We must face the fact that terrorism in Europe is purely Islamic in character , and that radicalised Muslims are completely immune to integration measures .
Radicalisation is on the march in Europe , and the political classes often seem to be in denial to some extent when it comes to these issues .
For this reason a strategic approach to the fight against terrorism is necessary and , indeed , crucial to guarantee the survival of Europe , its peoples and its cultures .
Efforts should begin with young people , but they must also show a degree of willingness to play their part .
Abrogation of all human rights - which , as we know , is already practised in some cases in the United States - must not of course occur in Europe .
Nevertheless , it will be essential to be tough on terrorism .
All unlawful content found in the new media must , of course , be treated like any other illegal statement , and its authors must be prosecuted and punished .
in writing . - ( PT ) One of the greatest dangers in the debate on terrorism and its causes is to fall into one of two extremes : on the one hand , in seeking to understand everything , the perception that everything becomes acceptable and justifiable ; on the other , the refusal to recognise different realities that makes everything confused and that groups everything according to the same concepts and standards .
Both extremes are dangerous as an analysis because , since they are not accurate , they do not allow valid conclusions , leading the police , legislators and the public to make mistakes .
They are in addition a threat to an understanding of the real situation , which is both inclusive and firm with terrorism .
That is the challenge we are facing : to be able to understand reality exactly as it is , rather than as we fear it or would like it to be ; and consequently to act on both its distant and its proximate causes , while never forgetting that terrorism cannot be accepted or justified in any circumstances .
And that it is not the victims ( whether actual or potential ) who must understand and justify the crimes of the aggressors .
For all these reasons , I voted against this report .
in writing . - ( FR ) The best means of combating terrorism is prevention , not the blanket surveillance of European citizens .
So the important thing is to attack terrorism 's underlying causes .
The phenomenon of violent radicalisation will cease once we address inequalities and injustices at both national and world level .
I abstained in the vote on this report because , in the process of combating terrorism , I do not think we can point the finger at one particular religion .
Terrorism is not about religion , even though some people may look to what they term their faith in order to justify killing .
The only way to combat violent radicalisation will be by strengthening the lay ethos in our societies and by engaging openly in intercultural dialogue with all the stakeholders , especially the representatives of civil society .
in writing . - ( SV ) Terrorism is a cross-border phenomenon and must be combated vigorously by common action .
However , the fight against terrorism must always be waged by legal and proportionate means .
The CIA flights in Europe , the use of torture , mock executions and waterboarding , which the CIA now acknowledges did happen , and the establishment of special secret jails must be vigorously condemned .
Here the EU should have acted much more firmly than it did .
But to me , one thing is self-evident : it is our values which must form the basis of our common legislation .
We must also ensure that Community legislation does not jeopardise or set aside important principles - including that of freedom of expression .
The report speaks of introducing a new concept into the Framework Decision : ' justification of terrorism ' .
I think this would be unfortunate .
Not because it is not a good idea to ensure that all Member States have good laws against incitement , but because it is difficult , if not impossible , to arrive at a definition which would be applied uniformly and which would not lead to thorny problems of interpretation .
On the one hand , there is the important task of devising ways to combat terrorism and save lives .
On the other hand , there is the principle of freedom of expression and the concern to maintain a high level of legal security in Europe .
It is a question of finding the right balance .
in writing . - ( PL ) I am unable to support the Deprez report and its proposal for a European Parliament recommendation to the Council on the factors favouring support for terrorism and the recruitment of terrorists .
The report advocates the wrong priorities in the struggle against terrorism .
The proposal concentrates above all on social policy measures .
That approach will not facilitate the struggle against terrorism , which also requires better border controls and coordination among prosecution agencies .
in writing . - The Left in the Parliament diluted a key , undeniable message in the original text of this report , which had stated that ' terrorism ( in particular Jihadist terrorism ) is today the most severe threat to the security of the citizens of the Union ' .
The report completely omits any reference to the largest factors favouring the recruitment of terrorists , namely uncontrolled immigration and , certainly in regard to the UK , the widespread lack of regard for the Christian religion and positive understanding of our own history and culture .
Not surprisingly , newcomers then see little with which to identify .
It makes no mention of the way in which terrorism can be seen to succeed and the legitimisation and reward of terrorists such as the former leaders of the Provisional IRA .
I therefore voted against the report and contributed to its rejection by Parliament .
in writing . - ( PT ) This EP own-initiative report is a genuine repository of goals and initiatives for liberalising world trade - whether in goods , services or capital - led by the EU and the European Commission , a virtually omnipotent body in common commercial policy with the new draft Treaty , which makes this an exclusive EU competence .
The opening up of markets is the dogma .
The end of all and any trade barriers , especially with the developed and emerging economies , is the course of action .
The opening up of markets , carried out if possible in the image of the EU single market , is the objective .
Since it considers the current WTO system to be insufficiently regulatory and binding , it advocates the ' European governance model ' for trade , whether by concluding free trade agreements or by stressing conclusion of the current round of WTO negotiations - for which it calls for synergies to be created with the EU 's major trading partners ( such as the USA , Canada and Japan ) .
As an example , see how the report urges non-EU countries to lift foreign ownership restrictions on European companies ...
Economic domination is the aim .
Hence our vote against .
in writing . - I welcome the Guardans Cambó report on the EU 's Strategy to deliver market access for European companies .
The principles of improved mutual access , better support for SMEs and enhanced internal market access should help to bolster the Lisbon agenda .
In particular I support the amendments on making a distinction between access to developed markets and emerging economies on one hand and LDCs and developing countries on the other .
in writing . - ( PT ) Although the European internal market is huge , the world market , opened up due to globalisation , is even larger and more dynamic .
Access by European companies to that market , especially to the high-growth-rate emerging economies , must therefore be both a public and a private priority .
While it is true , however , that in the area of private initiative it is not up to us to make choices or , worse still , to impose priorities , in the area of public initiatives there is a long way to go .
On the one hand , we must be aware of the need to open up our markets if we wish - and we do wish - to gain increasing access to international markets .
On the other , it is essential to focus on the capacity of European companies to stand up to the growing economic efficiency and competitiveness of companies from those countries , which means that we must unhesitatingly focus on the competitiveness and innovation of our own companies , which can only occur in a free , open and transparent environment .
in writing . - ( RO ) The Guardans Cambó report refers to the European Union strategy to facilitate the market access for European companies .
In the first part of last year , the European Commission presented a communication regarding a stronger partnership in order to obtain market access for the European exporters .
The measures proposed by the Commission refer to restructuring the Community computer system that provides market access information and services in approximately 100 countries , better transparency and an information campaign , especially for small and medium-sized companies , regarding the Community services available for European exporters .
Nevertheless , I regret that some of the amendments submitted by the Group of European Socialists , which concerned the field of public procurement and competition , were not voted on .
I believe it is necessary to define a partnership between the Commission , the Member States and the European companies in order to facilitate the latter 's access to third markets but , at the same time , we must ensure that the European principles and values are complied with in those markets : labour law , environmental protection , respect of intellectual property , and human rights .
Corrections to vote and voting intentions : see Minutes
( The sitting was suspended at 12.40 p.m. and resumed at 3.05 p.m. )

Debate on the future of Europe ( debate )
The next item is the debate on the future of Europe , in which the Prime Minister of Sweden , a Member of the European Council , will take part .
Ladies and gentlemen , I bid you a warm welcome to this special sitting . In particular , I wish to extend a very warm welcome to Mr Fredrik Reinfeldt , Prime Minister of Sweden .
Välkommen till Europaparlamentet !
Welcome !
( Applause )
It gives me - and all of us - great pleasure , Prime Minister , to welcome you today to the European Parliament for the first time to discuss the future of the European Union with us .
I have just seen Simeon Sakskoburggotski , the former Prime Minister of Bulgaria , in the gallery .
I bid you a warm welcome to the European Parliament .
The Treaty that was signed in Lisbon on 13 December 2007 takes the European Union in a new direction .
After many years of discussion , we finally have a Treaty that matches the needs of the enlarged European Union , enabling it to devote itself to fulfilling the hopes and expectations of the European people by means of democratic procedures .
Not only will the new Treaty provide for more transparency in the activity of the Union , which has always been a matter of particular importance to Sweden ; it also makes combating climate change a new aim of the European Union , and that is an area in which Sweden can already boast major successes .
Your country , Prime Minister , has every reason to be proud of its leading role in Europe in the use of renewable energy sources .
We in the European Union must be united in pursuing the offensive against climate change , so that we can jointly play a leading global role in that struggle .
Only last week at the United Nations , I saw what great hopes the UN places in the European Union in particular , as well as in the European Parliament as its legislative arm .
The Lisbon Treaty gives us instruments to pursue the goals that are important to our future , and to implement rapidly the reforms we need for that purpose .
Like you , Prime Minister , the European Parliament firmly believes that the new Treaty should enter into force by 1 January 2009 .
The European Parliament was therefore pleased to learn of the announcement made by the Swedish Parliament , the Riksdag , of its intention to ratify the new Treaty by November 2008 .
If the ratification process can be successfully completed on time in all 27 Member States , the Swedish Presidency of the Council will be able , in the second half of 2009 , to devote itself to the major challenges of the future within a new institutional framework .
Sweden will lead us into a new era of European integration .
Together , on the basis of the new Treaty and with a newly elected European Parliament , a new Commission and Sweden holding the presidency , we shall be able to open a new chapter of enhanced cooperation .
Whether in the field of energy security , climate change , the continued development of the Nordic dimension of the Union , or EU strategy for the Baltic Sea , we expect Sweden to be a source of powerful impetus .
This is why we keenly await your remarks on the future shape of the European Union .
Prime Minister , I now invite you to address the European Parliament .
Thank you , Prime Minister .
We are also pleased to note that the European Commission is represented here by Vice-President Margot Wallström .
We shall now move on to the debate .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( FR ) Mr President , Prime Minister , colleagues , it is my pleasure , on behalf of the PPE-DE Group , to welcome to our Chamber the Prime Minister of Sweden .
Fredrik Reinfeldt , you are the first head of government to share his vision of Europe 's future with this House since the signing of the Lisbon Reform Treaty .
On the eve of our debate on the Treaty and the democratic progress it involves for the Union - and I speak here on behalf of my fellow PPE Group members - I must urge once again that the ratification process be pursued at a steady pace .
To date , five Member States out of 27 have ratified the treaty .
They have said yes to the new tools that the Lisbon Treaty offers for shaping Europe 's future and giving substance to its people 's aspirations .
The sooner we have ratification , the sooner we can apply the new operating rules that are essential for effective European action .
Most importantly , the sooner we can focus our efforts on the content of our common policies .
Europe must have the ability to take rapid decisions about energy , climate , food safety , immigration and defence .
For more than 50 years the political family to which I belong has encouraged and supported the development of Europe .
In June 2009 , our commitment to a Europe of shared values , a Europe of prosperity , a Europe of security and solidarity will be put to the test of the popular vote .
We hope Europe will be ready for that challenge .
We want to see a competitive Europe that creates jobs . We want it to promote economic growth and social development .
Europe 's prosperity must be a long-term concern .
That is why we are calling for sustainable , sensible development , which involves protecting the environment and combating climate change .
The PPE-DE Group favours free trade - free trade of the type that allows the purchasing power of the poorest in society to increase , and helps to reduce inequalities both within national borders and between different countries .
While we believe that globalisation can be an opportunity for Europe , we will never accept unbridled free-trade-ism .
It is our responsibility to protect the interests of the most vulnerable among us and to defend our European social model .
Economic growth and a high level of social protection are not mutually exclusive : the fact that our growth rate exceeded that of the United States in 2007 proves the point .
Prosperity in Europe also depends on achieving an effective and open single market and pursuing the aims of the Lisbon strategy .
We want the keepers of Europe 's accounts to be responsible and to set high standards for the management of public money .
However , budgetary discipline cannot be allowed to undermine the principle of solidarity between the Member States or between Europe and its world partners .
Solidarity comes at a price , and we must be prepared to pay it .
We also want a strong Europe that is capable of fighting international terrorism and organised cross-border crime .
What is at stake here is the defence of our values , our freedoms , our democracy , our rule of law and our solidarity .
There can be no room for negotiation when it comes to the security of Europe 's territory or its people .
Defending our dearly bought freedom demands unflagging determination and tough , coordinated measures .
While we need to be more vigilant in the face of genuine threats , we also need to respect people 's individual freedoms .
What we advocate is a healthy balance between security and personal freedom .
In the international arena , too , it is high time for Europe to commit itself and to pursue closer links with partners who share our vision of the world .
We are in favour of a firmly based and meaningful trans-Atlantic relationship , but we also want to develop a policy of good neighbourliness and to pursue EU enlargement .
With regard to Cyprus , our group supports the latest efforts to identify a just solution that will enable all the people of the island to live together in peace .
In the Middle East , Europe must offer political and financial support for the difficult process of negotiating peace between the Israelis and Palestinians .
The rising tides of extremism cannot be stemmed without concessions from both sides .
The European Union 's very existence demonstrates that it is possible to overcome hatred between peoples and to build a shared future .
Where conflict is tearing people apart , our experience needs to be put to use .
Today the south-eastern Balkan region is the least stable part of our continent , and Kosovo 's declaration of independence heralds a period of uncertainty .
We call on all sides to be measured in their response .
All forms of provocation must be avoided .
The imperative is to keep people safe - and Europe has a key role to play here .
The time has come to show that we are capable of bringing stability to the Balkans .
We approve of sending an EU police and justice mission to support the authorities in Kosovo .
We invite Kosovo to pursue a stable , democratic , multi-ethnic future - and a European future .
That prospect of Community membership applies to the entire Balkan region - obviously including Serbia .
We do not advocate isolating the Serbs : we advocate uniting Europe .
Mr President , Prime Minister , this is a debate on the future of Europe - we need to confront and overcome the challenges and we need a clear political vision , as well as determination and courage .
On the sure foundation of these values and these priorities , the PPE-DE Group is ready to play its part in meeting the challenges .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , Prime Minister , I am pleased to be able to welcome you to Strasbourg .
I do not know whether Mrs Malmström is equally delighted at having had to come to Strasbourg with you , but perhaps we can discuss that on another occasion .
You delivered a good speech , Prime Minister .
I also believe it was a wise speech , because you pointed out that our vision of the future of Europe will only be attainable if we equip the European Union to play its part in addressing the challenges facing this continent in all parts of the world .
The debate on the global climate is not a European debate but a global debate .
That is true .
Consideration of the role of the European Union in world trade should not be confined to the debate on the internal market , but must also serve to identify ways in which this huge single market with its great economic power can contribute to prosperity , not only in Europe but in other continents too .
The fact is that prosperity in other continents - and this brings me to a third point that you raised - is conducive to world peace .
As a force for peace that has established stability and harmony within its territory , Europe must be able to contribute to making the world a more peaceful place .
This does not mean that Europe should try to teach the world , but the European model can be an option .
Supranational integration , integration across the deep divides of religion and ethnic conflict , bridging the gulf of a bloody past by abandoning nationalism in favour of a supranational approach , will always lead to greater prosperity and will always nurture peace .
This is why the future of Europe depends on the ability of Heads of Government like you to be prepared , when it comes to the crunch , to surrender a degree of national sovereignty in order to contribute to a supranational framework , which is the basis for more prosperity in the world and hence for more peace within our own countries .
That is the logic you set out here today , and I subscribe to it .
It is a different logic from that of the ultra-nationalists we shall experience again tomorrow , who keep telling us that more nationalism is needed .
More nationalism invariably means more wars .
Let us make no bones about that .
For this reason the message you conveyed to us today was a good one .
( Heckling )
Those who are reacting are the very ones to whom I was referring , so my message has clearly hit home .
What I missed , Prime Minister , was the idea of a social Europe .
Someone told me you have to watch Reinfeldt , because he is the next best thing to a Socialist .
That , at least , is the impression you gave in the election campaign in Sweden .
Admittedly , the Swedish people were quite quickly put right about your Government 's real intentions .
But you did not refer once today to the concept of a socially responsible Europe .
Now I know you take the view that social policy is a national matter , and rightly so .
I must say , however , that if the internal market you seek to develop is perceived by people in Sweden and other countries as a threat to the social standards they enjoy at home , they will reject that internal market .
In that case , your global trade strategy would be worthless too .
You must appreciate that , while there is a need to develop the internal market , the process must be accompanied by the parallel development of a European social model .
Otherwise , if such a twin-tracked approach is not adopted , a misshapen European internal market based on free trade alone will be a genuine threat to the social stability that we have struggled to achieve in our respective countries .
Let me therefore give you some good advice , Prime Minister : go ahead on the global climate , go ahead on world trade , and go ahead on international peace-building , but go ahead on the European social model too .
Since I know , however , that you are a man who is capable of learning , I am fairly sure you will redress the balance a little .
Prime Minister , I was very pleased with a remark you made concerning Turkey .
You are a fair man , just like our President .
He granted my fellow Member , Mr Doyle , an extra minute and a half .
He will grant me that too , which means that I can add one more point .
You spoke about Turkey .
Tell that to your European Council colleague , President Sarkozy , for it is not right that people in the European Union constantly pop up with conflicting messages .
If I were the Prime Minister of Turkey , I would never cease to be astonished .
Mr Reinfeldt visits the European Parliament and tells us not to batten down the hatches but to keep the prospect of Turkish accession open .
The next President of the Council to appear here after Mr Janša will be saying the opposite .
I am pretty sure of that .
The fact is that President Sarkozy told us here in the European Parliament that Turkish accession to the European Union was not on his agenda .
This issue cannot be kicked back and forth like that . Clarification is essential .
There is a clear EU strategy for Turkish accession , and we must stand by our declarations .
Or am I wrong ?
You put it plainly today , and I hope Nicolas Sarkozy will do likewise .
One final remark : what pleased me most was your announcement that you intend to come back in the summer of next year as President-in-Office of the Council .
That was good .
There are some who believe that the next President of the Council to address us here will be the permanent one , who will then present the programmes of all the rotating presidencies .
In other words , Mr Blair or Mr Juncker , or whoever the horse-trading might give us , would be the one who presented your Government 's programme , which you had adopted in Stockholm .
But it is you that the European Parliament expects to see here next year in the rotating presidency with your programme , which will then include the concept of a social Europe .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Mr President , when Parliament first convened this series of debates on the future of Europe , few could foresee a Treaty in force by 2009 .
Europe was sinking , and to paraphrase Mr Reinfeldt 's countryman , August Strindberg , ' there was something unnatural in it , for nature demands progress , evolution , and every backward step means wasted energy . '
Well , since then , the European Union has found the collective energy to set Europe back on the path to progress .
By the time the Prime Minister 's country takes over the reins in 2009 , the EU will have undergone a democratic revolution : it will be more open , more accountable , more responsive to its citizens .
So those who attack the EU for being undemocratic are barking mad to oppose a treaty which puts citizens and their representatives in the driving seat .
They are also barking up the wrong tree when they bring their protest to this Parliament , which has no responsibility for decisions by national governments on whether to hold a referendum .
The Prime Minister , with his record as a consensus-builder in his own country , looks an ideal candidate to launch the European Union under a new Council , a new Parliament and a new Commission .
But will he , in fact , be taking over the reins - as have presidencies in the past - or will he be simply a chef de cabinet to the full-time President of the Council ?
The truth is that the Treaty provides a framework for a future we have yet to sketch , a future where the biggest single challenge for our Union , as Sweden 's Europe Minister says , is delivering the practical results which citizens rightly demand and not the interminable naval gazing , which a Conseil des sages will simply prolong .
Survey after survey shows that the Euro-sceptics are wrong .
Citizens do not want less Europe .
They want more : more joint action on terrorism , more joint action on energy and the environment , on defence and foreign affairs , on migration , on research and development .
They want Europe to think big .
And , yet , in almost all these areas , cooperation is in its infancy , because Member State governments in national capitals persist in gainsaying the public will .
We have 10 months left before the Treaty enters into force .
It is time for us to get our House in order , for this House to prepare for the greatest increase in powers it has ever seen and for the Council and the Commission to ' Lisbonise ' both legislative proposals in the pipeline and current practices which must change .
Urgent challenges lie ahead , as the Prime Minister alluded to .
They will not be met without loyal cooperation between the institutions of government .
My plea to the Prime Minister is to make sure that , by the time we have codecision in almost 80 policy areas and a huge increase in the workload of this House and in the Council , we have greater dialogue between Parliament and the Council to allow us to manage the Union properly : when it comes to dealing with the biggest foreign policy challenge for the Union now - the issue of Kosovo ; when it comes to dealing with the question of Turkey , on which I agree so much with what the Prime Minister said ; when it comes to dealing with big challenges , like world population growth , poverty and migration , of which he spoke .
The Prime Minister outlined the challenges of globalisation , both at our immediate borders and beyond , challenges to which EU cooperation has the answers .
Previous prime ministers have done the same in this Chamber , though without achieving such cooperation , so I commend to you a Swedish saying : Gott lära av andras fel , eftersom man inte hinner begå alla själv - it is well to learn from the errors of others , since there is no time to make them yourself .
( Applause )
on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Prime Minister , the delicate phase of ratification has finally begun , and we hope that they will take place very rapidly .
The European Parliament 's greater involvement in the decision-making process bears witness to the fact that more account is being taken of European citizens .
Europe now has an ambitious mission : to be more of a player in international politics .
Not just consolidated human rights , but concrete measures to defend them .
The Union must tackle international crises which are currently being left to the individual Member States , to the United States and , with all the limits on its action , to the United Nations .
We have to anticipate future scenarios and cannot , as we were in the case of Kosovo , be unprepared and divided in the face of such a sensitive scenario .
Energy is an urgent issue on which the Union is working , and we have to abandon any falsely environmental approach , studying common solutions to resolve the major problems of the energy crisis and development .
The Member States or the companies through which they work must , in our opinion , continue to own distribution networks , because everything can be privatised except the security of citizens and Member States .
Any other choice would deprive Europe of its independence and self-sufficiency .
We need to study objectives through which the nuclear and alternative energies dilemma can be resolved .
The time has come for decisions , and not just words .
While the Internet and the inability to impose any regulation right from the outset have meant that the degree of freedom of our society has been positively enhanced , they have exposed everyone to the uncontrolled risk of terrorism , which , as a result of cryptography as well , is increasingly threatening democracy and everyone 's freedom .
The Europe of services , the economy and the free market - a market which must be guided by clear and shared rules - cannot disregard the defence of such a fundamental value as the integrity of children .
The increase in online paedophilia and the recent data which show that 52 % of paedophile Internet sites are in Europe mean that the laws of Member States must be harmonised in order to provide the Union as a whole with the certainty of fast trials , adequate prevention , laws which make providers responsible and which make provision for the closure of illegal sites throughout the Member States of the Union .
What is needed is a single European centre which helps families , teachers , police forces and the courts to pass on the information needed to put an end to this atrocious crime and punish those responsible .
Mr President , Prime Minister , if we fail to deal with this crisis immediately , we will be depriving Europe of its future , because without children 's integrity our Europe will have no future .

on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , this opportunity to get to know the Prime Minister is very welcome , especially as he is surrounded by a bevy of women - some of whom , like Cecilia , we have known for ages , and others , like Margot , we have had here for quite some time .


The role of women in his government and in his country is something that I should therefore like to stress , especially as it is not just a question of gender , but also of quality , and it is partly in recognition of this that we are therefore pleased to welcome him here today .
Mr President , the European Union 's future mission is to control climate change in all its aspects : environmental , economic and social . We must at all costs manage to reverse the trend towards global warming , and use this challenge to bring about a shift towards a sustainable economy as well as sustainable work and competitiveness .
Just as many years ago the mission of the European Community was to prevent war and then to bring about the unification of Europe through the fall of the Wall , we must be able to take on a genuine leading role in future as regards the main environmental challenges .
It is not because we are single-issue people or because we are Greens that we think in this way , but because we see the reality as it is with no illusions , and not through the lens of ideology .
We are convinced that the economic system , democratic stability , the ability to achieve the Millennium Goals and to control migratory problems are all connected with the management of scarce resources and with climate change .
Europe undoubtedly has a leading role to play here .
For that reason , Mr President , his comment that what should be done and paid for at European level and what should be done and paid for at national level need to be discussed yet again seems to us to be entirely banal , and we hope that it can be avoided .
The European Union currently has a budget of 1 % , with the result that none , or at least a good half , of the things that he has said could be achieved unless the European Union has a decent budget available .
I therefore hope that in the mid-term review in which his Presidency will , I believe , play an important part , bearing in mind that between this year and next year we must decide on the future of the financial perspective as well , his country will play less of a blocking role than it has played in the past .
Lastly , Mr President , on the important energy package , we expect that virtuous Sweden will play a positive role and stop trying to reduce its commitments , thereby setting a bad example for the other Member States as well .
Finally , on the issue of free trade .
While we are not protectionist , it would be genuinely short-sighted and a little ideological to think that free trade is the answer to everything when , without environmental and social rules , we know that to be absolutely impossible .
On the question of Turkey we are fully in agreement .
The elimination of Papadopoulos in Cyprus is very good news in our view .
Mr President , why not re-open the question of the seat of the European Parliament ?
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( FR ) Mr President , Prime Minister , Madam Minister , if there is an area where Sweden 's experience is of interest to us when it comes to European policy , I think it is one which you unfortunately chose to overlook in your address , that is , the social field , and more specifically the lessons to be learnt from the Laval-Vaxholm case .
Let me just run through the facts .
The Swedish trade unions took industrial action to try to force a Latvian company to apply Swedish labour law in Sweden .
What else would you expect , you might think - unless you are a supporter of the so-called country of origin principle , otherwise known as social dumping .
However , the Latvian company relied on European law as justification for opposing the trade unions ' demands .
The dispute was then brought before the courts , and was referred to the highest court in European law , the European Court of Justice , which , as we know , interprets the Treaties and establishes case-law .
On 18 December last year the Court ruled in favour of the company and against the unions .
The Court 's judgment states , and I quote , ' In the case in the main proceedings , it must be pointed out that the right of trade unions [ ... ] to take collective action [ ... ] is liable to make it less attractive , or more difficult , for such undertakings to carry out construction work in Sweden , and therefore constitutes a restriction on the freedom to provide services ' .
In future , in such cases , the trade unions in Sweden and elsewhere must restrict their demands to , and I quote again , the ' minimum protection ' allowed under Community law , so as not to infringe Article 49 of the Treaty , which guarantees freedom to provide services .
This is clearly not acceptable , and it is why my Group is urgently calling for the European Parliament to debate this issue and its huge ramifications : what should be the political follow-up to this judgment ?
For the time being , however , we would be interested to hear your views on this case , Prime Minister .
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - ( SV ) Mr President , Prime Minister .
The response to the referendums on the EU Constitution in France and the Netherlands in 2005 is an example of undemocratic tendencies in European politics .
The political elite is only interested in listening to the people and respecting the popular will if the subjects obligingly and obediently say ' yes ' to more EU federalism .
In conjunction with the discussions on the Lisbon Treaty , Prime Minister Reinfeldt should have acted like a champion of democracy by stating that the results of the referendums in fact meant that the Treaty had failed .
Furthermore , Reinfeldt could have called for a more intergovernmental treaty , argued for flexible integration , demanded exemption from the euro , and asked for the commuting to Strasbourg to be ended .
He did none of these things .
So what will happen under the Swedish Presidency in 2009 ?
The overriding aim should have been to reform and modernise EU cooperation and make it more effective .
Mr Reinfeldt should thus have given notice that Sweden would prioritise a reform of the agricultural policy and demand an end to the European Parliament 's travelling circus .
Instead of working for a leaner but keener EU , the Swedish Government seems rather to be aiming for a broader and more meddlesome EU .
In Sweden popular criticism of further EU federalism is widespread , but in practice it is non-existent among the political elite .
There are good grounds for questioning to what extent our elected representatives really represent the people .
Finally , I would like to offer Fredrik Reinfeldt a good bottle of Alsace wine if he can give a single example of a law which could have been passed under the rejected EU Constitution but cannot under the revised version .
Do you accept the challenge , Mr Reinfeldt ?
( FR ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , France 's betrayal is complete .
The congress of shame met at Versailles on 4 February to adopt the constitutional review needed to adopt the so-called Constitutional Treaty .
Versailles has become the prime location for abdicating French sovereignty , bearing in mind that the German Empire was proclaimed there .
On behalf of the 26 Member States who are not going to be consulted in a referendum , Ireland will be the de facto spokesman for the millions of Europeans who voted ' no ' in 2005 and do not want a European superstate .
When you deprive people of their legitimate right to have a say in their future , they will take revenge .
Do not worry , ladies and gentlemen , they will take their revenge , and what a revenge , in the European elections next year !
If the truth be told , a number of European leaders knew that their countries would reject this thinly veiled constitution .
Mr Sarkozy came right out and admitted as much to Parliament 's Conference of Presidents , referring to the United Kingdom government in particular .
He is the self-appointed mediator in this outrageous piece of trickery .
He was actually the very last person entitled to get this second version of the Constitution adopted by Parliament , but these are the lengths that some people will go to in order to draw attention to themselves and make themselves look as if they are pulling all the strings .
Illustrious and ancient nations are thus being cast aside in favour of a constructivist Utopia that is surrendering them , bound hand and foot , to the evil consequences of globalisation and unfettered liberalism : mass immigration , insecurity , economic ruin , social disaster , and moral and cultural decadence .
Europe 's future lies not in this totalitarian superstate , as we can see today in Kosovo , which should serve as an example , but in cooperation freely given between the nations and peoples of Europe , including the Slav nations .
In any event , what is certain is that two nations , both founder Members of the Union , were consulted in a referendum and clearly rejected the proposed Constitution .
Since the Constitution is therefore unlawful , all of its consequences are also unlawful and no one can be forced to comply with its provisions .
So national resistance is legitimate : the right of all citizens , and the duty of all patriots .
Caveant consules !
( SV ) Mr President , I welcome the Prime Minister here .
This is where I work .
It is a dynamic place .
It is where policies are formed which have a direct effect on Swedish society , as also on other European societies .
That happens here , not in order to exclude the public from the political process , but because there are matters that can only be dealt with by countries acting together .
The nation state is no longer the appropriate context in which to deal with many of the great challenges of our time .
Those of us who are from Sweden , which is after all a relatively new Member State , may have reason to remember that many of the problems and challenges we encounter do not arise because of the EU , but fall to the EU because the European Union has shown itself to be successful in meeting the challenges of our time .
They include Kosovo .
They include the climate issue , on which Sweden has shown how development can be used in place of regulation in order to advance the interests of our society .
They include questions of competitiveness , and questions relating to the fight against crime and terrorism .
These are concerns and areas which we can only deal with by acting together .
They are problems and challenges which fall to us because of our successes .
Hence I also think that the Prime Minister did well to stress one aspect , and I think it should be the great idea of the European Union in the years to come - openness .
Openness towards the world around us .
Openness to the world at large is what enables us to help shape the international order with values such as democracy and freedom , when we enlarge our own Community but also when we participate in international free-trade rounds and a great deal more .
As regards openness between the Member States , I think it important to stress that those who are against openness are also against free movement for people and freedom of opportunity .
That is where discrimination occurs .
The good European idea is openness and , if we can make it a reality , then we shall also ensure that our citizens will come to recognise that this really is the People 's Europe .
This is a challenge for the Swedish Presidency and a challenge for this Parliament and all its political groups .
( SV ) Mr President , like everyone else , I would like to thank Prime Minister Reinfeldt for coming here .
My first question concerns the environmental assessment of the gas pipeline in the Baltic , one of the world 's most polluted seas , on which Parliament recently had an inquiry involving several committees .
Sweden was the first country to have environmental impact assessments .
This question is one of the most important environmental issues for Sweden and the EU .
Will Sweden demand yet another alternative with the pipeline laid on land which has to be subjected to an environmental assessment ?
The operators tell us in Parliament that it would be too expensive .
But both the Prime Minister and I come from Stockholm , where infrastructure and investment must all have practically doubled in cost .
I cannot believe that a cost increase of 10-15 % is a strong counter-argument .
The environment is more important .
My second question relates to cluster bombs and the like , which are now being debated in the Oslo process and in Wellington , New Zealand , and were considered in the Swedish Parliament last week ; it is also an important EU issue .
I have received letters signed by many organisations in Sweden , such as Amnesty International , the churches through Diakonia , the Red Cross , UNICEF , Svenska Freds ( the Swedish Peace and Arbitration Society ) and the United Nations Association of Sweden , demanding that Bombkapsel 90 ( BK90 ) , carried on Swedish JAS aircraft , should be treated as a cluster bomb and included in the international work on a comprehensive ban .
What is the Government 's position on the JAS bomb ?
Does the Prime Minister consider BK90 to be a cluster bomb or not ?
Does the Prime Minister intend to act in the continued Oslo process ?
Finally , I would like to know when the Prime Minister intends to act in order to end our periodic relocation to Strasbourg , after EU Minister Malmström collected a million names and signatures ?
Should not Parliament itself decide on its place of assembly and not the Council ?
I would also like to offer my heartfelt thanks for the statement you made on Turkey .
Finally , let me say that , when they return during the Swedish Presidency next year , the Prime Minister and other members of the Government will be welcome back , often !
( SV ) Prime Minister , the fact that Sweden got a new government in autumn 2006 did not pass unnoticed as far as commitment to the EU is concerned .
I therefore want to thank the Prime Minister and the EU Minister for their clear determination to make Sweden a more active partner in the Union , to have its place at the heart of European integration , as the Prime Minister said .
Yet Sweden remains outside the euro , something that will be costly to us Swedes both economically and , not least , politically .
After all , Prime Minister , it is essentially a matter of solidarity .
My question is thus : when will Sweden become a full member of the EU ?
How does the timetable look , Prime Minister ?
A sensitive subject back home in Sweden .
We are now in Strasbourg , a beautiful and appealing city whose history calls to mind the horrors of war .
That said , we know that millions of our fellow citizens think that this travelling between Brussels and Strasbourg is not the best way to care for the environment and manage our money .
A small entreaty : would it not be possible for the Swedish Government during the Presidency to hazard an initiative which might put an end to this travelling back and forth ?
( LV ) Prime Minister , both you and we expect a lot of Europe 's future .
In his time Robert Schuman hoped to unite Europeans after centuries of separation caused by various conflicts .
He understood that in order to know where we are going it is important to know where we have come from .
Prime Minister , do you realise that the European Union has not taken stock of its undemocratic , totalitarian past ?
An obvious example is last year 's EU Framework Decision on combating racism and xenophobia .
It is recommended that European countries impose custodial sentences for the denial of Nazi crimes , but similar crimes under the Communist regime , their unjustified denial or , even worse , their glorification are deliberately forgotten .
Europe should not allow this .
What impression does this give to the millions of Eastern Europeans , including residents of what is now the European Union , who were tortured in Stalin 's concentration camps ?
I call upon you to seriously reflect on and promote a solution to this problem in the name of Europe 's future and justice . Thank you .
( SV ) Mr President , Swedish day now continues with someone else who wants to avoid moving to Strasbourg .
I also want to have a referendum on our Treaty .
This morning I found that I had put on one green sock and one blue sock .
I wonder whether the symbolism was that we should have some kind of new future alliance here between groupings different from the traditional ones .
If you are to have a green sock from me , Fredrik , you will probably need to become more ambitious with regard to energy-saving and renewable energy sources .
I have brought an example with me .
This lamp is an LED lamp .
It takes 12 seconds to screw it in .
It takes 12 years to build a new nuclear power station .
Which is the easiest and quickest way to solve climate problems ?
I also thought that when it comes to growth we have problems that we must agree on .
At present we import historically large quantities of products which generate emissions in other countries .
We have to bear this in mind in our work on the climate .
Then we come back to trade .
Protectionism to protect businesses is wrong .
But protectionism to protect the environment and human rights is an obligation and a responsibility for politicians in a free market .
Otherwise people will become tools of the market rather than the market becoming a tool of the people .
The best way for you to demonstrate popular participation in the future of the EU is to allow the people to show what they think in a referendum .
( SV ) Mr President , I want to welcome Sweden 's Prime Minister to Parliament and to this debate on the future of Europe .
It is an important debate , which affects 493 million citizens .
The debate must therefore be held , and decisions on the debate must be taken not only in Parliament but also among the citizens .
But for the citizens to become engaged in the debate , they must also be able to influence the future .
Without participation and the ability to influence there will be no engagement .
So how can we get citizens to participate ?
The answer is obvious : by asking them about the future and by listening to their answers .
A referendum on the Treaty of Lisbon is therefore necessary if we are serious about a citizens ' Europe .
Too much EU legislation is now created by anonymous officials who are influenced by experts and lobby groups in which the citizens ' voices are not heard .
Now it is time to let the citizens ' voices be heard .
The Prime Minister did not mention the Vaxholm judgment at all .
It has received a great deal of attention , not just in Sweden but also in many other EU countries .
This is natural because it is not just a deathblow to the Swedish model but an attack on wage earners and the trade unions ' position throughout the EU .
The judgment is an invitation to reduce workers ' wages to the lowest minimum levels .
No country has to set more favourable conditions for workers than the minimum protection .
The result is a two-tier labour market .
Some fringe benefits will apply only to domestic wage earners , whilst different rules apply to foreign wage earners .
This leads to dumping in terms of wages and conditions of employment and to discrimination .
Sweden can change this .
Sweden can defend the rights of wage earners and a social Europe by demanding exceptions in the Treaty of Lisbon for collective agreements .
Sweden can take the lead and get others to follow .
In conclusion , I want to remind Sweden 's Prime Minister of one of the two most important issues for Sweden prior to EU membership .
One of the highest priorities was equal-opportunities issues .
What has happened , and does Sweden want to lead the way in the future on equal-opportunities issues ?
This question is part of the debate on the future .
Without women Europe has no future .
( FR ) Mr President , Europe clearly only has a future through its peoples , since they are what give it substance and strength .
If its peoples were to be absorbed , shorn of their responsibility for themselves , and divided or broken up into little principalities without any political dimension - in line with America 's imperialist policy , of course , as we have just seen with Kosovo , where the latest dreadful developments now pose such a threat for the future - in short , if Europe were to put itself in the hands of a landless technostructure that surrendered it to the whims of globalisation and empire , then I would be very fearful for our future .
All the evidence now is that this machine that we , to our shame , refer to as the European Union is operating not just without the people , but actually against them .
We have just had further proof of this in the astonishing negation of the French people 's vote in the 2005 referendum , aided and abetted by our lacklustre leader President Sarkozy .
The French people feel let down , and have given up all hope in this general free-for-all , which is a negation of both the past and the future .
Europe will only find salvation if the people take their destiny back into their own hands , if the Member States are free to pursue their own policies and only join forces when necessary , if we denounce the lies of a democracy that no longer has anything to do with demos or kratos , in short if the Member States and the nations reclaim their freedom .
Otherwise the good ship Europe will founder , and we will find ourselves drifting further and further away from the shores of history .
( HU ) Mr President , Prime Minister , the introduction to the Charter of Fundamental Rights attached to the new basic Treaty of the European Union states that the peoples of Europe are resolved to share a peaceful future based on common values .
Sakharov prize-winner Salih Mahmoud Osman , however , addressing a plenary sitting of the European Parliament last December , said that there will be no peace without justice .
Unjust systems of peace sooner or later lead to war and collapse .
The most recent Balkan war and the disintegration of the former Yugoslavia are a prime example of this .
Reconciliation is almost inconceivable unless a just new order is put in place .
Europe must also come to terms with its communist past .
Eliminating the pernicious legacy of communism is a prerequisite for a peaceful future in Europe .
Communism deserves to be condemned equally along with fascism .
There will be no peace or rule of law , no security or stability on our continent unless legitimate justice is served in every regard .
This same justice also applies to resolving the situation of minority ethnic communities .
Mr President , I am delighted to welcome the Prime Minister today .
His historic win in the Swedish general election was a personal triumph .
I also congratulate him on uniting the Centre Right and breaking the Social-Democrat dominance , and wish him and his Government well .
Today , we are discussing the future of Europe in a week in which this House will vote on a report endorsing the Lisbon Treaty .
I want to make very clear that British Conservative MEPs will vote against that report because we fundamentally disagree with the Treaty , with the process by which it was agreed and with the fact that it is simply a carbon copy of the constitution rejected by two of the Union 's founding Member States in national referendums .
This treaty takes Europe in the wrong direction .
It transfers substantial new powers to the EU , some of them in extremely sensitive areas of national interest .
My party has a different vision for the future of Europe , which is for a Europe that is both more open , dynamic and transparent and less centralised , uniform and inflexible .
The British Parliament is currently deliberating the Treaty .
The people of the United Kingdom had , of course , hoped to have their say in a referendum .
But the British Government has shamefully reneged on its manifesto pledge to hold one .
My party , both here and in the UK , will continue to campaign vigorously for the people to have their say in a referendum .
Without widespread public support the European Union will lack popular legitimacy for what it is doing .
It needs to move on from its obsession with institutions .
To be fit for the 21st century , the EU needs to focus on issues like the environment , economic competitiveness and global poverty , in order to demonstrate it is worthy of public support .
These are the things that the future of Europe should be about .
( CS ) Prime Minister , ladies and gentlemen , the EU has just concluded a most successful year .
The EU was enlarged to include Romania and Bulgaria , the Schengen area was enlarged to include nine new countries , the euro zone was enlarged to include three new states and the euro has gradually started to replace the dollar as the international currency around the world .
The EU , with its 500 million citizens and consumers , is beginning to dictate , to a significant extent , global commercial , environmental and technical rules and norms .
Despite the wishful thinking of many Eurosceptics , Europe has even reached agreement on the new Reform Treaty .
I am highlighting these successes because they have been achieved with the active participation of the new Member States , not in spite of them .
That is why I welcome the Prime Minister 's proposals regarding future priorities .
One of the priorities for future years should be furthering the enlargement of the EU to include the Western Balkan territories .
This , however , presupposes the following two conditions : the countries in question being generally prepared from a technical point of view and courage on the part of the existing Member States .
Their politicians must have the courage to explain to the citizens how the enlargement has been a success , that it has not meant less but more security , freedom , democracy , and prosperity .
In my opinion , we must also have the courage to allow the Western Balkan regions to join the visa-free regime at the earliest opportunity .
What have we to fear from the remaining 20 million people in the Western Balkans , being as we are a Community of 27 states and 500 million citizens ?
I have one final comment .
The Swedish Presidency is coming up next year .
It will be working with France and the Czech Republic .
I would like to call on the Prime Minister to encourage his Czech colleagues to submit the Lisbon Treaty to the Czech Parliament for ratification at the earliest opportunity .
As a Czech citizen , I suspect that the Eurosceptic Czech Government is not very eager to do so .
( SV ) Fellow Members , there is nothing fanciful about experience .
It helps you to recognise a mistake when you commit it again .
This time we must not make mistakes when it comes to the Balkans .
That is my first comment on the Prime Minister 's opening remarks to Parliament .
Europe must speak with one voice on Kosovo .
My second comment concerns terrorism , where the open society must combat terrorism with the means available to open society and with strong self-confidence , and not give in to intrusive measures .
My third and final comment concerns the climate issue , where the European system must deal with perhaps the biggest and most difficult issue in the shortest time that we have had to take a decision on such a big subject .
There is a danger that when we finalise things in Copenhagen , it will be like Hans Christian Andersen 's story when the emperor is wearing no clothes or walks naked through the streets of the city .
In order to produce the European legislation that we need , there must be a show of strength and cooperation between the Council of Ministers and the Commission and , above all , with Parliament , something which is unprecedented in the history of the EU .
Lastly , I am delighted to see a proactive Swedish Government at the centre of the European debate .
Welcome !
( PL ) Mr President , most important for the future of the European Union are visible results in the lives of ordinary citizens , in terms of wealth retention , public safety and international security .
The future of the Union will not be determined by the ever more complicated institutional reforms which this House will be discussing tomorrow morning .
One of the tests for the Union of particular concern to your country and mine , both of which lie on the Baltic Sea , is the issue of the northern gas pipeline .
The project is exceptionally dangerous for the environment and politically contrary to EU energy programmes .
If we want a Europe that produces results , we cannot tolerate such projects . Hence my question : what is your view of the funding of this project out of European resources , to which Nord Stream representatives recently referred ?

Mr President , for more than nine years , I have had the great privilege of representing Scotland here in this Parliament , during which time we have had many a debate on the future shape of Europe and we have welcomed 12 new Member States to the top table .
This massive expansion of the internal market and other areas of cooperation is good for Scotland and good for Europe as a whole .
But , also in the past nine years , we have had to agonise over so-called crises , such as the resignation of the Santer Commission and the rejection of the Constitutional Treaty .
It is a great pity and a frustration that many of the positives which EU membership entails have been tempered by such self-inflicted negatives .
In Scotland , we move on too .
We have a new Government - an SNP Government , which is pro-European and which has a vision for a new future for Scotland in Europe .
Prime Minister , I want to see Scottish Ministers sitting alongside your Ministers in the Council , not in the second row .
Scotland has much to contribute to the European Union and its development : a constructive attitude and a wealth of energy resources to name but two .
I look forward to a day when Scotland is welcomed as an independent Member State of this Union .
Such a change , I think , would not just be good for Scotland but good for the future of Europe too .
( SV ) Mr President , Prime Minister , we are discussing the future of Europe here , but the biggest question is who will decide that future .
It has unfortunately been a tradition in the EU , going back to Jean Monnet , for the EU to be built without the involvement of the European people .
The greatest deception so far is that the EU 's political establishment is presenting the same proposals on how the EU should be run and what the EU should be doing as the constitutional proposals which have already been rejected in referendums with high turn-outs and large ' no ' votes .
I note that the leader of the Liberal Group here calls those who reject that Treaty barking mad .
So he is saying that the majority of Dutch and French people are barking mad , like me , of course , standing here in the auditorium .
I think that the President should not allow such language to be used in future .
Sweden 's Prime Minister is saying at home and here in the Chamber that support for agriculture in the EU budget should be reduced and cut back and that the march towards supranationalism should be stopped .
That is the view of the Swedish people .
But in the Council his government supports the development of the EU into a state , and its MEPs accordingly vote to shift political power from the Swedish people to Brussels .
That is no future .
( NL ) Mr President , Prime Minister , it is a bit odd to be debating the future of Europe here without considering the question of the European Union 's borders .
Yet this is one of the most fundamental issues we face .
Time and time again we duck the issue , and public opinion is rightly worried .
People are wondering if the European Union is still a European project .
It won 't be any longer if Turkey joins .
If the European Union obstinately refuses to listen to the will of the people , its democratic base will slowly but surely disappear .
Prime Minister , you warn of the danger in maybe building a wall against Turkey .
But that is not the point .
No one in Europe is going to be fobbed off with fine words .
The Copenhagen criteria have to be met , by Turkey too , but very clearly they are not .
So it is time the negotiations were suspended .
It is quite simply a matter of sticking to what was agreed .
( PL ) Mr President , Prime Minister , you referred to the European Union as a global player , especially once the Treaty has been ratified .
We can only support this view , and I would congratulate you , Prime Minister , on the clear and determined position you have taken vis-à-vis the Belarusian regime , Europe 's last remaining dictatorship .
If we want to exercise influence in favour of democracy and the defence of human rights in Africa and Asia , we must first address those issues near at hand , on the Union 's own doorstep .
In this context I would also congratulate you on the clear position taken with regard to enlargement of the EU .
Here I am thinking of Belarus 's neighbour , Ukraine , where a great struggle is taking place over whether Ukraine will be a democracy and develop normally , swiftly and democratically , both to our benefit and to that of the Ukrainian nation .
Opening up to Ukraine is very important , with a view to its membership of the European Union .
Finally , I would congratulate you , Prime Minister , on your very strong statement concerning environmental protection of the Baltic , a small sea bordered by eight EU Member States .
The Baltic is practically an internal EU sea , and no sea in the world faces such a great environmental threat .
You also spoke of energy issues and action to counter climate change as the main priority of the Swedish Presidency .
We fully support this commitment , which is our civilisation 's task and responsibility .
But I have the impression that , in this respect , we talk a lot and do little .
The mid-term budget review will take place during the Swedish Presidency .
Unless we change our budget so we can afford , with some degree of responsibility , to take action to combat climate change and to adapt to low-carbon technologies in the broad sense , we shall indeed go no further than words , and we shall fail to achieve our main priority .
( SV ) Mr President .
Welcome to Fredrik Reinfeldt .
You spoke very wisely about the Treaty , about enlargement and about the climate .
I will touch on something you did not mention .
Jacques Delors once said that the internal market would never succeed without a strong social dimension .
He was absolutely right .
So I was a little surprised when you commented on the social EU , seeing it as a conflict between national systems and the rules we have in the EU .
I think it is the other way around .
We have a common labour market .
We must therefore supplement national labour law and the national systems , otherwise it will not function .
If you do persist in this view I would like to give a few examples .
Is the Posting Directive a problem ?
Is the Takeover Directive a problem , or one of the agreements concluded by the social partners at European level ?
The Part-Time Work Directive ?
The Parental Leave Directive ?
To take a specific example , the imbalance between the market and policy can be seen in the Laval case .
The problem in the Laval case is that the market takes precedence over workers ' rights .
You have handled this well in Sweden .
So far you have handled the issue well , but as many others have said here , other countries throughout the EU are also affected .
If it becomes necessary with the European initiatives , will you also be there with us when it comes to taking European initiatives ?
Last month we adopted a strategy on health and safety at work .
One target was one labour inspector for every 10 000 workers .
Sweden is heading in precisely the opposite direction and will not meet that target by a long way .
Instead , the proportion is falling by 27 % in Sweden .
Denmark , whose labour market is similar to the Swedish market , has more than two health and safety inspectors per 10 000 inhabitants .
How can it be that Sweden is heading in precisely the opposite direction ?
Why are you not prioritising health and safety at work ?
( SV ) Mr President , it is a big task to bring the Union together for a common energy policy which is able to secure the Member States ' energy supply , as you said , Prime Minister Reinfeldt .
You also mentioned the EU 's Baltic Sea strategy , which the Commission is currently working on .
A properly planned strategy for the Baltic Sea region can be an important building block for the future energy policy , not least for energy cooperation with Russia .
The problem is illustrated by the decision taken by the Swedish Government last week to reject the application by Nord Stream to take a gas pipeline through Swedish territorial waters in the Baltic Sea .
The application was too incomplete to be considered .
There is great mistrust in the region over the gas pipeline project .
An acceptable solution cannot really be found unless the EU and its Member States around the Baltic Sea formulate a line of action and are also given full access to the project .
I would like to praise Sweden , which is providing an opportunity to test the new energy-policy provisions contained in Article 176a of the Treaty of Lisbon .
( DA ) Mr President , Prime Minister , I would like to talk about a small aspect of environmental policy .
The initiatives of the City of Malmö in the fields of energy saving and the use of environmentally friendly transport are promising .
I have test-driven several of the environmentally friendly cars .
Recently in January in Berlin , I drove a large S-type Mercedes : a car of around two tonnes .
The car was powered by both traditional fuel and hydrogen .
At the push of a button it was possible to change from one fuel type to another - irrespective of the speed of the car .
The acceleration was apparently identical for both fuel types .
The use of hydrogen as a fuel for cars has progressed greatly in terms of development .
The waste product from a hydrogen car is pure water and nothing else .
With hydrogen as the ordinary fuel for private cars , it would be possible to permit only hydrogen cars to drive in central areas of our cities .
This would reduce pollution dramatically , and therefore also respiratory disorders and corrosion of our old buildings .
I hope that Sweden will promote such environmentally sound development .
Mr President , on 14 December 2007 the European Council asked the Commission to present an EU strategy for the Baltic Sea region by July 2009 at the latest , an initiative that was also welcomed by the European Parliament .
The importance of this decision cannot be underestimated either by the Nordic countries or by the Member States around the Baltic Sea that joined in 2004 .
The strategy might truly unleash the full potential of the region covering areas from the environment , economy , culture and education to security .
By aiming to achieve the ambition laid out in the Lisbon Agenda , the EU strategy for the Baltic Sea region could become a bridgehead to Russia .
Sweden will hold the Presidency in the Council during the second half of 2009 , and we hope that this will give a good start to the strategy .
However , it is essential that all the Baltic Sea countries have compiled their operational programmes by that time , and this also applies to my country , Estonia .

( DE ) Mr President , there are basically two models for the future of our united Europe : the model of a coherent , ever more closely integrated united Europe , which is the model envisaged by the Treaty of Lisbon , or the pick-and-mix model .
Now Sweden , together with Austria and Finland , has been in the European Union for some considerable time , but Sweden is not part of the eurozone .
May I ask the Prime Minister whether there are particular reasons for this ?
We would be pleased to have Sweden join us in the eurozone .
Mr President , Mr Chichester briefly appeared to make a short speech and disappeared before hearing the reply .
There was not otherwise a single member of the British Conservative Party in this debate to hear a Conservative Prime Minister tell us about the future of Europe .
Why is this ?
Did they not want to hear from a fellow Conservative how good the Lisbon Treaty is ?
How it does not need a referendum because it does not involve any further transfers of sovereignty ?
How we need this new Treaty for our Union to work better ?
Are they unable to participate even in a debate on that ?
Did they rather stay outside , presumably in the bar with their colleagues from the UK Independence Party ?
I do think it is a shame they have not even been here to participate in such an excellent debate .
( Applause )
( DE ) Mr President , Prime Minister , you referred to the common agricultural policy as the only EU policy that is fully in the hands of the Community .
You will , however , be aware that , over the past 15 years , agricultural policy has undergone more radical reform than any other EU policy , and there is no way in which agricultural policy can be compared or equated with industrial policy , because they are subject to quite different conditions .
Security and scope for advance planning must continue to underlie the common agricultural policy .
I should like to remind you that the share of the EU budget devoted to agriculture will be down to 35 % by 2013 .
The farming community takes its responsibility to the public very seriously , a responsibility that is enshrined in the Treaties of Rome .
Research , development , sustainability , employment and protection of the environment must be our common objectives .
I am really looking forward to an exciting Swedish Presidency .
( FI ) Mr President , Prime Minister , when speaking about the future of Europe you did not speak about the militarisation of the European Union .
Under the Treaty of Lisbon the Member States of the EU are committed to increasing their military resources .
Under the Treaty of Lisbon the Member States are prepared to operate abroad in crisis management assignments , even to enforce peace , without a mandate from the United Nations , i.e. illegally from the viewpoint of international law .
Furthermore , there are military safeguards associated with the Treaty of Lisbon , at least with the solidarity clause , and in this respect Swedish neutrality - her military non-alliance - is very questionable .
Prime Minister , do you think that the military safeguards contained in the Treaty of Lisbon are compatible with your military non-alliance ?
( PL ) Mr President , Prime Minister , clearly we are engaged in European construction not for the sake of European technocrats in Brussels but for the citizens of the European Union , so that they may live better and in greater security .
Only by listening to them can we succeed in our task .
Politicians have different expectations : some want more Europe , some less . But the fact is that the Prime Ministers of the 27 Member States have signed the Treaty of Lisbon .
The treaty is a signpost to a more transparent , more democratic Europe , and it should therefore be ratified this year .
Let me say this to Members who are now calling for ratification referendums , although they themselves were opposed to the European Constitution : don 't play around with the institution of the referendum , don 't dress up as defenders of democracy , because the citizens of the Union will not believe you anyway .
They know it is the Lisbon Treaty that will defend democracy in Europe .
( SK ) Ladies and gentlemen , today we are talking about a vision for a modern , dynamic Europe .
This debate is extremely useful and timely .
Globalisation compels us to ask questions and tackle challenges like those mentioned by the Prime Minister of Sweden , Mr Fredrik Reinfeldt .
Implementing structural reforms , which I consider to be politically the most difficult aspect of the Lisbon Strategy , must be our major political ambition .
Unless our economy experiences healthy growth , a knowledge-based economy will be out of question .
I am convinced that a knowledge-based economy and investment in human resources are the right strategies for the future of Europe .
Many speakers expressed their wish for a ' social Europe ' .
I do not know a single politician , not even in our conservative family , who would be against a social safety net for citizens , who would not want citizens to earn a good wage and have a better standard of living , who would want citizens to receive a pension of just EUR 150 as they do in Slovakia .
In the last quarter of 2007 my country , Slovakia , experienced record inter-year economic growth of 14 % .
Could the present social democratic government led by Prime Minister Robert Fico implement social policies if the previous government led by then Prime Minister Mikuláš Dzurinda not had the political courage to adopt courageous reforms of the tax , social , health and education systems ?
( EL ) Prime Minister , what you say is very true : we should fear not a strong but a weak Europe .
I fully agree and I think that all European citizens do as well .
When , however , they see us busying ourselves with tractor lights and other trifles , I am sure they are disappointed .
Prime Minister , you spoke with great enthusiasm about enlargement .
I wonder , however , whether perhaps it would have been wiser for the EU to solve its internal problems before enlargement . Might it have been better if some kind of reform Treaty were now in operation before enlargement ?
Finally , Prime Minister , the urgent issue now is the ratification of the Lisbon Treaty .
I was surprised to hear the views expressed by my fellow Member from the United Kingdom .
If Lisbon is not ratified , then Europe has no future .
( SV ) Many thanks to you all for your questions and comments .
I certainly will not be able to do justice to all these questions .
Thank you very much for the patience you have shown with the large amount of Swedish you have had to listen to because of all the questions that have been asked here .
The answers that I have are very much connected with my confidence that agreements entered into will be respected , something that I will come back to .
I said that I have a strong belief in Europe .
On many occasions in Sweden I have also expressed a strong confidence in the Swedish labour market model which has been developed around our Swedish collective agreements .
In Sweden we have to some extent chosen a different path from many other European countries , which have placed greater emphasis on legislation , whilst we have placed greater emphasis on the social partners taking responsibility .
Our view is that the Laval judgment does not diminish the Swedish model , but that it certainly raises a number of questions concerning certain Swedish legislation .
We are proceeding cautiously together with the social partners to see how changes might be made to the Swedish labour market model , but not in order to detract from it or to make fundamental changes to the way it works .
We intend to continue to respect its organisation and hope to have the discussion , and I hope that this will not be misconstrued as anything else when it is discussed around Europe .
It is said here that the internal market is not sufficient .
Yes , one criticism is that the internal market is not fully functioning .
It is a criticism that I often hear from businesspeople and others , that we talk about an internal market but that free movement is not all that free .
My government is certainly working with the aim of reducing social exclusion , creating the basis for self-determination through work , and ensuring that more people are in work .
In addition , welfare ambitions should also be made possible for others .
More people in work means more resources to build welfare solutions for people who are not able to work .
So I think that the path between work and welfare is coherent in the policy pursued in Sweden .
Democracy has been mentioned in various comments here .
I believe that democracy is borne here admirably by its elected representatives .
It is not a bad form of democracy .
I think that many of you here today have represented your voters well , and I too am prepared to do it in various ways .
Democracy is the capacity to take decisions and must be so .
Our Swedish experience of referendums , I would point out , is very mixed .
Sometimes it has been clear what it is we are asking and what is being answered .
Sometimes we have asked a question and been given a different answer and spent many years discussing what the Swedish people actually answered . I know that there have been similar experiences in a number of other countries .
The kind of treaty based on many amendments which is now at issue , and which we have decided on previously in Europe 's history without referendums , we are prepared to decide on in the context of representative democracy .
I think this is an admirable way to show how a living democracy must work .
A few brief answers regarding the gas pipeline which has been mentioned by many .
There too we want to respect agreements and legislation as it appears , that is to say in accordance with international conventions and Swedish legislation we are testing the possibilities of considering that gas pipeline .
We have been able to establish that the proposal we received is inadequate .
We therefore sent it back .
The matter will come back .
I cannot assess at present the degree to which we can influence this primarily through Swedish environmental legislation .
However , that will be our starting point as we do this thoroughly .
We have heard many views on whether you MEPs should move back and forth between parliaments , but here too we are aware of the way agreements work .
All the Member States essentially have an influence , a kind of veto over the matter , as all you who are asking these questions know .
We respect that even though , like many of our voters , we are asking questions about how successful it is to move about in the way that is done here .
We are now seeing environmentally friendly vehicles grow in Sweden to an extent that virtually no one else can show .
We have introduced special premiums for environmentally friendly vehicles , which are a powerful incentive and have meant that we now have a situation where more than 30 % of new vehicles sold in Sweden are environmentally friendly .
This is a trend that will certainly be further accentuated .
There were several questions on the euro .
Here too we are respecting agreements in the sense that we have the result of a referendum of the Swedish people in 2003 .
We have said that we will follow Swedish opinion .
If the Swedish people change their minds , the question may possibly arise again .
I also want to point out that Sweden , which lives close to Finland with its euro , is naturally wondering what will happen in Denmark if in the autumn Denmark tests again whether its so-called opt-out in relation to the euro will be withdrawn .
Then the euro will have a much greater presence as a currency close to Sweden , and that will possibly influence the Swedish people .
Some of you mentioned that it is unclear what role I am returning to .
The first time it is probably not so unclear , as up to the summer I will be taking part in presenting the 18-month programme covering the French , Czech and Swedish Presidencies .
Then it is undeniably an open question as to the role to which the rotating presidency will return .
We will have many ideas on this subject . I firmly believe in an EU that is anchored in its various parts of Europe .
I therefore think that the rotating presidency will also have a clear role in the future , alongside the elected President who is being brought in via the new Treaty .
Many thanks for your valuable comments and valuable questions .
Thank you , Prime Minister .
That was the last debate in our series of reflections on the future of Europe .
The debate is now closed .
( SV ) Mr President , when a Prime Minister visits us , many people from the same country want to speak and that is good .
However , the President might try , perhaps during the ' catch the eye ' procedure , to ensure that there is a better geographical distribution .
There were virtually no speakers from southern Europe here today , and sometimes it is the reverse when someone from southern Europe comes here .
It would be good if you could help to create a better balance .
Then the southern Europeans must ask to speak and get involved .
If they are not here , I cannot call them .
( Protest )
In point of fact , I did call Mr Varvitsiotis .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
in writing . - ( RO ) I would like to welcome the fact that the future of Europe continues to be a theme that is always present in the Parliament debates .
A common reflection is essential in order to ensure a prosperous and stable future to the next European generations .
I believe two main ideas should lie at the basis of this analysis and of the concept of the European future : the European citizen 's future and EU 's role in the world .
Thus , at an internal level , the citizen 's wellbeing should guide all European actions , while human rights and their complete protection should represent its decisive vector .
Education is not less important , as a premise of a prosperous future , as well as the policies of promoting protection of young people and children , intercultural dialogue and mutual tolerance .
Both the Lisbon Strategy and the new Reform Treaty are key documents , which should be firmly transposed into facts .
Nevertheless , in the 21st century globalised and interdependent world , a truly prosperous future for Europe is impossible without ensuring it for the entire world .
Thus , the EU has the obligation to contribute to ensuring global peace , stability and prosperity .
in writing . - It is with regret that I listened to the debate on the future of Europe and heard the Swedish Prime Minister question the agriculture budget in the EU .
If this is a debate about the future , then it seems to be bogged down in the past .
It is worth pointing out that the CAP was one of the foundation policies of the EU .
It provided food to feed a hungry Europe and has evolved and changed over the last 50 years in line with political and public pressure for change .
Today the CAP is not the biggest item of spending in the EU budget .
Yet I believe that spending on agriculture and food production is money well spent in a world where food security is now very much on the political agenda .
Looking to the future and the ratification of the Reform Treaty , it is important to tell people what the Treaty is about and what it is not about !
In Ireland we are holding a referendum on the Treaty which will , if passed , give an enhanced role and power to national parliaments in EU law-making .
This is an important provision , but elected members of parliaments must use this new power .
in writing . - We sit here as a House representing 27 nations .
Our differences currently divide as a consequence of our approach to Europe and our politics that shape that approach .
Our great challenge is not a new Treaty which attempts to bind us by force but the spirit in our approach to the future of Europe - a Europe where our children and their children will succeed as they compete with the emerging powers of the 21st century .
I look forward to a Europe in which future generations will not only be able to travel freely but will not be discriminated against based on which geographic location of Europe they come from , which language they use as their mother tongue , or how their last name is spelled .
Jargon like ' solidarity ' , cohesion , and integration is commonplace within our institutions - words that are empty in a Europe divided between the old and the new Member States , between those Member States that seek individual gains in bilateral agreements with third countries and those Member States that are impaired by those same third countries .
The European Union is lost today between bilateral agreements , conformity , and a diversity which should be our asset , not a hindrance .
Approval of the minutes of the previous sitting : see Minutes
Lisbon Strategy - Broad Economic Policy Guidelines for 2008-2010 ( debate )
The next item is the joint debate on the Council and Commission statements on the Lisbon Strategy , followed by the report by Mrs Starkevičiūtė , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , on the Integrated Guidelines for Growth and Jobs ( Part : broad guidelines for the economic policies of the Member States and the Community ) : Launching the new cycle ( 2008-2010 )
President-in-Office . - ( SL ) I am very pleased to be taking part in this session , in which the European Parliament is debating the start of the next phase of the Lisbon strategy for growth and employment .
The signing of the Treaty of Lisbon concludes an era in which we were greatly occupied with our own internal and sometimes political shape .
Europe is now considerably better equipped to open itself up to the world , and the Lisbon strategy provides the tools for Europe to help in the shaping of world trends as well .
The present moment is characterised by at least four of these trends .
When Europe launched the Lisbon strategy in 2000 , globalisation was mainly understood to be a competition between Europe , the USA and Japan .
Since then , new and important players have entered the world stage and are giving us cause to reflect anew on the contribution that Europe can make to this global world and where its true competitive advantages lie .
The communications revolution is happening before our very eyes , with the Internet and the World Wide Web .
Creativity and innovation are no longer restricted to rigid institutional schemes .
Only once in the past have we witnessed a revolution in mass communication ; that was 500 years ago when cheap paper and print came along , forming the foundation of European supremacy .
We are on the threshold of a third industrial revolution , the consequence of which will be significantly reduced dependence on fossil fuels and transition to a low-carbon economy .
In May 2007 , Parliament adopted a declaration on the third industrial revolution and hydrogen economy , thereby demonstrating Europe 's support for the leaders in this field .
Following the industrial era we are entering a conceptual era where values , meaning and empathy will come to the fore .
The red thread of these trends is the growing importance of the creative potential of the people and their values .
These are two topics which , of their nature , are very European .
That is why Europe has an ambition to be a co-designer of , and leader in , these four trends .
European ideas about development are framed by the Lisbon strategy for growth and employment .
Following a fundamental review in 2005 , the effectiveness of the Lisbon strategy was confirmed .
Structural reforms have improved the foundations of the European economy .
That is why it is easier to deal with crises in the financial markets and rising raw material prices , especially crude oil and food prices .
The world economy is heading into ever-increasing uncertainty .
It is therefore important that Europe should stick to its course and continue to implement reforms and modernise its economy and society .
The Commission did good work in preparing the Lisbon package published in December .
Slovenia , as President of the European Council , has placed the Lisbon strategy among the five priorities of its Presidency .
We are very pleased that the European Parliament is taking part in the broad debate in the next phase .
We have already had an exchange of opinions in ECON consultations , among the Three and in interparliamentary meetings .
We are all doing our best to enable the spring session of the European Council in March to launch this ambitious new phase of the Lisbon strategy .
The European Council will endorse the broad economic-policy guidelines and adopt the conclusions on employment policies .
The need to modify the broad guidelines was discussed at length .
In the end , colleagues from most Member States agreed that we could improve on some formulations , but putting forward the actual guidelines for discussion would initiate a long period of harmonisation and slow down the transition to the new phase , although the final result would be very similar to what is in front of us now .
The ECOFIN Council unanimously adopted the decision not to modify the broad economic guidelines .
What are being modified are the explanatory texts , that is to say the context in which the guidelines are set .
The European Council will adopt the specific recommendations of the Member States relating to their progress in the implementation of the national reform programmes .
It will call on the participants , namely the Council , the Commission and Parliament , to implement the Community 's Lisbon programme .
It will promote a few key activities and targets in four priority areas .
Those four areas reflect , firstly , Europe 's concern for the environment ; secondly , Europe 's concern for humans and their position in society ; thirdly , efforts to develop a more enterprising Europe ; and , fourthly , efforts to allow a more innovative and creative Europe , on which everything else is actually based .
Allow me to briefly address each of these four areas .
I place creativity alongside education and innovation .
Europe must translate its rich cultural tradition and ethical assets into a competitive advantage for its products .
We must continue to strive for the target of 3 % investment in research and development .
Knowledge must become the fifth freedom .
We need a unified knowledge area where there is open access to knowledge , where open innovation is supported and , of course , where knowledge is appropriately protected by European patent and copyright .
It should be possible to improve coordination between European research and development policies and national policies .
We Europeans must become more enterprising .
We lack highly innovative and creative small companies .
We must therefore pay more attention to the creation and development of small and medium-sized enterprises and their access to knowledge and research infrastructure , as well as to sources of capital funding .
We must strengthen the internal market , especially in service and networking industries , and abolish various hidden barriers .
A strong and effective internal market is also a much better defence against the effects of globalisation than the temptation of protectionism .
It is necessary to increase the transparency of financial markets , improve legislation and reduce administrative burdens .
We in Europe must preserve the tradition of offering our people care and solidarity .
Flexible security makes it possible to seek dynamically for a balance between the economy , which requires an efficient labour market , and the security that means that people will quickly find new employment .
We must therefore provide lifelong education and other support .
In particular , we must ensure that young people complete some kind of education and find employment as soon as possible .
The older generation must be encouraged to stay active as long as possible .
Finally , we in Europe care about nature and the environment .
Europe must take the lead in the process referred to by some as the third industrial revolution , the essence of which is to shift to a low-carbon economy .
I am convinced that it will be profitable for Europe 's economy , because Europe will be the world leader in the technologies of the future .
We need political agreement on the energy and climate package by the end of this year .
Ladies and gentlemen , we need a decisive push for the new phase of the Lisbon strategy , in order to make Europe a more dynamic , creative and enterprising knowledge-based society , which cares for people and the environment .
We urgently need to reflect on the strategic framework of European development after 2010 and the possible convergence of the Lisbon strategy and the Strategy for Sustainable Development .
As Mark Leonhard wrote , this century will be the century of Europe , not because Europe will lord it over the whole world in a colonial fashion , nor even because it will have the most powerful industry .
This century may become the century of Europe because the world will be dominated by European values and creativity , that is to say those two elements by which world trends are essentially shaped .
European creativity is supported by Europe 's brilliant cultural tradition .
European values ( as neighbours we cooperate with each other in solving disputes and caring for nature and man ) are an example to the whole world .
Therefore , we must not forget these deeply human starting points when we consider the economic and social future of our Union , that is to say our strategy for growth and employment .
Vice-President of the Commission . - ( DE ) Madam President , Mr President-in-Office , ladies and gentlemen , as far as the Commission is concerned , today 's debate is a fundamental one about the future position of Europe in the world .
It is about our response to the economic , social and environmental challenges of our time .
European integration , which has brought together 27 countries and almost 500 million people , is our great strategic strength .
We no longer weaken ourselves through strife , and so Europe has become , in every respect , one of the most appealing regions in the world .
The internal market is the foundation stone of our prosperity , and the common currency is a precious political and economic asset .
We are not exposed to the imponderables of the age or the storms of globalisation .
Integration gives us the chance to help shape the globalised era in accordance with our own vision .
This global age , however , will not bear the stamp of one single country or continent .
Japan , the United States and the European Union face a challenge from emerging countries such as China , India , Russia and Brazil , which - like ourselves - are vying for top spot in the global economic and technological rankings .
We believe that this new age offers us great opportunities and new options , but only if we remain alert to the signs of the times and are fully aware of all the risks .
At times of global mobility , the question of how secure jobs are in the European Union and how we can guarantee more jobs , and well-paid jobs , in the future is the real social issue of the age .
Let me repeat : the social issue of our time is the question of whether we shall have , and retain in the long term , a sufficient number of high-quality jobs .
The resolution of this key issue is at the heart of the revised Lisbon strategy , our partnership for growth and employment .
This strategy is the European response to globalisation .
We have carried out a review after three years , and we can be satisfied with the findings .
These have been good years for growth and employment .
Many millions of jobs have been created , and the growth rate has been higher than in the preceding years .
For the first time , productivity has risen faster than in the United States .
People have begun to feel the benefits of essential structural reforms .
But it would be wrong to rest on our laurels .
We have not yet reached our destination .
We still have a lengthy path ahead of us and more reforms to carry out .
We do not need an oracle to realise that the distinguishing feature of our age is not rigidity but constant change .
That still frightens many people , especially those who fear that they will be left behind by these changes and join the losers in the globalisation process .
This is another reason why it is important that the partnership for growth and employment should be even more firmly rooted within our societies .
We believe we have found a strategy which , unlike the original Lisbon strategy dating from 2000 , is realistic and will deliver the desired results .
That is also the aim of the Commission 's proposal for the next three years .
We believe that the basic orientation is right , but we also believe that adjustments are still needed on some of the issues that hold the key to the future .
For example , in the next three years there is a particular need to place greater emphasis on the social dimension of our partnership for growth and employment .
That , I think , will be the core issue .
Education , training and skill levels need to be improved .
We can only confront change by helping all individuals , from earliest infancy and throughout their lives , to develop all their talents , to keep learning new things and to remain flexible .
That is everyone 's right .
This is the only way we can ensure that those who lose their jobs are not condemned , along with their families , to live on the fringes of society in permanent unemployment and poverty .
We need a policy that boosts employment and enables people to make a new start at any stage in their lives .
This is not a task for politicians alone but for European entrepreneurs and companies too .
Let me make that crystal-clear , particularly in the light of some recent events .
Entrepreneurs and companies that are not in the picture yet will have to do some rethinking , because a good and motivated workforce is a company 's most valuable asset , and can give it that fine but all-important competitive edge .
We need more efforts to create a truly knowledge-based society .
Unfortunately , we are still far short of our target of spending 3 % of Europe 's GDP on research by 2010 , and I note with grave concern that the gap is widening rather than narrowing .
There is another trend that I find even more alarming , namely the fact that , although European companies are actually spending more , not less , on research and development than in past years , they are tending to invest that money outside rather than within Europe .
The European Research Area must become a reality .
If we do not succeed in keeping research and development activities in Europe , we shall not manage to keep jobs in Europe either .
We know that we must continue to strengthen the internal market .
We need to release the full potential of the vast majority of our businesses , by which I mean the 23 million small and medium-sized enterprises that employ two thirds of the entire European labour force .
We have already set the wheels in motion with a number of initiatives , but we intend to move up another gear in June with the Small Business Act .
Another immediate priority is a vigorous drive to incorporate energy and climate goals into our growth and employment policy .
We are keen to furnish evidence that environmental challenges can be converted into economic opportunities and social progress .
We need a strong European industrial sector to take up the baton , for we are firmly convinced that a leading European role in the realms of energy efficiency , new technology and economical use of resources would not only be good for the environment but would also boost employment .
Environment-friendly products and processes are in greater demand than ever before .
Responsible policies designed to combat climate change are not based on a deindustrialisation of Europe but on the viability of Europe as an industrial location , and on industries in Europe which produce without harming the environment and which export environmental protection .
We take the view that we could become far better yet at addressing this issue .
To this end , we need a great joint effort on the part of the European Union and the Member States .
We now have a reliable framework for that purpose .
We have a partnership which is based on dialogue and critical assessment of previous achievements , and which has proved its worth .
Three years ago , with the integrated guidelines , we established a reliable set of reference points with which European and national reforms can be aligned .
I am well aware that some are questioning our proposal that the guidelines in the narrower sense of the term be left untouched .
In making that proposal , the Commission was not driven by dogmatism or obstinacy .
We did not want any cosmetic packaging .
We wanted to emphasise the continuity of the aim of reform and the direction of the reforms in the European Union .
At the same time , we undertook a thoroughly critical review and stated plainly where the weaknesses of the past three years have lain in order to learn from them .
This is why we are proposing the change of emphasis I have described to you on aspects such as the social and environmental dimensions , and this change has also found its way into the guidelines .
We have also proposed a new Community programme , which - unlike its predecessor - is not a large and motley assortment of projects but a focused programme .
It reflects the overarching priorities of the Lisbon strategy for growth and employment .
Our growth and employment policy , ladies and gentlemen , remains the main interest of this Commission .
It is at the very top of our list of priorities , because it is all about more jobs , more prosperity and better protection of the environment .
( Applause )
Member of the Commission . - ( ES ) Madam President , President of the Council , ladies and gentlemen , first I should like to congratulate Mrs Starkevičiūtand everyone in this Chamber , especially members of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , who have been involved in drafting your report , which I find extraordinarily rich in its analysis and suggestions for the future on this new cycle of the Lisbon Strategy for the next three years .
If we look back over the past three years we can agree with the report 's analysis of the fruits being produced by the Lisbon Strategy in this new phase following the review of 2005 .
As has already been said this evening , jobs are being created .
A significant proportion of that employment is related to the reforms which are coming out of the Lisbon Strategy , the way in which reforms are viewed in the labour market and other areas of economic activity as set out in the Lisbon Strategy and the national reform programmes adopted three years ago .
Potential for growth is rising , although we would like it to rise further .
However , it is vitally important for Europe 's capacity to grow in normal economic conditions to increase .
We need greater growth in order to be able to occupy an important place in a globalising world where new and extraordinarily dynamic players are emerging .
In addition , market operation is improving , the barriers which stand in the way of entrepreneurship , of businessmen , and of production-oriented investment , are being removed .
Reforms have been introduced to improve the sustainability of social protection systems and public accounts in many European countries and there has of course been a heightening of awareness of the need for us to take care of the environment in our model for growth .
Lisbon is therefore bearing fruit .
The strategy for growth and jobs which has been in operation since 2005 is bearing fruit .
It would be a mistake to change direction now .
Therefore we essentially agree with the report being debated this evening : we must continue to move forward in the direction it sets out .
Nonetheless it is clear that account must be taken of changes in the situation - whether they be significant changes in the situation regarding energy and the environment , or the need to make countering climate change our top priority , new challenges , experience and obviously the economic climate and the economic situation we have been experiencing in recent months .
The situation we face leads to greater uncertainty for us , as well as pressures on financial markets , and means that in these more volatile , more uncertain , more difficult circumstances , we must accelerate the rate of reforms , accelerate the degree of establishment , the speed of application of the Lisbon strategy .
We share the view that implementation must , as the Integrated Guidelines state , take place within a framework of macroeconomic stability , within a framework which strengthens the sustainability of our public accounts , our welfare and social protection systems , environmental sustainability , and within a framework of confidence and commitment on the part of economic agents .
We must make best use of the room for manoeuvre gained through the sound reforms and sound policies of recent years ; we must exploit the margin which this time of uncertainty is offering us now that the fiscal positions of our economies in most of our countries have improved .
We can allow the automatic stabilisers to stop working in most of our economies now that there is less growth because of the volatile pressures in the financial markets or the sharp slow-down in the United States .
We are in a better position than in 2001 to cope with a significant slow-down in economic activity , thanks to policies based on the Integrated Guidelines in our strategy .
When , in view of the pressures in the financial markets , we have drawn comparisons between the situation of the European economies and that of the economy of the United States , many of us have over the last weeks and months noted the advantage which the European economies have because of our sound economic foundations .
Those sound economic foundations have been strengthened thanks to the policies set out in these guidelines , both with regard to the operation of Economic and Monetary Union , and to the many structural reforms which are part of the Lisbon Strategy .
In particular , there are some priorities for the near future which are also evident and are pointed up in the analyses in Mrs Starkevičiūtė 's report ; it is now a priority for us to strengthen progress in financial integration .
Financial integration is an instrument available to us to enable us to bolster our capacity to contend with a situation such as the one we are experiencing now .
Some initiatives do exist , such as a road-map recently approved by the ECOFIN Council .
We must all help these initiatives to be made reality in practice Europe-wide as soon as possible and we must ensure that Europe speaks with a single voice on those initiatives which must also be discussed and adopted within a more overarching framework , for example at the International Monetary Fund or the Financial Stability Forum .
In the light of all this I am sure that we will work together , that we are going to work together productively with Parliament ; this should strengthen the consensus on the basic aspects of our strategy and messages so as to encourage economic and social agents to participate actively in this reform process too so that the reforms are not something imposed from above but rather grow from the ground up and are refined through social dialogue .
The European institutions of Council , Parliament and Commission must work together productively so that not only they but also our Member States can develop and as part of their national reform programmes implement the objectives on which we are in agreement this evening .
rapporteur . - ( LT ) I would like to thank Mr Verheugen and Mr Almunia for their definition of the EU Lisbon Strategy .

However , I have always found it rather difficult to understand its main priorities .
This Commission document comprises some 300 pages , which are divided into separate chapters , each of them defining their own priority objectives .
Altogether we find 24 frameworks for the European Union to follow in order to achieve successful implementation of its economic policy and strategy .
We would not like to appear to be lagging behind the European Commission , so Parliament has adopted three different resolutions on these 24 frameworks , following three different procedures .
Apparently , this is our contribution to curtailing bureaucracy .
I would also like to thank the Commission for stressing the importance of the continuity of the reform .
I could not agree more .
However , life presents changes and new developments every day , especially from the perspective of globalisation .
Thus , if we decide that only cosmetic alterations are to be made , it hardly means we would be encouraging innovation and creativity , as pointed out by respectable representatives of Slovenia .
I appreciate the European Council 's view that every new strategy should create added value .
However , in my opinion we should establish our position as welcoming the continuity of the reforms but with the condition that they are consolidated and adapted to new circumstances .
The Lisbon Strategy 's sole priority should be the wellbeing of citizens .
To achieve that goal we can implement a variety of instruments of economic policy , all of which should work together .
Speaking of monetary policy , we should emphasise the importance of the independence of the European Central Bank .
Given the variety of interests and global challenges , there has to be a single body to respond to them .
We also need to remember that not all Member States have yet joined the single currency area .
However , the Central Bank 's ability to meet inflation targets is limited , as is its potential to meet inflation pressure and global challenges from outside the European Union .
Accordingly , alternative means should be introduced to enable the Central Bank to become independent .
Of course , we should first of all be speaking about fiscal balance .
I would , however , dare to disagree strictly with attempts to achieve fiscal balance by means of mechanically reducing expenditure .
In such a case it is the most vulnerable and socially deprived sectors of the population that shoulder the burden , rather than officials , who are not in the habit of making cuts in their own salaries .
Our first objective should be to consolidate managing institutions and reduce management expenditure .
The funds could then be distributed to sectors benefiting citizens .
Another relevant issue that I would like to highlight is the role of the financial sector .
It makes little sense to talk about tightening the budget when at the same time billions are being spent in bids to save banks .
The role of the financial sector should be set out and clearly defined in the Lisbon Strategy .
It is obvious that without the stability of the financial sector , it would be impossible to secure long-term economic stability .
Notwithstanding the manifest problems of today 's financial sector , quite frankly I cannot see too much effort being spent on trying to tackle them in all seriousness .
Until the next crisis , so to say .
How can we help our people , the citizens of the Member States ?
First of all , we are in a position to be able to reduce their work costs , living costs , costs of settling down and adapting to the challenges of a new way of life .
Researchers have put forward various suggestions for solving these problems .
I do agree with the ideas that they think might produce beneficial results , that is improved representation and more accessible finance for small businesses .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( NL ) Madam President , Mr President-in-Office , Commissioners , ladies and gentlemen , this is the first time we have held the annual debate in which we prepare for the spring summit in the afternoon .
Usually in this House we schedule priority debates for the morning .
But you should not conclude from this that we regard the spring summit and the Lisbon Strategy as less important .
Not at all , it is just that for once we have graciously devoted our morning to Mr Corbett and Mr Méndez de Vigo and our debate on their excellent report on the reform treaty which , together with the Lisbon Strategy , will be decisive in shaping the future of Europe .
Last week in Brussels we got together with members of the national parliaments to review progress on the Strategy , and on one thing we were very quick to agree : the new approach which focuses on growth and jobs , not forgetting the dimension of sustainability , is bearing fruit .
The Strategy encourages the European economy 's potential for growth and is creating a climate which favours the creation of new jobs : 6.5 million so far , and we expect 5 million more to follow .
The next step is what the Commission is proposing , boldly continuing along the path we have embarked on , because the job is not yet finished .
In all Member States and in all areas there is still plenty of room for improvement and a need for it .
We have a lot to learn from one another and we must also make better use of opportunities at the regional level .
So we shall wholeheartedly support the joint resolution on the Lisbon Strategy .
For our Group the priorities are clear .
Greater investment in research and innovation and effective protection for intellectual property - these are crucial if we are to develop our economy in the future and create quality jobs .
Equally essential is a better climate in which to do business .
Completion of the single market , better regulation and less red tape , these things are important to all businesses but especially to our 23 million SMEs .
So we need this Small Business Act and it must be more than just a token .
So we are also very happy to have been able , this week , to complete the legislative package on the single market in goods , but we are less happy that new labelling rules have been proposed which will add to all the administrative kerfuffle .
Thirdly , the labour market must be reformed , flexibility and job security must go hand in hand with each other and we must invest more in people 's skills .
Lastly , we support the 20-20-20 objectives , but in a way that will create jobs here rather than causing jobs to be exported to other continents .
One final point : the spring summit will rightly be looking at the creeping crisis in the money and insurance markets .
We really must make sure that this crisis does not derail our efforts to promote growth and jobs .
If we are vigilant , if we remain on course , we can restore people 's confidence .
Confidence means stability and with that we can guarantee Europe a good future .
And that is our job .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( FR ) Madam President , the application , albeit imperfect , of the Lisbon Strategy has enabled the European Union to move forward in many areas .
Jobs have been created and there has been greater investment in training , research and the new technologies .
There are still challenges to be faced , however .
The world is on the move , and new problems are emerging .
The Minister , Mr Turk , and Commissioners Verheugen and Almunia have just made this clear .
Even if the subprime crisis started in the USA , bankers , insurers and fund managers in Europe have been just as greedy , this being the main driving force in the financial world .
While some top bosses have opened their gold parachutes , workers and the general public are paying for the mess .
There has been a credit squeeze pretty much everywhere .
The real economy is marking time , the USA is clearly in recession , growth in Europe is running out of steam , inflation is taking off again , oil products are shooting up , as are food prices , while fertiliser prices are rocketing , indicating more expensive harvests to come .
The European Central Bank is doing nothing more than trying to keep a lid on inflation .
Workers and trade unions are being asked to tighten their belts , yet purchasing power is declining just about everywhere .
Mr Verheugen , all of our countries are now having to deal with poverty and social exclusion .
68 million people in Europe are living below the official poverty line in their respective countries .
13 % of workers have unstable contracts and no lasting social protection .
There are 23 million false self-employed .
At the same time 1 % of the population owns more than 15 % of the available wealth in Europe .
Combating climate change will make poverty more likely for many people in Europe .
The polluter-pays principle sounds good , but it is still consumers who ultimately foot the bill .
In the UK the public authorities are working to combat fuel poverty , yet the Commission tells us that the EU has not liberalised its energy market enough , as if , in a world where 90 % of the energy resources are dependent on sovereign States , consumers are free to choose their suppliers .
Faced with these increasing problems the Commission , and particularly President Barroso , has only one response : do not change the Lisbon Strategy .
The Integrated Guidelines are apparently carved in Portuguese marble and cannot be altered , as far as President Barroso is concerned .
On behalf of the Socialist Group , let me give President Barroso a solemn warning .
We will not accept this Cold-War style niet from the Commission about the Guidelines .
The context of the Lisbon Strategy is changing .
The document guiding our actions also needs to adapt to the new European and international situation .
( Applause )
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( BG ) Dear representatives of the European Council , dear representatives of the European Commission , dear colleagues , Three years ago , the re-launched Lisbon Strategy clearly emphasized on the need for sustainable economic growth , and more and better-quality jobs .
Today , national reforms move at good pace , the European economy scores steady growth rates , while unemployment rates are at their lowest since 1998 .
Notwithstanding the good results , much greater effort is needed against the backdrop of the gorwing global competition to achieve a dynamic and competitive economy based on knowledge and innovation .
The Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe consider this Strategy to be the driving force of deep-going economic and social reform .
It is the response to the globalization challenges , making it possible for the European Union to take the lead in economic growth , social and environmental prosperity , technological development and modernisation .
It is the attainment of these objectives that needs redoubled efforts in the years to come .
Liberals and Democrats for Europe recognise the development of new structures for the management of the Strategy over the last three years , with better allocation of responsibilities between the Community and the Member States .
Bulgaria and Romania have been fully integrated in the implementation of the Lisbon Strategy since their accession and , in 2007 , they reported the implementation of their reform plans for the first time .
Regardless of the differences existing between individual Member States , the implementation of the Lisbon Strategy has improved the growth potential of the European Union as a whole .
The business environment , which is so very important to Liberals and Demoracts , has benefitted substantially from these reforms .
The EU strategy for better regulation is gradually taking shape .
It is easier and cheaper to register a company and start a business in most Member States today .
Nevertheless , an integrated entrepreneurial culture is still missing at the European level .
WE need a comprehensive approach at the EU level to the growth and competitiveness of small and medioum-sized enterprises .
The EU Member States have committed themselves to investing 3 % of GDP in innovation , research and development by 2010 .
Still , the available data point to substantial discrepancies between Member States .
Therefore serious efforts will be needed in this respect , including the private sector , so that to achieve this target .
The European Union has made big strides towards its transformation into an environmental society .
New ambitious commitments have been undertaken to drastically reduce carbon dioxide emissions and to use renewable energy sources by 2020 .
Liberals and Democrats believe that the lwo carbon society is feasible only if research and innovation offer the " green ” technologies needed for this purpose .
The high standnards that we , Europeans , wish to have , are achievable only through solidiarity action .
Therefore the exchange of experience , the support and the opportunities to learn from each other are of paramount importance .
The knowledge-based economy implies also willingness to learn .
Economic growth , low unemployment , high social standards and a dynamic business environment are not mutually exclusive .
It is sufficient to recall the examples of countries like Denmark and Finland .
Dear colleagues , many priorities of Liberals and Democrats have been reflected in the European Parliament 's Resolution on the Lisbon Strategy . They include the creation of conditions for a more flexible and better functioning labour market , allowing social inclusion ; reduction of the administrative burden and attainment of better regulation ; strengthening of the positions of European businesses at the international level ; more imports , exports , and investment ; greater transparency and stability of financial markets ; better consumer protection ; greater commitment to the environment ; more efficient use of the Structural Funds of the Community for achieving tangible results in the implementation of the Strategy ; and reinforcement of the transport network of the Trans-European projects .
Dear colleagues , The inidcators are in place , the objectives are clearly defined .
What matters now is implementation .
on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( LV ) Thank you , Madam President .
Commissioner , representatives of the Council , today I would like to focus on the possible effect of the current issue on the tasks and targets of the Lisbon Strategy .
Problems on the global financial market and the effect of the US economy 's difficulties on world economic growth are the first serious test for the new Lisbon Strategy and its ability to act as an antidote to the possible obstacles to the growth of the European economy .
Regardless of the current complications , faster long-term growth remains Europe 's priority .
This demands the emergence onto the market of many new , active businesses .
I am in no doubt that the perturbation in the financial system requires measures to re-establish stability .
It should , however , be stressed that this is the time to take responsible decisions .
Re-establishing stability within the financial system should not stand in the way of the tasks of the financial system : promoting the growth of Europe 's businesses .
I would like to emphasise this in particular because it is essential to widen the range of funding options for newly established businesses .
Competition between financing options needs to be significantly encouraged .
The task highlighted in all the Lisbon Strategy documents of nurturing the growth potential of small and medium-sized enterprises is to be welcomed .
The Commission 's proposed Small Business Act is to be welcomed .
The current situation , however , is such that large businesses with an established place on the market have incomparably better finance opportunities than people wishing to start up their own businesses .
What is lacking in the Lisbon Strategy is a duty to foster a wide , competitive range of financial instruments , but this is in fact a vital precondition for nurturing Europe 's growth potential .
The current response to the instability of the finance system must not be allowed to restrict innovation in the financial sector . Thank you .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( DE ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , in the realm of climate policy , the year 2007 - and some time has already elapsed since then - is regarded as the year when the reality of climate change was officially acknowledged .
If we consider that the debate on global warming and sustainability strategies has been running for almost two decades , it becomes clear how long it takes to influence such a political process and how difficult it is to effect an actual strategic realignment .
Even though we hear assurances throughout the EU that the pursuit of sustainability has finally been incorporated into the Lisbon Strategy , I still doubt whether we are really serious about this sea change and whether we are really prepared to strike out in a new direction and turn away from a purely quantitative growth target to pursue the aim of quality-driven growth .
When we were preparing the Lisbon resolution for Parliament , with Mr Lehne and myself as co-rapporteurs , we argued once again - not we personally but our political groups - about the issue of energy policy and energy strategies .
It is no wonder that we did , for this issue is worth arguing about .
The resolution now enshrines a concept that barely conceals the potential gulf between our respective views on sustainability .
The term ' low-carbon economy ' is now being presented as a compromise formula for this Parliament .
In my opinion , it merely papers over the conflict between the status quo , whose advocates would press on with the energy-based economy , fuelled by the old energy mix of coal and nuclear power , and the strategy that we wanted , namely a radical change of course designed to cut resource consumption .
This concept which we have now incorporated thinly veils our continuing failure to take a decision .
Let me reiterate at this point that Europe , in my view , could not possibly play the pioneering role which would fulfil the hopes of people throughout the world on the basis of high-risk nuclear energy or of a renewed reliance on coal .
I shall move on now , but we shall resume this argument in another context .
I also believe , Mr Verheugen , that the adjustment of the guidelines in this area is yet to happen , because simply appending security of energy supply and renewables does not amount to a change of strategy .
A new strategy is quite a different matter and has to be reflected in new measures and instruments .
I believe , however , that the need to alter the guidelines of the Lisbon strategy is not confined to the environmental dimension but also extends to the domain of social policy .
We keep hearing of an upturn in European growth and employment over the last three years .
At the same time , however , we have seen social marginalisation and an increase in the number of insecure jobs .
In our opinion , the common aim of social integration and cohesion can only be interpreted to mean , in plain and simple terms , that working people in Europe must be able to live on what they earn .
I was therefore puzzled by the squabbling between the political groups during the preparation of the Lisbon resolution on the question whether it is right or wrong to conclude agreements on minimum wages in Europe on an industry-by-industry basis .
I do not believe there is any alternative , and I only wish there were a greater degree of consensus on that point .
I also wish that my fellow Members on the right of this House would not always interpret the concept of ' flexicurity ' to mean only that the weakest members of society need to be flexible and submissive while the others are free to continue conducting their business as they see fit .
Something I regard as a very important aspect of the resolution that will be put to the vote tomorrow - and this remark is also addressed to Mrs Figueiredo , who played a leading part in this success - is that we have managed to present joint proposals for new indicators with which progress towards achievement of the Lisbon objectives can be measured , particularly the objective of improving people 's quality of life .
The fact that the income-based approach in the form of that old landmark indicator , the national-income growth rate , completely overlooks disparities in income growth shows that it is not in any way an adequate indicator .
It becomes even more inadequate , of course , if we actually want to measure factors such as improvements in the quality of life and in the state of the environment .
I would be delighted if the Commission were to respond to these comments regarding environmental and social indicators .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL group . - ( PT ) In practice , eight years after the Lisbon Strategy was approved , social inequalities have widened and poverty , which afflicts around 78 million people , including 25 million low-wage earners with insecure jobs , has got worse .
Most of the jobs created are insecure , and part-time work involves women in particular , who continue to be discriminated against in access to jobs , training and career progression , and in terms of wages .
Youth unemployment is twice as high as total unemployment , and includes many young higher education graduates who are unable to find work , much less work commensurate with their education , while around 6 million young people continue to leave school prematurely every year , which also threatens their future .
These consequences could be foreseen in a strategy whose neoliberal vision was developed with the 2005 reform , the priority measures of which included structural sector and public service liberalisations and privatisations , and which stressed labour flexibility .
Poverty and social injustice may now be exacerbated by the financial crisis that began in the United States , and by the high price of fossil fuels and of some agricultural produce which is essential for the diet .
Policies must therefore be changed as a matter of urgency to forestall their consequences in the European Union , particularly in the most fragile economies , to avoid a deterioration in the social situation .
Our resolution therefore stresses the need to replace the ' Lisbon Strategy ' with a European strategy for solidarity and sustainable development that opens new horizons for a Europe of full employment without discrimination , decent jobs with rights , better wages , economic and social cohesion and adequate protection and public and universal social security , or in short , guaranteeing greater social justice .
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - ( NL ) Madam President , over the last few months the credit crisis in the USA has shown that a purely capitalist system is unsustainable .
For rather longer than that we have known that a communist or , if you will , socialist system does not work .
That became very clear in 1989 .
But now that capitalism clearly is not working either , it is high time to act on that realisation .
Through the Lisbon Strategy we are seeking to ensure that Europe remains economically competitive with the rest of the world .
That will only be possible if everyone who can play a part actually does so and if we work to guarantee a good living environment .
So the promotion of employment and sustainable development are quite rightly principal objectives of the revised Lisbon Strategy .
I do not think the solutions recommended by our colleagues in the GUE Group are either sufficiently informed or realistic .
If we were to take measures of that kind , inflation would rise and investor confidence in Europe would evaporate .
And at the end of the day , inflation is theft .
In previous debates on the spring summit I already said that governments in the Member States should take an active role .
I say so again today .
Member States themselves must initiate reforms and carry them through .
And whilst we are not yet at the point of a recession , it is high time we took adequate measures to reform the welfare state .
Europe can certainly coordinate here , but it cannot dictate .
( SK ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the report in question rightly accentuates the risks of a deregulated global financial system .
It is beyond the direct influence of EU policies and can transmit a risk of widespread financial instability .
It is therefore necessary to re-assess the impact of the business model and the role of multinational financial groups on global financial markets and to try to structure them across a wide international base .
I agree that a healthy and stable macro-economic environment requires large-scale budget consolidation and an intelligent private and public investment policy that delivers forward-looking infrastructure and open 's up tomorrow 's markets .
I do not think that public ownership is one of the main elements leading to distortions of the European energy market .
So far no one has proved that private monopolies behave more correctly than monopolies in which the State is a shareholder .
It is all a question of setting up the rules correctly .
It is therefore necessary to improve the rules governing competition in the energy sector as well as in transport and information systems , to gradually open up the relevant markets and to broaden and harmonise the European infrastructure .
( DE ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the resolution drafted by the Steering Group focuses on three key areas : the internal market , where we are concerned in particular with the need to close certain gaps , and I need only quote the examples of the absence of a uniform patent law and the absence of an internal market in insurance ; the labour market , where we are concerned in particular with security through flexibility ; and monitoring and control , where we are concerned in particular with implementing the strategy in the Member States .
This time we chose deliberately to focus not on energy and climate , because that was the key area in the past two years , and in strategic terms we have in fact achieved what we wanted to achieve with our resolutions , namely to ensure that the Commission and the Council concern themselves deeply with the subject , which is what they are doing .
One aspect we continue to regard as important and which is addressed in the general part of the resolution is the whole complex of better legislation .
In particular , we refer to the problems that still exist in regard to evaluating results and cutting back on red tape .
Of course arguments also arose between the groups during the preparatory stage , nearly all of which were settled .
In the end one decisive point of dispute remained .
My Group stands by the integrated guidelines and , like the Commission , believes that we do not need to change the integrated guidelines at this point in time .
Overall , we can regard what has been achieved in recent years as a success .
When in 2005 we in a sense revived the Lisbon Strategy , everybody assumed Lisbon was merely the capital of a Member State , Portugal .
Nobody connected its name with a concrete strategy .
That was not the case , for example , of Kyoto , which stands not just for a town but also for a global strategy .
We have made considerable progress in recent years in terms of our perception of what Lisbon stands for .
We support the Commission 's position that growth and jobs are the key aspect and that progress in that area is of crucial importance .
For only if we have growth and jobs can we conduct a good environmental and social policy .
( DE ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , that is a bit of a problem .
' We stand by the guidelines ' sounds a little dogmatic .
We in the PSE Group are not so much concerned with which document we do or do not support but believe the key issue really is whether these guidelines are an answer to the real economic situation , and the key issue is whether they offer any more help in tackling the needs of the people in the European Union .
That is the key issue in this debate , so once again : let the data speak for themselves .
Jean-Claude Juncker , the Eurogroup Chairman , has just announced that growth will decline , that in 2008 it will no longer be 2.7 % , but 1.6 % , 1.7 % or 1.8 % .
This sounds a clear warning bell , especially because we know that the outlook in the USA was already looking gloomy at the end of 2007 .
At the same time inflation is forecast at 3.2 % .
That means a loss of prosperity , a loss of real wages , a loss of purchasing power .
Obviously we fear that stagnation may go hand in hand with inflation here , and this is a warning bell .
We also know that poverty has not fallen in the European Union over the past five years , but that in fact more people are excluded from the affluent society .
Research and development have reached a more or less stable level , but certainly not the 3 % we need for the Lisbon Strategy , only just over half of that , at an average of 1.6 % , 1.7 % or 1.8 % - far too low to allow us to play the international role we want to play .
We are now looking at a contradiction .
Surely I cannot pretend that the integrated guidelines provide me with an instrument of governance while at the same time shaping that instrument in such a way that it does not react to economic and social data in the European Union ?
I cannot on the one hand stand up - obviously as President of the Commission - and make sure that nothing , not an iota of the core text of those guidelines is changed , while at the same time hoping that people in the Member States of the European Union , the employers , the employees , those who play their part in the economic process , feel that they are seeing political governance here .
That is not the way to resolve this contradiction .
The Commissioners present here have told us many times what needs to be changed .
Let us discuss those changes , in whatever area they apply .
Where are the products , where are the changes that will also help improve the lot of the people ?
The Socialists support an offensive strategy , as presented in Parliament 's documents , but we want real answers that help improve the lot of the people .
( DE ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the Member States are and remain responsible for formulating and implementing economic policy .
That means the Lisbon Strategy can only be implemented by targeted measures in the Member States .
There is no such thing as a European economic policy defined centrally in Brussels .
That is precisely why the basic features of economic policy are so important .
They are the cornerstone of the coordination of economic strategies by Member States and they constitute a point of reference designed to ensure that Member States move in the right direction by taking the necessary reforms and then remain on the right road .
They enshrine the EU 's core economic principles : open markets , fair competition , innovative private entrepreneurship without state regulation .
Unfortunately , the Member States do not always implement the integrated guidelines for growth and jobs , and at times only do so rather timidly .
Specifically with a view to meeting the challenges of globalisation , the European Union must adhere to its core principles , as the only way to safeguard its competitiveness in the long term .
Unfortunately we have recently seen more examples of what I would term creative compartmentalisation .
For example - and I am saying this to Mrs Harms , for her information - by introducing excessively high minimum wages , the Deutsche Post , the German Post Office , is keeping any competitors away from the officially liberalised market .
The current turbulence on the financial markets also shows that enterprises are all too quick to turn to the State for help if they run into difficulties .
Rescuing private financial institutions such as Northern Rock in the UK or IKB in Germany with the help of the taxpayer 's money is an unacceptable mistake in terms of the rules of economic policy .
The banks ' profits stay in the hands of the shareholders and excessive bonuses are paid to a small number of employees , while the losses are nationalised .
That kind of procedure undermines people 's trust in the social market economy system .
It is the State 's job to support the market by passing the appropriate framework legislation , but it is the job of the market to drive the economy forward and ensure that Europe remains competitive .
Madam President , the recent financial turmoil which shook consumer and market confidence brought home to us how important it is to have in place sustainable strategies for growth .
It has always been the correct approach for the EU to have such strategies and to have policies of cooperation and coordination that strengthen us as individual nations and as a unit .
Many of the issues which are important to the Lisbon Strategy have been raised today , whether it is supporting innovation , fair competition , addressing energy issues , climate change , lifelong learning or investing in knowledge , to name but a few .
I believe that increasing competitiveness and growth , and trying to reach the 3 % , is absolutely vital if we are to see Europe grow in the way that we want it to .
I think an awful lot has been achieved .
Sometimes we are too critical of ourselves .
Well over 12 or 13 million jobs have been created in Europe over the past number of years , which is more than has been achieved in the United States of America .
However , if we want to get enlightened social policies and have the money for enlightened social policies , we have to liberalise our economies .
And that is one of the issues that we are not addressing within individual Member States .
I believe that is the challenge : to have economies that are growing so that we can then spend money on enlightened social policies .
( ES ) Madam President , I would agree that the priorities and resources related to the Lisbon Strategy should be more clearly identified in the budgets of the Member States and competent institutions .
Close examination should be made of the whole chain of educational and training systems , and the content in terms of general culture and scientific and technical training should be of the highest level possible with the aim of enabling people to adapt to changes in the wider situation and promoting citizen participation , better quality jobs , the entrepreneurial spirit and innovation .
It is necessary in turn to study demographic changes and their effects on the public purse , the labour market and health service provision .
Similarly , innovative reform of the labour market should be guided by ' flexicurity ' rules which promote competitiveness and at the same time provide adequate social security yet do not give a nod to the right in this Chamber , as my colleague Rebecca Harms said in her speech .
Finally , it is important for the Member States and all the competent institutions to exchange best practice effectively , as doing so also has the advantage of fostering convergence of objectives throughout Europe .
( DE ) Madam President , Commissioner , you said we have created more jobs recently .
True , but most of them are insecure jobs .
You said productivity has now grown .
True , but that productivity growth has not been used to increase wages - which could have been done - nor has it been used for reinvestment .
You said the rising GDP is also a sign that we are on the right track , that the Lisbon Strategy is the right one .
I say to you that despite the three positive statistics you gave , we have seen no results at all to date .
We have rising profits , but income from wages is not rising ; we continue to have an economic policy directed at supply and not demand ; we do not have adequate domestic demand .
That means we still have the same problems we had five years ago , that we had three years ago , with the Lisbon Strategy .
Nothing has changed at all .
So how can you then say that we are on the right track ?
What have we got ?
You also said we must support the SMEs .
In that case I would ask you to turn to your colleague Mr Mandelson .
What was his input into the global Europe strategy ?
It was that the markets must be opened to large companies operating worldwide .
Nothing about SMEs there , not a word !
We are carrying out tax reforms in the Member States that give preferential treatment to joint-stock companies .
They are exempted from tax .
The profits then made are , however , no longer passed on to the national economy .
We say that employees have to be flexible .
They have to accept earning less money .
They have been doing so for years .
If profits escalate , they could also be allowed their share .
That is not happening .
The banks speculate mercilessly and a very large proportion of the big companies ' profits is invested as financial capital , because the profit margins are higher there , rather than going back into production .
That is the wrong track for Lisbon .
If I want money , then I as the European Union or as a Member State must also insist on more tax revenue .
I can only get that in areas where enough taxes also can be obtained .
That would be the right approach for a Lisbon Strategy : a radical rethinking of economic policy .
If we continue along the lines you have proposed , we will not resolve the problem in the European Union .
Madam President , it really does no good to keep talking about the Lisbon Agenda , because every year for the past eight years it has been universally acknowledged that it has not worked very well .
This report , with its huge list of what the European Union should do , completely misses the point .
Rather than the EU being the force that drives growth and productivity , it is the EU , with its endless interference in business , that is holding back the economies of Europe .
Another point which is ignored is that the different economies of the EU have vastly different structures and performances .
It makes no sense to talk about the European economy as a single entity .
Contrast Germany , which has been enjoying some modest economic growth , with the southern EU countries variously afflicted with huge trade deficits , collapsing housing booms and enormous government debts .
What these countries desperately need is lower interest rates and devaluation , which cannot be delivered because they are all in the euro area .
If the European Central Bank reduces interest rates to provide some assistance , it will have to ignore its inflation target , which would certainly not please the Germans .
Surely , rather than continuing to add millions more words to the sterile discussion of the Lisbon Strategy , some attention should have been paid to these rather more pressing issues .
But I suppose that would highlight the fundamental weakness of economic and monetary union , which is that a single currency is not a sustainable long-term arrangement for a group of widely differing economies with independent governments .
( NL ) Madam President , we all know that Europe must evolve further into a knowledge-based economy that is better able to compete in world markets .
We don 't have to push at open doors here , we are all agreed on that .
What we are not agreed on is , for example , the fact that the Commission regards new economic migration on a huge scale as one of the most important means of achieving the Lisbon objectives .
This is absurd .
We have talent enough in Europe .
Above all we have a few tens of millions of people out of work in Europe , and that is more than enough .
This is the huge challenge facing governments and the world of business and industry .
And your average European , furthermore , really does not want to see a new wave of immigration .
He wants to see the huge numbers of foreigners already here being integrated , assimilated and absorbed into the employment process .
Yes , once again the Commission is well wide of the mark .
I remember the European Commission saying a few months ago that the political crisis in Belgium would slow down the pace of the reforms needed to achieve the Lisbon objectives .
In reality the very opposite is true .
The reality is that the political crisis in Belgium was proof of the failure of the Belgian state and it is this fact of Belgium 's existence that is stopping Flanders from modernising its employment law and jobs market , from reducing its social costs , simplifying and reducing its taxes precisely in order to meet these Lisbon targets .
But of course it is utterly beyond the pale for the European Commission to admit that Belgium is an obstacle both to Flanders and Wallonia .
( ES ) Madam President , Commissioner , Mr President-in-Office , we are again at a complex moment for the European Union , facing a difficult economic situation , and we are starting to draw up the outlines of economic policy in circumstances which are essentially characterised by a weakening of economic growth which itself is basically a response to a lack of confidence on the part of economic agents : consumers , entrepreneurs and , above all , small and medium-sized undertakings .
Accordingly , in addition to congratulating the rapporteur , in addition also to expressing our satisfaction for the positive attitude of the other Groups , especially the Socialist Group , with whom we have reached broad agreement allowing economic policy outlines to be drawn up , my political Group , the Group of the European People 's Party , wishes to stress the appropriateness of strengthening the European Union , and strengthening the European economy by advocating and committing ourselves to economic reforms .
To that end we support the Commission in its efforts to use the Integrated Guidelines to facilitate fundamental reforms to underpin a new framework of confidence to enable the difficulties we are facing to be overcome .
A new framework dedicated to labour reforms agreed with social partners , tax reforms which encourage growth of small and medium undertakings and job creation .
In short , a framework dedicated to reforms which facilitate the completion of the internal market as the best way of stimulating economic growth as a job creator in the European Union .
In that regard I would also like to stress that protectionism must be rejected , a point we defend in our policy position , and advocate in short for us to finally lay the foundations in the European Union for economic growth which creates employment , which is the true pillar of European integration .
Madam President , after a long debate , we finally have a text which we as Socialists can support , and I welcome this compromise on the Lisbon resolution .
However , let me start by expressing a personal opinion , which is that having an idea is not the whole solution .
Everything depends on the execution .
One has to put the two together .
In 2000 , the idea of Lisbon was good and very timely .
Nor could we identify better targets than we did during the 2005 review .
But if one looks at the execution itself - especially looking back at that execution through time and along the full decision-making chain - it is another story .
There has been an improvement compared to the first five years , and we have acquired some dynamism , but the results compared to the needs and the global challenges we face , and compared to the potential we have , are limited .
We have had some great initiatives and success stories , like the Growth and Jobs programme or the ' Think Small First ' project , and there have been some great legislative successes - the Services Directive , the supervision of the financial markets regulation , climate change policy and the new energy package , to list just a few .
But the overall feeling is missing , and the commitment itself is missing .
In the European institutions we can see this in the decreased use of the expression ' connecting to the agenda ' .
It can be seen in the very low interest in the topic last week during the joint parliamentary session with the national parliaments , and it can be seen simply by reading the Eurobarometer results .
I would like to quote two numbers from the Eurobarometer .
The so-called optimism index has decreased over the last nine months by nine points , from 26 to 17 .
Also , if one looks at other key performance indicators , the employment optimism index has fallen by three points from + 4 to + 1 in the last nine months .
If one looks further , the key elements of the Lisbon Strategy are amongst the last issues people consider to be the most important .
This means that , eight years after Lisbon , European citizens do not believe that the EU can provide proper responses on these issues .
So Lisbon is still in our documents , but is certainly not in our hearts and minds .
In the 21st century the race of continents will not be decided only by natural and energy resources or by financial resources .
The power of human capital and human resources will determine the winner .
The conjunction of the total population , in terms of quantity , and the consistency of its knowledge , in terms of quality , will jointly decide the strength of the Community .
We still have a lot to do as regards knowledge creation , knowledge management and the motivation of people as a Community .
This is a Community that we need to consider as a whole , not letting anyone be discriminated against .
We cannot leave anyone out , whether young or old , black or white , rich or poor .
We need everyone - the people as a whole .
In the 21st century , real people will be central , yet the Commission President is not here today to speak about this ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
Madam President , after seven years of work , the Lisbon Strategy is partly a failure .
This is mostly due to implementation difficulties .
I will give you some examples on the internal market .
Regarding the energy package , we had to deliver totally new legislation .
When we decided to increase the budget line on research , we only got 50 % of what we had decided we needed .
We have a European paradox in innovation where we put money in but we do not get the industrialisation and the jobs that we wanted .
We talked highly of the SMEs but they are still struggling with the same regulation as the big global industries .
We know that gender equality improves economic growth but we still have a lot to do in this area .
We know that the transport sector is very bad in Europe and we still have a lot to do when it comes to railways and transportation time through Europe .
It is time to change this .
The first thing to consider , Mr Turk and Mr Almunia - and maybe you can pass this message on to Mr Verheugen - is what will be in the text of the Resolution on Climate Change at the Spring Summit .
We all agree that climate change can be a win-win situation , where we can solve environmental problems and where we can create new jobs .
We have already delivered decisions on this in Parliament and now we are waiting to see what the Commission and the Council will deliver in the Spring Summit .
There are still 18 million unemployed Europeans , more than 18 million people unemployed , and we know that SMEs , clean tech , innovation and services can deliver the jobs they need .
Will you give them the chance ?
( PL ) Madam President , in this debate on the Lisbon Strategy I want to point out first of all that , in my opinion , insufficient account has been taken of the effect of the American financial crisis on the level of economic growth and unemployment in Europe .
While the GNP forecasts for 2008 and 2009 put forward by individual Member States are lower than the growth rates achieved in 2007 , it appears that the reality will be even worse .
My second point is that the United States Government and the Federal Reserve System reacted vigorously and with lightning speed .
The government proposed 150 billion dollars ' worth of support for firms and consumers and , by cutting interest rates several times , the central bank ensured that the real basic interest rate was negative .
By contrast , the governments of the EU Member States , the European Central Bank and the other central banks give the impression that they are happy with the slowdown in economic growth and the strengthening of the euro .
One must agree with the report 's conclusion on the need to transfer the work-related tax burden to environment-related taxes , but decidedly reject the proposal to coordinate corporate tax rates in the Member States .
( DE ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , it is true that the European economy is facing major problems .
Crises on the world financial markets , rising energy and food prices , sluggish domestic demand as a result of wage dumping and social robbery , the growth of insecure employment - those are all urgent problems that need to be tackled .
Yet there is no mention of them in this report .
We are reminded that the rise in incomes should keep pace with the medium-term growth in productivity .
Yet at the same time the report calls for the continued pursuit of neoliberal structural reforms , i.e. precisely those alleged reforms that produced the problems we are facing today in the first place .
Instead of creating jobs through public investment , even more pressure is to be put on employees and the unemployed , working hours are to be increased and protection against wrongful dismissal undermined even more .
Instead of taking action to regulate the financial markets and capital transactions , we are to stand by helplessly as the current financial crisis spreads ever further .
And instead of putting an end to the policy of liberalisation , which has contributed a good deal to the forcing up of prices on the energy markets , we are to continue stubbornly to focus on privatisation and deregulation .
Our Group will not vote for this report . It will not endorse a report that advocates a neoliberal agenda , stamps on social rights and will produce ever more crises .
What we really need is a radically different economic policy , in which the interests of the employed and the unemployed take precedence over the profit-seeking of big companies .
( FR ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , wanting a knowledge economy is a good thing , but it is not enough .
Growth in direct or ancillary jobs relies on the sustainability of traditional forms of blue-collar work , but these industries are caught in a vice .
With their competitiveness already under threat from the increasing bureaucratic costs in our societies , they are being stifled by the absurd way in which the euro is managed , which generates a competitive additional income for countries that have no serious social or environmental policy whatsoever .
The model is back-to-front .
We are socialist within the EU and liberal outside it , yet what we need is greater protection from the rest of the world and greater freedom within .
The facts make this clear .
The Lisbon Strategy does not work because of the asymmetry in Europe 's economies , growing pressure of competition and the hypermobility of the capital markets .
Let us therefore abandon the demotivating myth of a European social strategy that guarantees prosperity for all .
You cannot make a plant grow by pulling on its leaves !
The solutions will come not from Brussels , but from free cooperation and the Member States ' own common sense .
It is our roots in the soil of our nations that will give us the intelligence , responsiveness , sense and strength to meet today 's challenges .
In this particular case letters to Father Christmas will get us nowhere .
Madam President , I have been participating in debates in this House since the original Lisbon Strategy and I am also part of the Lisbon Coordination Group in this Parliament .
One of the things I have been consistently calling for is for the Commission to sharpen its focus on the Lisbon Strategy and set out a clearly defined list of priorities .
I do not think anybody has mentioned this so far or complimented the Commission on actually doing this .
We now have a Community Lisbon programme with 10 priority actions .
I have to say , somewhat to my regret , that , as a member of the group , I think Parliament 's resolution has gone in entirely the other direction .
This resolution before us today seems to me to be rather more long-winded and ambiguous than previous ones .
I suspect the Commission will be disappointed , because I note in the Community Lisbon Strategy with its 10 priorities , which I am sure all of you have read , that one of the top demands from the Commission is as follows : ' It is essential that the European Parliament , the Council and the European Commission agree on the strategic reform objectives and actions ' .
I certainly agree with that .
I hope that the Commission can extract that from this resolution , because I believe most of it is in there .
Nevertheless , I think that one of the lessons for our work with the Commission is that , for our next work on this strategy , we have to focus on these priority actions , because I am pleased to see that the Commission is going to work on these , keep them stable and move them forward .
Part of the problem we have is that we get piles of papers - different communications on different aspects of the strategies and revised priorities .
This set of revisions , this set of 10 priorities , is different from the ones we had last year .
Frankly , that is no way to move forward .
Last week , I participated as a rapporteur in the meeting with national parliaments .
I just want to echo what many colleagues have said : the action on Lisbon is shifting from here to the chambers of national parliaments , because that is where we need to engage them on delivering these 10 priority objectives , and that is something we need to reflect on as well .
I particularly welcome the Minister 's attendance here to show the importance the Council attaches to it .
( NL ) Madam President , Mr President-in-Office , Commissioner , in all honesty I am disappointed at the lack of social ambitions in the list for the spring summit you have outlined for us today .
My Group maintains that there are good reasons to strengthen the Lisbon Strategy and the Integrated Guidelines in a number of crucial respects .
Three of them concern the social dimension .
It is true that Lisbon has helped with growth and jobs but not everyone has been able to share the benefits of that .
Six million youngsters leave school without qualifications .
Migrants , disabled people , have great trouble finding jobs , 16 % of Europeans live in poverty .
Proof that a strategy for growth and jobs does not automatically lead to social inclusion and worthwhile employment for all .
So we want to see the Lisbon Strategy 's social dimension strengthened by a new guideline to ensure active social integration for all .
Secondly , not all jobs are quality jobs .
The proportion of precarious employment contracts ( temporary work , involuntary part-time work , agency work ) has risen considerably .
Women and young people especially often get stuck in low-quality jobs .
And Member States ' spending on active employment policy , support and training has fallen rather than risen .
So clearly Member States have not yet grasped that a balanced flexicurity approach has to entail contracts that are both flexible and secure and that active investment in human resources is a sine qua non for preventing segmentation of the market .
We want the Guidelines to encompass all the basic principles of flexicurity , including job quality and investment in human resources .
Thirdly , the social dimension of the Lisbon programme is a very skinny beast .
We are assured that there will be a new social agenda and it is good that this should be part of the Lisbon package .
But we are looking to the European Commission to propose an ambitious social agenda , not just communications on demography , training and migration , as announced , but also initiatives for legislation to improve the quality of employment and strengthen the battle against poverty and social exclusion .
At any rate , Mr President-in-Office , I would like to see an extra shot of social ambition injected into the spring summit .
Mr President , one of the key recommendations of the European Parliament is to combat protectionism both within and outside the EU .
I firmly believe that protectionism undermines , rather than defends , citizens ' rights , but that Europe should be looking at its own backyard first .
Our highest priority should now be the removal of protectionist barriers within the EU .
In order to make the European single market a reality we need to enhance the four fundamental freedoms of the common market , especially the free movement of workers .
Our report acknowledges that many labour markets remain segmented and that worker mobility is still low .
How surprising !
Have we forgotten that most citizens of the new Member States still need a permit to work in other EU countries ?
Four years after the ' big bang ' enlargement we have seen no major disruption of labour markets in the older Member States , and no influx to justify the transitional restrictions .
On the contrary , the proliferation of complex national quotas and qualitative restrictions in Member States is undermining the Lisbon Strategy , which aims to ensure flexible markets and a mobile labour force .
We have only two years left to become the world 's most competitive economy , and to boost competitiveness and create more jobs and growth , but I am hopeful .
In Romania , my country , the average economic growth rate has been about 6 % over the past five years , and the unemployment rate is down to 4 % .
We are now starting to have concerns about the lack of labour .
Opening frontiers to third-country workers is necessary , but our top priority should be to lift the EU 's internal barriers first .
Workers from the 12 new Member States should be granted priority to go and work in any other EU Member State , and the transitional arrangements should be removed .
One cannot possibly justify calling for external workers while restrictions still apply to our citizens .
Restrictions are unjustifiable and incompatible with the Lisbon Strategy , and removing them is the only way to achieve a competitive and innovative Europe .
( PL ) Mr President , the Lisbon Strategy sets out the aims we must achieve in the future if Europe is to be a place that fulfils its citizens ' desires .
Europe , however , is only an island on the world map and , unless the biggest world powers achieve similar aims , the introduction of even the most greatly desired changes - concerning the climate , for example - will simply mean that we ourselves restrict the possibilities of our industry and manufacturers while throwing away other aims of the strategy .
To combat demographic decline in Europe by accepting immigrants from other continents , while at the same time destroying the institution of the family and family values , is suicide , since it increases the likelihood of culture conflicts in the future .
The same is true in many other fields .
The leaders of Europe 's biggest countries talk of the need to liberalise trade while pursuing economic nationalism in their own countries .
The European Union must pull the wool from its eyes and stand up to fight on world economic markets on the basis of respect for Europe 's traditional laws and customs .
( EL ) Mr President , let me ask a simple question .
In the committee 's report on the strategy 's new cycle , how much importance is given to the social demands of workers , small and medium-sized enterprises , young people and women ?
Is it a solution to transform citizens ' demands for full-time , secure work into flexible and insecure jobs ?
Is extending working time and raising the retirement age , I wonder , the right response to increased competitiveness , rather than what we believe : a better salary and secure working conditions that will contribute to productivity , and will , above all , improve living standards ?
What do young people and women want ?
Do they want to find themselves permanently between training and employment , or to be able to use their qualifications ?
We believe the latter to be the case .
As for the environment and climate change , there are positive elements in the target of reducing greenhouse gas emissions , more so than in the United States and other countries . However , if development in every country is not fully linked to environmental protection , then the results will not be systematic .
Further , is it possible both to promote the break-up of state energy , electricity and liquid gas providers and to claim that this is for the public good and helps towards achieving energy self-sufficiency - at low prices , of course ? In practice , is precisely the opposite not the case ?
Finally , I should like to add that research and innovation cannot be merely a marketable asset ; they are a public asset and should be judged first and foremost on the extent to which they serve the progress of society .
Consequently , a genuine increase is needed in public investment and research .
We should not sacrifice the potential for research to private gain .
Mr President , economic competition is a key factor to the Lisbon Strategy .
The Lisbon Strategy is based on competition , competitiveness and growth and , although competition is important for any viable economy , remember that the basic mechanism of competition is that someone wins , and someone loses .
The idea is survival of the fittest .
In general within Europe this makes companies pull up their socks , improve their products and services , try harder globally .
On the other hand , globally it can mean extreme poverty for the losers , but even within Europe this issue of losing is important for us to address , because there are citizens within our Union who are losing by not reaching the benefits stressed in the Strategy .
For example , the goals for employing our citizens and relieving them from poverty are far from being reached .
In fact , statistics are showing an enormous increase in not only those who are unemployed , especially among the youth , but also an increase in the social inequalities and levels of poverty .
( PT ) In 2006 the European Union recorded its highest economic growth since 2000 .
In 2007 the EU grew more than the United States , and some new Member States approached or even broke the two-digit barrier .
For those who claim that the reform of the Lisbon Strategy is neo-liberal and no longer attaches importance to social issues , the answer is clear : in 2006 employment grew three times more than the average over the previous five years , in the last two years over six-and-a-half million new jobs have been created , and another five million are expected by 2009 .
Figures like these have not been seen since the 1980s .
What is more , in 2006 European productivity increased more than the annual average for the previous five years , and for the first time in many years , productivity growth in Europe was greater than in the USA .
Although these results cannot be attributed exclusively to the Lisbon Strategy , it cannot be denied that it has contributed to them .
I therefore congratulate the Commission on its coordination of the Lisbon Strategy in very difficult circumstances .
As regards the future , the European economy can continue to grow and more jobs can be created , despite the current economic climate , if in coming years Member States ' economic policies are better coordinated , if the internal market is developed further , if social dialogue is promoted , if wage rises accompany growth in productivity , if there is an effective system of financial supervision , if the fifth freedom - knowledge - is boosted , and , very important for me , if the European Union shows clear signs that it wishes to defend its interests , which means , rather than being a passive subject of globalisation , on the contrary showing that it is prepared to play a crucial role in controlling it .
( SV ) Thank you very much , Mr President , Commissioner and Mr President-in-Office .
I agree that the Lisbon Strategy has delivered and been successful for a number of years , but I do not see this as a reason not to make changes .
On the one hand , it is just as Udo Bullmann says .
Growth is declining at present and inflation is rising .
The situation is not completely straightforward .
On the other , things have happened .
First of all , we have the whole discussion on climate policy which will change policies for us all in the EU .
I am optimistic about this because it will also mean new investment and a new type of job that is more sustainable in the long-term with a large knowledge element .
This should have been reflected more in the Lisbon Strategy and in the Guidelines .
Secondly , we have had a debate on ' flexicurity ' for a number of years which has also produced good guidelines in the Council , but this has not been reflected in the Integrated Guidelines .
We have the same old guidelines we used to have .
Consideration could have been given to the whole process that has taken place .
Thirdly , I want to mention one aspect which Anne von Lanker , among others , has raised .
It is true that things have gone well for a while in the EU , but it is not true that things have gone well for everyone .
There is large-scale social exclusion .
There are also jobs that are not always good and that do not provide a living .
There are regions around Europe where developments are not so positive .
We must link the Integrated Guidelines with a social dimension .
There is no contradiction between the social dimension and development for jobs and growth .
They are conditions for each other .
( SV ) Mr President , it is important that the EU grows , that growth is strong and that jobs are created .
This also creates the conditions for greater legitimacy for our Union .
In recent years the EU has fared better than for many a day .
Things are also going better for the EU than for the United States , for example .
We know that the internal market and euro cooperation have created entirely new conditions for a growing Europe .
There is still much to be done , as many have said .
Let me give a specific example .
It is possibly a little jingoistic , but nevertheless : in my home country the Swedish Government has pursued a growth policy which has created almost 100 000 new jobs , partly through targeted measures to cut taxes and employers ' contributions .
One proposal specifically concerned reducing employers ' contributions for service undertakings in a number of sectors which are not competitive on the international market .
It was hoped to create 17 000 new jobs in this way .
The Commission has now effectively put a stop to this by demanding that the proposal be restricted , which makes it so blunted that the Swedish Government will presumably be forced to withdraw it in its entirety .
I find it difficult to understand the Commission 's action for two reasons .
In the shadow of an impending global recession many governments are obviously responding with different kinds of incentive packages to safeguard employment and purchasing power .
The proposal was intended to give a badly needed boost to the extremely undeveloped Swedish services sector , which had been hoped to produce good stabilising effects for our economy as a whole .
I think that this is highly inconsistent with the general spirit of the Lisbon Strategy .
If we are to become this competitive economy , the world 's most competitive by 2010 , should we also dare to try new ways ?
I want to ask you directly , Commissioners , why you are preventing new jobs being created in this way ?
( PL ) Mr President , during the communist period , people in Poland used to say there were three ontological categories : being , non-being and planning .
And we today , just like the communist planners , continue to say we must do this or that , or we must achieve such and such , without getting any nearer our targets .
And so we get stuck in the apparent contradiction between the concern of the developed countries to defend their centres of excellence - meaning , in practice , their jobs - and cohesion policy treated as an exercise in charity .
Yet the economic development of the Asian tigers - China , for example - shows that results are achieved by another method : through investment in modern technologies in countries with low production costs .
Unless we resolve the contradiction in the EU 's approach , we shall continue mouthing phrases about strategy , chanting ' forward ! ' at the top our voices while standing motionless on the stage .
( NL ) Madam President , it is good that we are making an active contribution today to the spring summit and are dotting the i 's and crossing the t 's .
It is right to have talked about it this morning and made our expectations known to the Member States .
I would stress that our Strategy is implemented at a decentralised level , in businesses , in municipalities , in the regions .
More than 66 % of all government spending goes on local and regional projects and as EPP coordinator for regional policy I know that in using the European instruments we have given things a sizeable boost since 2007 by re-prioritising in the structural funds and in regional policy .
We have moved from physical infrastructure to knowledge-based infrastructure , to training and innovation .
We are talking here of the biggest European Union budget ever , more than 450 billion by 2013 .
Happily our resolution makes this fact clear .
And the Committee of the Regions does the same in a report brought out at the same time .
May I touch on another point we talked about this morning in connection with the new Treaty ?
Along with social and economic cohesion this reaffirms territorial cohesion as a third objective .
That will mean top priority for clustering , the concentration of firms in the principal regions .
But at the same time we must ensure that know-how is not exploited in a limited part of Europe only , but that it also transfers to other regions in the Member States , which must not get left behind .
So I see the regional agenda and the Lisbon Strategy as an investment in knowledge and competitiveness , entrepreneurship and SMEs , as a significant answer .
There are many programmes ongoing which we can use to show our voters , our people and businesses that this is not just a European agenda but an agenda of decentralised partners too .
( PT ) Mr President-in-Office , Commissioners , ladies and gentlemen , the so-called subprime crisis has brought many of the arguments repeated by the most liberal politicians crashing down .
In the end the markets do not regulate themselves , losses do not only affect people who consciously and deliberately take part in sophisticated high-risk gambles , and Europe 's good behaviour does not guarantee immunity from external upheavals .
This is only one of the many examples recommending , as the Socialist Group has been arguing , that Europe should define strategies and policy instruments which are consistent with its goals and with the role it wishes to play in the difficult context of the globalised economy .
In 2000 we defined a core objective through the Lisbon Strategy , which has meanwhile been revised .
That objective is still valid , but insufficiently attained .
The aim was that in two years from now , in 2010 , Europe should be the most competitive area in the world , based on a knowledge economy that would create greater social cohesion and more and better jobs .
Now the challenges are more urgent and some conclusions are clear : firstly , convergence between the major economic policy guidelines and the Lisbon Strategy will have to be total ; secondly , a balance must be struck between the stability of policy guidelines and the capacity to respond to rapid changes in circumstances , particularly in terms of climate , power , financial market development , external trade policy or the role of exchange rates ; thirdly , the goals of social and spatial convergence are now one of the Strategy 's greatest failures .
Finally and in summary , ensuring external competitiveness and reconciling it with internal cohesion requires more effective intervention mechanisms .
Effective economic policy coordination in favour of growth and jobs is only one of these .
Social , educational , investment , research , science and technology policies will have to be reappraised in the light of the new realities .
This was the spirit of the Socialist Group 's contributions , which I hope the Commission and the Council will welcome .
First and foremost , we need and people expect the promises of progress to materialise .
Only in this way will their hope and confidence in Europe 's future make sense and be sustained .
( FI ) Mr President , eight years after the target was set we can say with certainty that the European Union is not going to achieve it .
The competitiveness goal has been more propaganda than concrete action .
With Europe 's ageing population it will in practice be a huge challenge to achieve the targets under the Lisbon Strategy , especially as the competitor countries and regions are forging ahead .
We might also legitimately ask if the most competitive economy was a realistic target , even such as it was originally , or one which we in Europe should aspire to at any cost , completely ignoring all other values .
Here I would just like to point out that in Europe there are 18 million unemployed and the unemployment rate amongst youth in some areas is as high as 25 % .
Unfortunately , I have not been aware of any great concern about this on the part of EU leaders , or that they have been particularly interested .
It is nevertheless very important to take care of these young people and the unemployed .
( PL ) Mr President , is the Lisbon Strategy some kind of rabbit hunt ?
Do we want to chase the rabbit or actually catch it ?
It seems to me that the basic task is to create some confidence in the European institutions that are proposing the Lisbon Strategy .
To that end , it is absolutely necessary that the fruits of economic growth be shared more equitably than in the past .
It would be a bad thing indeed if the Lisbon Strategy came to be associated with ever greater social and economic contrasts .
I agree with previous speakers that , if that happens , the strategy will be rejected in practice not by governments but by the citizens of the European Union .
Mr President , the debate today shows how sensitive this matter is to the European Parliament .
The topic of the day is the raison d 'être for us .
It is about the wellbeing of Europeans in the future .
We have our different opinions about the tool bag - how we reach the Lisbon goals - but I think everyone in this House wants to reach the goals . Even though I agree with Ms Jäätteenmäki that , unfortunately , we have not seen a lot of progress .
I think we have to speak about two different levels of action .
First , at European level , we have only one key thing we should do in order to increase competitiveness and that is the single market .
The European internal market is the biggest driver of competitiveness in a global context .
We also have a lot of red tape and we need to work with our SMEs - these are very much the key to European success .
Of course , then we need to concentrate on things at national level , at Member State level , and there we need much more action than we have seen lately , especially regarding the structural reforms to the labour market .
We heard today the Prime Minister of Sweden , who spoke about the importance of structural reforms to the labour market , also in terms of coping with demographic changes .
I think it is self-evident that Member States have not done their duty in this respect .
Also , I think that , on fiscal policy and macroeconomics , we have to end the era of budget deficits .
We really need to work on our macroeconomics .
This cannot be done by the Union , even though we have a single currency .
It must be done by the Member State politicians .
Finally , I would like to agree with Ms Starkevičiūtė , whose report is , I think , wonderful .
Financial services are one of the cornerstones of the internal market .
Financial services need much more attention , including at European level .
( FR ) Mr President , I think that this year our debate is really quite important because we are reviewing the Lisbon cycle .
I finally understand the Commission 's approach of saying that everything is fine and we do not need to make any changes because the European economy is fundamentally sound .
You say this because compared with the situation of the American economy , yes , our economy is fundamentally much sounder .
Yet I would add that it is bound to be relatively difficult to negotiate a redefinition of the Guidelines among twenty-seven countries .
This is not all there is to it , however .
The situation of the American economy is going to have an impact on the economies of all the EU Member States and the economy of the euro zone in particular , perhaps .
Also , we are going to have to take account of the legitimate new strategic targets for the environment and energy which the Heads of State and Government adopted last March .
Everyone is looking at the turbulence , to put it mildly , on the financial markets and assessing its impact on those markets and its repercussions on the real economy .
We are therefore calling for these three elements to be officially included in the review of the Guidelines .
Mr Turk , when we saw you in Ljubljana last November , you said to us , ' Tell us what the European Parliament wants ' .
Well , we are telling you now , we want the Guidelines to take greater account of coordinating economic policies , climate change and the supervision of the financial markets .
If efforts could still be made to do this we would welcome it as progress in improving our ability to coordinate economic policies and therefore to apply the Guidelines .
But this is not all , Commissioner !
We also want greater consistency between the Guidelines and all the other tools at the Commission 's disposal for ensuring that this strategy , which we are defining together , can be implemented using the instruments available to the European Union in this field .
( SV ) Mr President , Commissioner Verheugen , ladies and gentlemen , the Lisbon Strategy is now coming out of a slow initial stage and is beginning to create optimism and will , which is exactly what we need .
The authors successfully focused on what is important and were not affected by Parliament 's problem of dragging in everything .
There are different ways to meet the challenges of globalisation .
Some put their heads in the sand like ostriches and think that everything will be alright .
Others are wiser and , like the authors of the report , see opportunities and improve their own capacity .
The most immediate and important thing now is at least to ensure that the Member States comply with their own obligations .
This means monitoring the internal market , ensuring that the Member States implement and comply with decisions that have been taken , ensuring that the rules are well-founded , not too complicated and not too expensive for small and medium-sized enterprises .
We should also stick to important themes , such as simplification , benchmarking , comparison and competition .
This will also call for greater cooperation between authorities at local and regional level .
It is good for citizens , it is good for businesses , and it contributes to integration .
It calls for systematic monitoring of free movement so that we can make the services market flourish .
Measuring results is a step forward .
The EU gains its legitimacy from delivering , not least quality of life for citizens .
It calls for a stimulating entrepreneurial climate , which the Lisbon Strategy can help provide if it is implemented very deliberately .
The Commission must put pressure on the Member States .
Lastly , I am convinced that the Commission will bring a reasonable solution to the Swedish problem relating to employers ' contributions .
( ES ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the reform of the Growth and Stability Pact and the relaunch of the Lisbon Strategy , identifying growth and sustainable employment as European priorities , have been bearing fruit since the spring Council of 2005 .
Europe has been implementing a common agenda and , as Mr Almunia has said , its first three-year cycle has seen an increase in growth , the generation of employment , improvements in public finances and an increase in the European economy 's potential for growth .
Although results vary across the different Member States , the general tone is positive .
I was genuinely surprised to hear one fellow MEP saying that it was impossible to square the circle , that it was impossible to grow , create employment , increase social protection and save .
There are examples of these things happening in the European Union and the one with which I am most familiar is of course that of Spain .
The European Commission has stated that Spain has made good progress in implementing its national reform programme , has reached a level of employment 66 % higher than the European average three years ahead of schedule , increased investment in research and development ( R & D ) and has recorded surpluses in all budget years .
It is a prime example of the success of the Lisbon Strategy , which has strengthened Spain 's economy and been the motor of unprecedented convergence to the extent that it stands at 105 % , ahead of the Community average .
On that ground we must today maintain the same strategic challenges based on accelerating globalisation and the ageing population .
In order to achieve this it will be necessary to highlight the social dimension .
A Europe which is a knowledge society needs to build a freedom of knowledge , to make a reality of digital inclusion and foster the social dimension by improving people 's basic skills , providing SMEs with opportunities and establishing a model for flexicurity with social standards .
It will be necessary to address issues which have surfaced recently , such as the subprime crisis and fuel and food prices , but when we do so we must bear in mind that the our circumstances are sounder , that next year we will celebrate the tenth anniversary of the euro and that we must strengthen international economic cooperation .
( FR ) Mr President , we all know , and have to admit and accept , that the Lisbon Strategy has not allowed us to make the progress we had hoped .
This is why we are having to talk again today about revising the Lisbon Strategy .
Growth in the euro zone slowed down dramatically in the last quarter of 2007 , and it is this lack of growth that lies at the root of Europe 's problems .
So if the next cycle of the Lisbon Strategy is to succeed , we need to go further than merely diagnosing Europe 's problems , we need to start treating them by applying a process of clear governance .
The next cycle of the Strategy must not be just another bureaucratic exercise .
It is important , as happened last week , for there to be more involvement between the national parliaments and the European Parliament on this Strategy .
Since the Member States agreed together on what they each needed to do to reform their economies , they should also undertake to report back on how their reforms are being implemented .
Up to now most of our fellow citizens have had no idea what the Lisbon Strategy is all about .
The EU must therefore avoid shooting itself in the foot at a time when it is facing many challenges : a population that will be declining from 2020 , economic pressure , a hike in energy prices , climate change and social imbalances .
We therefore need flagship measures to create a genuine dynamic and promote the development and growth of millions of SMEs for new jobs .
In the environmental field measures to bring about rapid improvements in the energy efficiency of our buildings must be given sizeable budgets , thus encouraging innovation and therefore new jobs .
Bear in mind what Churchill said , which should be our watchword for the next cycle of the Strategy : ' However beautiful the strategy , you should occasionally look at the results ' .
It is by proving that it can be effective that the European Union will grow closer to its citizens .
This is the whole point of a Europe that protects its people and its interests .
( IT ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to highlight some key points of the position of the European Parliament , and in particular of the Socialist Group , as regards the broad guidelines for the completion of the Lisbon cycle for growth and employment .
One of these is the need to connect the process of budget consolidation , characteristic of the convergence programmes within the Stability Pact , with the quality of public spending .
Member States ' public spending needs to be re-oriented and coordinated towards the priorities of the strategy in order to guarantee macroeconomic stability , sustainable growth and the achievement of full employment .
Any re-orientation of public spending , targeted in a coordinated way among the Member States on common investment objectives , through public-private partnership initiatives as well , has to be linked to research and development , education and training , infrastructure , transport and energy , and it is that which can be the prime mover of a strategy of growth and competitiveness which makes the European economy strong and able to withstand financial turbulence and the fallout from the financialisation of the economy .
Public spending geared towards these priorities makes it possible to step up competitiveness and productivity .
Particular attention needs to be paid to the link between budget policies and productivity growth and wage policy .
Here , the Socialist Group is of the view that a strong link needs to be forged between productivity growth and a fair redistribution of the profits to which it leads , with a view to ensuring social cohesion .
A key point for social cohesion is the introduction of a national minimum wage .
In this sense , I am convinced that the European Parliament , in tomorrow 's vote , will give a strong and decisive signal by calling on Member States to commit themselves to concrete and timely implementation .
Mr President , the financial crisis and the tightening of money markets has spilled over into the real economy , and presents a serious problem that needs considered action .
The Financial Stability Forum has stated that we are likely to face a prolonged adjustment that could present difficulties .
Euro area growth will see a marked slow-down in 2008 .
The President of the Euro Group , Mr Jean-Claude Juncker , has forecast growth to be between 1.6 % and 1.8 % this year , which is a drop of a full percentage point over last year .
The protracted and sustained rise of global commodities presents further difficulties for the European economy , with the price of oil , steel , minerals and basic agricultural products all rising to unprecedented levels , adding to inflationary pressure .
The euro has strengthened at a time of a weakening dollar , which is impacting further on global imbalances and European competitiveness , and all these factors are creating a very difficult monetary and fiscal policy environment .
But , lest we become depressed , let us examine how far we have come .
Sixty million Europeans died in the first half of the last century .
The Berlin Wall fell in 1990 and we are still in the embryonic stages of integration .
Despite that , if we look at the success of the euro , and in general the success of the European Central Bank and its inflation targets and low interest rates , we can see that despite all these difficulties we can overcome , and we can achieve the objectives we set ourselves .
I would therefore ask the Commission to please plough ahead with its 10-point plan and to make competitiveness its byword .
Up to 12 million jobs have been created since the introduction of the euro .
Please promote entrepreneurship .
Make creating a job the most profitable thing a citizen of the European Union can do .
This will deliver people out of poverty and out of misery .
( PL ) Mr President , our debate is taking place against the background of a deepening crisis on the financial markets , a slowdown in growth , and rising inflation .
It is therefore all the more important to press ahead with the structural reforms set out in the Lisbon Strategy .
To meet the challenges of globalisation we must build a knowledge-based economy and invest in education and the creation of human capital .
We must also modernise the labour market , generalise the flexicurity model and increase the professional activity of European societies .
In a nutshell , Commissioner , Europe 's future will be decided by knowledge and work .
Those are also the best ways to combat poverty and exclusion .
It is good that these two factors are reflected in the Commission 's documents .
In acting to promote development , knowledge and employment , the European Commission can count on Parliament 's support .
Liberating the potential of European entrepreneurs will be of great importance for economic growth and employment . This applies particularly to small and medium-sized enterprises , which generate over two thirds of the Union 's GNP .
I impatiently await the Commission 's adoption of the Small Enterprises Charter and of measures to reduce administrative burdens by 25 % by 2012 .
Mr President , the weakness of the documents presented is that they fail to analyse the reasons for the slow and uneven implementation of the Lisbon Strategy in various domains .
We do not know why expenditure on research and development is growing so slowly .
We do not know why labour markets still discriminate against outsiders .
We do not know why continuous education is not developing as intended .
Nor do we know why the opening up of the services and network sectors is meeting with resistance .
The Commission documents provide no answers to these and many other questions .
Commissioner , let us not hide our heads in the sand !
The best measures will be ineffectual unless they are based on a correct diagnosis .
I urge the Commission to provide a solid explanation for the delays in implementing the Lisbon Strategy .
Mr President , there are 59 paragraphs in this resolution and therefore many messages .
I particularly draw attention to paragraphs 20 and 21 about the importance of small businesses , paragraphs 29 and 30 about competitiveness and the importance of the single market , and paragraphs 42 and 43 about the need to drive labour market reform .
In this context , I would particularly highlight the importance of flexibility , not just for employers but also for employees , a concept that the Left consistently fails to understand , hence some of their typically outdated comments today .
But I would invite the Commission and the Council to stand back from the detail of this document and look it as a whole .
In particular , I invite them to compare it to other resolutions that Parliament has approved in the past , prior to earlier Spring Councils .
Then , hopefully , one single message may emerge , namely this : that in many respects , though sadly not all , this resolution is so much more robust than any of its predecessors .
It confirms the way in which Parliament wishes the Lisbon Strategy to be pursued ; indeed it strongly reinforces it .
As a resolution , this one is , literally , very resolute .
I therefore urge the Commission and the Council to be equally resolute in their response and to put timidity aside , so that the next time Parliament produces a resolution on this subject , instead of MEPs saying with even greater vigour what still needs to be done , we could be in a position to congratulate all stakeholders on the real and measurable progress that will have been delivered .
That is the challenge and that is the central message we are going to give you in our vote tomorrow .

( RO ) Mr. President , dear Commissioners , the European Union is not only a common market based on competition ; we have to build a social Europe together .
It is essential to improve the quality of life in Europe , in the context of globalization , demographic changes and environmental challenges .
By creating new highly qualified and well-paid jobs and through sustainable economic growth , the Lisbon Strategy is also an instrument for building a new social Europe .
Social Europe should guarantee universal access to health care and social security services , access to quality public services and improve social cohesion by the efficient use of structural and cohesion funds .
Also , regional development should remain one of the priorities for the period of 2008-2010 .
It has been proved that information technology and communications increase labour productivity .
Today , we use computer systems and electronic communication networks in transport , financial services , public services , education and health care .
The 2004 the European Union 's statistics regarding the innovation capacity showed that , in Bulgaria , Romania and Slovakia , companies with more than 10 employees had more than 36 % of the income realized from selling innovative products and services ; nevertheless , now we have to invest more in the economy based on knowledge , to increase investments in research and innovation and , especially , in applied research .
This should become a priority for all the Member States .
In fact , the investments in research and innovation achieved in technological parks or universities should also be encouraged by fiscal measures bringing about the increase of private investments in research .
We need to invest more in education , to promote tertiary education and life-long training .
The Lisbon Strategy builds a Europe based on social justice and decent work .
The economic security of all the European citizens , social inclusion , the establishment of child care services , gender equality and the establishment of a social market economy will make the Union become an economic and social model in the global context .
( DE ) Mr President , money simply is a part of the development of Europe .
Let me , therefore , come back to the financial situation , to the financial markets and the examples of turbulence we have known so far .
We all know about the situation of many banks in Europe - not to mention US banks - and how much the European Central Bank had to inject in order to keep the financial markets functioning .
That is why any adjustment of the basic approach until 2010 naturally also involves the necessary increased cooperation with all global market players in order to give our European financial economy more protection against further attacks from the outside , together with better rules on rating and adjusted supervision and great transparency , and restoring the banks ' trust among themselves and the trust of the investors .
There is a reason why we need more intensive dialogue with other global market players , especially the USA .
Over the last seven years , the US economy has grown in value by 4.2 billion , while total credits , however , have grown by 21.3 billion .
That means a debt level that is 350 % too high in relation to GDP .
Unfortunately , the US intends to continue with the monetary policy that has led to that huge over-indebtedness .
The US is aggressively lowering its base rates , which means money is being pumped into the financial institutions .
That results in growing currency devaluation , together with a fall in household purchasing power and a stagnation that is difficult to control and may have a considerable impact on Europe .
These monetary policy methods are largely to blame for the latest crisis .
Europe and all global market players must fight the next wave of crises promptly and together , to ensure we are not overtaken by an absolute tsunami and that many of the endeavours to achieve the Lisbon objectives are not in vain .
( EL ) Mr President , I think that we should recognise three positive elements in the course of the reforms initiated by the Lisbon cycle to date :
the first positive element is that even the most wary of governments have gradually begun to comply with the philosophy behind the reforms and have started to produce the first hesitant results ;
the second - and for this we should give the Commission credit - is that the new strategy is more focused .
The Christmas tree approach , where everything was fitted inside a reform framework , has now been abandoned ;
the third positive element is that major flagship European programmes like Galileo and the EIT are at the heart of the new strategy . On this point , let me take advantage of the Slovenian Minister 's presence to ask him to request that his colleagues close the Galileo file quickly so that we can begin to put to good use the very significant amounts earmarked for this programme .
In addition , however , we must level-headedly examine two negative elements . These shortcomings are as follows :
firstly , citizens are unfortunately not monitoring , pushing , or aware in the spirit of Lisbon .
The problem is that citizens see Lisbon as being concerned with organisations rather than individuals ; we need to persuade them that it actually concerns them ;
the second shortcoming is the monitoring mechanisms .
How can we check whether the Member States are doing what they promise to do within the cycle of reforms ?
I fear that the problem here is that this monitoring has degenerated into a process of exchanging letters between officials in Brussels and in the capitals of the Member States , without there being any political input .
I think that even if we authorise the reforms we need to make policy once again the focus of the monitoring procedure .
This voluminous bureaucratic correspondence must stop .
( HU ) Thank you , Mr President .
First I have two brief comments to make on the Lisbon process .
One : we have to work more , nearly as much as the Americans .
The other thing is : the Lisbon process will only be of any use if there are sanctions attached to it , as there are in the case of excessive deficit .
Two : the directives .
From the point of view of the new Member States , I would like us to view things not only in terms of neoliberal indicators , but with a little more distance .
After all , what is the use of having a 0 % deficit or inflation , for example , if quality indicators are deteriorating ?
Depression is on the increase , while the opposite is happening in the case of entrepreneurship and in numbers of new families being founded .
So it goes on .
This , unfortunately , is much more serious .
If we take the reform of the major distributive systems , for example , it is vital that we cut back if necessary .
Even more important , however , is the question of what will happen to health promotion , or whether education will dovetail with employment , in other words whether the market will be able to use people straight away , and whether there will be more emphasis on and opportunities for vocational training ?
In other words , in this context too we need to include a set of quality criteria , and not just take a knife and start hacking away .
The third thing concerns statistics .
I would very much like things to be measured in terms of GNI too , not only in terms of GDP .
Money is flooding out of the new Member States in the form of dividends , but their GDP is growing , so they say .
We should really be looking at what remains inside the country .
The Stability and Growth Pact : what sort of things are we providing rebates for ?
After all , in an emerging economy it is not clear that having R & D of 5 or 6 % , or more than 3 % , is all that important , given that catching up with Europe is the main thing in their case ; we should be rewarding them for creating jobs and facilitating cohesion .
Something else I think is lacking in this report is measuring the black economy .
In my country it is around 30 % .
We need to given some attention to this too .
Last , and most important , we need equal implementation of the four freedoms , not ' cherry picking ' , opening up to capital in one instance , while not opening up anything for the new Member States in terms of services .
Thank you very much .
( FR ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , this resolution on relaunching the Lisbon Strategy is very much in line with the report which Parliament adopted last October , on my proposal , on the future strategy for the Single Market .
I should like first of all to thank Marianne Thyssen and Klaus-Heiner Lehne , along with all their colleagues in the Coordination Group , for having drafted a resolution which is both well balanced and in step with the political , economic and social reality in the EU .
I should like to draw particular attention to the proposals concerning the importance of social rights and reconciling economic competitiveness with the social model : what I would say is that we must , of course , go much further here and adopt the provisions on services of general interest .
I would also underline what the report says about intellectual property .
This is a major weapon for the EU and for SMEs .
The international dimension which the resolution introduces is something new , and very necessary .
The Single Market is what puts Europe 's 500 million citizens in a position of strength in a globalised world .
Lastly , I would just like to say a few words on the question of method .
I am not sure that the open method of coordination , which is the method currently used , is the most effective .
I personally think that in a number of areas of the Lisbon Strategy we need to move on to genuinely common policies , Community policies , if we want to be successful in the future .
( PL ) Mr President , what has been done so far to reduce the corporate tax burden ?
Instead of reducing taxes , money is spent on all sorts of training programmes with dubious results .
Today there are new problems on the horizon for European integration , new issues to be resolved , such as protection of the environment , climate change and renewable energy sources .
Balanced growth and employment must be understood in a wider sense , not just in strictly economic terms but with regard to the social , cultural and environmental aspects .
Since we spend more than a third of our lives at work , we must attend , apart from pay levels , to such issues as comfort , safety , solidarity and the dignity of the individual .
My next point concerns the implications of the liberalisation of the energy market .
The continuing trend towards higher energy prices , combined with the mounting threats to the climate , highlights the need to promote energy efficiency in the widest sense .
Renewable energy sources , clean coal technologies , nuclear power , balanced sources of supply and the development of European infrastructure are the basic issues we shall have to confront in the coming years .
Having achieved a common market in goods , we must concentrate on improving the operation of the services market .
We must achieve speedy integration through consistent joint implementation and execution of the regulations adopted and the removal of all barriers to the introduction of services onto the market .
Finally , I hope the spring meeting of the European Council will adopt new guidelines for the next three years that take account of the views and opinions expressed in today 's debate .
Progress in removing directives that do not serve the development of EU Member States is a basic issue .
( DE ) Mr President , slogans are good for the political debate , but we must not stop at slogans .
The Commission 's communication on the integrated guidelines for growth and jobs , the joint motion for a resolution tabled by the five Groups on the 2008 European spring summit and the Starkevičiūtreport each sing a hymn of praise to the fifth freedom , the freedom of knowledge , which is to supplement and stand on a par with the four freedoms familiar from the past - free movement of goods , services , persons and capital .
That calls to mind a quote from the classics : the message well I hear , my faith alone is weak .
We have been hearing the slogan of a knowledge-based society for years .
We are taking it up again now .
When it comes to concrete measures , however , the messages we hear are very different .
In the past few years we have often looked into the question of whether and to what extent the European Union should have more competences in regard to the question of knowledge .
It was repeatedly argued that knowledge is not an area for which the Member States should hand over responsibility , it is their own holy precinct .
We have heard the same again and again in regard to the budget .
Whenever we deliberate and decide on budget questions , whether long or short-term , we are told that we must save and that the most sensible areas in which to begin saving come under the headings of education , training and knowledge .
A moment ago Mr Verheugen addressed the regrettable figures for research and development .
I remember the constant attempts to cut back , especially on exchange programmes that are important to knowledge .
I think , therefore , that this is the wrong approach .
We need new instruments and we need new financial resources .
Let me put forward a very concrete proposal : 10 % of all young people between the ages of 15 and 25 should spend six months studying in another European country .
That would create more knowledge and more flexibility and make learning more fun .
( PL ) Mr President , Minister , Commissioner , I am convinced that climate change is the factor with the greatest influence on achievement of the Lisbon Strategy at the present time .
And I fully agree with you , Commissioner , that the European Union 's present strategy on the matter consists in exporting pollution and emissions and importing unemployment .
We must take the lead on this problem , for which we bear a great deal of responsibility .
We must also convince others , so that we are not alone .
We must make the struggle against climate change into a source of development and competitiveness .
It can be done , but it will require a larger allocation of financial resources , especially to technology .
That means revising the budget .
You , Commissioner , are the best person to say this to : we must revise the budget , starting from 2009 !
( PL ) Mr President , I want to make a number of points .
First , the efficient education and training of young people should be an EU priority .
Only mobile , flexible and professionally trained individuals , especially in technical disciplines , will ensure that the Union makes continuous economic and technological progress .
Second , funding for scientific and technical research and development must be dependent on concrete results .
Those results must be paid for by industry , with financial support from national budgets .
Third , the Union must develop a model of the information society and create the best conditions for promoting the establishment and development of innovative undertakings and the achievement of an economy open to new technologies and technical progress .
Fourth , people working in Europe must increase their efficiency and productivity .
Fifth , and in parallel with this , we must combat social exclusion by ensuring access to employment and education and countering discrimination on the labour market , and by taking both preventive and curative action against drug addiction .
( ES ) Mr President , I wish to express my bewilderment at the fact that the ten objectives set out by the Commission for the new phase do not reflect the recommendation made by the European Parliament last year regarding better integration of the transport sector , logistics and trans-European networks into the Lisbon Strategy .
As I cannot believe that the Commission is unaware of the importance of these aspects of competitiveness - indeed , in the framework of globalisation , logistics represent a greater cost for industry than does labour , to say nothing of the additional challenge posed by climate change - I trust that this time the Commission will take full note of paragraphs 27 and 16 , on Galileo and innovation , so that we are able both to make full use of the beneficial synergy created by the Lisbon process between the Commission and the Member States and to make progress in European plans for sustainable transport , logistics and trans-European networks , especially in the cross-border sections which are always so overlooked .
As far as the Council is concerned , I would also urge the Presidency to take note of paragraph 27 , which urges the Member States to incorporate the basic aspects of transport and logistics into their national plans with appropriate , i.e. heavy , emphasis on the development of trans-European networks .
( PT ) In his speech Mr Almunia said that in the last three years growth has increased and that the functioning of the market , social reforms , public finances and the environmental component have improved .
I agree that this is true .
I acknowledge that this improvement is due essentially to better dialogue and better Member State participation , as we recognised last week in the joint meeting between the European Parliament and Member State Parliaments .
The question I would like to ask , Commissioner , is the following : could we not increase the speed of growth if we involved and encouraged the regions to participate , since they are the parties that often use the funds , and this is also related to the Lisbon Strategy 's effectiveness ?
At state level ' Mr Lisbon ' was positive and stimulating .
Although responsibility lies with the Member States , could the creation of ' Mr Lisbon ' not be stimulated at regional level ?
President-in-Office . - ( SL ) Mr President , Commissioners Almunia and Verheugen , ladies and gentlemen , thank you for this debate .
The Lisbon Strategy is a strategy for reform and modernisation ; it needs cooperation , support and ideas from everyone working to the common end and I am truly grateful for your well-founded remarks .
Firstly , as a general comment , the effectiveness of the Lisbon Strategy has been debated .
Some MEPs , like Mr Andersson , thought it was effective , while others - and there were a fair number of them - thought it was not .
This points to a spectrum of political views within the European Union .
Mrs Starkevičiūtasked about the Lisbon Strategy priorities and whether they had been given sufficient exposure .
The answer actually came from Mr Harbour , who said that the Community Lisbon Programme was an excellent set of priorities .
Many questions pertained to the integrated guidelines and whether they solved current issues .
As I have said , we were also wondering about that and we came to the conclusion that we must continue in the same direction and preserve the continuity and most of all the tempo of implementation of the Lisbon Strategy .
I was pleased that some parliamentary groups and Members of Parliament thought likewise .
Mr Leinen , Mr Harbour and Mrs Herczog stressed that what was needed was implementation and not ideas , especially at a time when optimism for the European Strategy was waning .
Other good procedural ideas have been pointed out , for example the exchange of best practices , the territorial dimension , and extension of the Lisbon Strategy beyond the framework of the Community and the Member States , possibly to lower levels .
The Lisbon Strategy is also extending globally .
As regards research and development , you agreed that this is precisely where Europe 's future lies .
I liked Mrs Herczog 's suggestion that hearts and minds are needed just as much as numbers .
I understand your support for the fifth freedom and the European patent relating to it .
We take the warning about European talent seriously .
It is necessary to secure good conditions for talented people in Europe .
700 000 of the best European research engineers are abroad .
We must endeavour to attract them back , because 7 out of 10 who go to the USA remain there .
Studies abroad should be encouraged .
As far as the business environment is concerned , some of you advocated the internal market without protectionism , that is to say that an efficient market is what gives Europe a competitive advantage .
I like the ideas on enterprise culture , namely the promotion of enterprise , that to establish a new company or create a new job is the best thing one can do .
The fact is that we must improve many things in this area , primarily for the development of small and medium companies and their access to finances and research infrastructure .
Mrs Kauppi and Mrs Starkevičiūtgave a report on this topic .
Employment and the whole of the social dimension were main topics of a number of discussions .
I do not agree that the Lisbon Strategy is neoliberal ; on the contrary , Europe 's care of man and the environment forms two of the four major pillars of the Lisbon Strategy .
There was some discussion on ' flexicurity ' , initiated by Mr Goebbels and Mrs Vălean .
The fact is that , as somebody remarked , if we do not introduce it , employers will resort to other forms of employment that are very flexible , but considerably less acceptable to the employee .
The economic environment is not set up to promote security as well , but the flexible security system does provide it .
The proposals for new indicators are interesting and relate to the OECD quality-of-life indicators .
There must also be a debate in the future on ways of assessing the Lisbon Strategy .
Much was said about the environment .
I think we are aware that , as someone said , it must become a ' win-win ' situation for Europe .
The problem is how to get the rest of the world to join us in our efforts to convert to a low-carbon economy , although we can certainly contribute by our example .
We have an excellent interlocutor in the field of financial markets and fiscal policies .
I apologise that I did not notice you and greet you at the beginning .
To sum up , we are leaving enriched by some important information .
I would like to thank Mrs Starkevičiūtfor the report and Mr Lehne and Mrs Harms for the draft resolution .
We have already studied it .
We will carefully review the final version as well .
The opinions expressed in this Parliament are varied , but it seems to me that they are pointing in the same direction as the Lisbon documents , that is to say the overall package .
I am convinced that we are on the right path and will successfully launch a new phase to meet today 's challenges , and that the message of the new phase will not just be that of the lowest common denominator on which we are capable of agreeing .
Vice-President of the Commission . - ( DE ) Mr President , let me make a few more , very brief points .
Our strategy for growth and jobs , also known as the Lisbon agenda , is in fact nothing other than an attempt to compensate in the most intelligent way possible for the fact that we do not have a common economic policy in the European Union and - we are currently in the process of ratifying a new Treaty - will not have a common economic policy on the basis of the new Treaty either .
What Mr Toubon called for was , therefore , well intended , but not very realistic at the present time .
We have no option but to proceed on the basis of partnership , in order to persuade the 27 to act jointly with the Community institutions and do what is necessary to achieve our common objectives at Member State level and at European level .
Is one of our aims really to become , let us say , the most dynamic , competitive and best region in the world by the year 2010 ?
Way back in 2004 the Council , Parliament and the Commission said that this Lisbon objective laid down in the year 2000 would not be achieved .
The fact of not achieving it is nothing new .
We have known that since 2004 .
That is why we presented an entirely revised strategy in 2005 , which no longer mentions that date .
That means we should not measure the growth and jobs policy we have today by the objectives that were set out in the year 2000 and that we know cannot be achieved .
I am giving you my personal view on the subject .
I do not think the point is whether we do better than someone else at some time .
What I think is important is that we should be in as good enough a position as soon as possible to achieve the social objectives we all want to achieve in Europe . They are : a high standard of living for all our citizens , a high level of social security for all our citizens , a high environmental standard for Europe as a whole and awareness of our global responsibility .
Those are our major social objectives .
If we want to achieve them , we will need a strong and stable economic basis , which is precisely what this strategy is aimed at .
I think Mr Rosati was right to ask about the deficits .
If he looks carefully at the country reports and at our recommendations , he will see where we have found deficits and that we have found them precisely in the areas he mentioned .
I will answer him .
Why does lifelong learning not exist in Europe as it should ?
Why do we not have as much modern infrastructure throughout Europe as we should have ?
Why have we not given the priority to research and development , education and training we really should have ?
The answer is simply because in many Member States and at Community level too - as you all know - the financial priorities still lie elsewhere .
If we jointly decide to try to change those priorities , that would be a good thing .
It assumes , however - and I am not just saying that because the Commission 's macroeconomist and great politician of stability is seated beside me but because I am firmly convinced of it - that we have a stable and solid macroeconomic framework .
Primarily that means , for instance , the consolidation of state finances .
Without solid state finances in the individual Member States it will not be possible to set new investment priorities .
On the guidelines , I understand the needs here and the Commission will be happy to continue discussing them with Parliament .
Let me just point out one thing .
Those guidelines are not a political programme as such .
They are not an action programme .
The guidelines are , if you like , the intellectual basis for the national reform programmes and for the Community 's Lisbon programme .
I am speaking with complete conviction here .
The guidelines , as formulated today , make it possible to do all those things that various speakers in Parliament today called for if they are implemented in practice in the national reform programmes and in the Community 's Lisbon programme .
We are quite happy to take on the very concrete challenge issued by Mr Olle Schmidt to Mr Almunia and myself , namely to check a specific incident in Sweden .
Let me just say one thing on the subject .
The Commission fully endorses a policy under which tax incentives for enterprises and entrepreneurs are also used to create jobs .
That is our policy .
Indeed , we will very soon be making a proposal on reduced VAT rates for service-intensive undertakings .
Joaquín Almunia and I do not know exactly what happened in Sweden , but we will look into it .
It seems to me that this is more of a technical than a really basic political problem , but we will clear it up and ensure that the necessary dialogue takes place .

Member of the Commission . - ( ES ) Mr President , to be brief , if you are asking me to compare the economic situation today with that of three years ago when the renewed strategy under the Lisbon cycle began , I think we can put more than enough information on the table to say that we are in a better position today than we were three years ago .
There are more jobs , greater productivity , fiscal positions are healthier , there are more sustainable social protection systems and many actions are under way .
If , however , you are asking me , as a Commissioner , to draw the conclusion that there is no longer any need to do anything , my reply is clearly that there is much which needs to be done , that many things must continue to be done and that , given the current economic situation with its financial pressures , the pace must be increased .
I said as much at the beginning and I reiterate that point now .
I would not therefore like anyone to go away with the impression that the Commission 's opinion and that of the Commissioners is that we are very satisfied and nothing more needs to be done .
We must not confuse continued progress in the same direction with doing nothing more .
Continuing to move forward in the same direction means that it is necessary to carry on doing things under the Lisbon Community programme , as referred to by some of you , and for which we are grateful , at the level of the Member States and regions , and in other bodies at a lower level than national governments , as Mr Fernandes said .
If , in conclusion to the many interesting speeches I have heard this evening , you were to ask me to identify three issues which are clearly matters of priority I would agree first with many of you who spoke about integration of financial services .
This is a key topic for Europe and economic and monetary union , not only for the countries in the euro zone but also for those who wish to join it in the near future .
The second key issue is climate change .
I shall not repeat what many of you have already said .
The third issue is social inclusion , which is one of the integrated guidelines .
We will not be able to tell citizens that it is necessary to address the challenges of globalisation , that it is necessary to be more competitive and that the operation of our markets must improve , if our policies do not respond to a greater degree of social inclusion which is also provided for by more competitive and more productive economies .
If productivity does not increase , there will be no high-quality jobs and , if there are no high-quality jobs , if there are no career prospects , if there are no life-long learning systems , there will be no possibility of having competitive economies .
This is , shall we say , the link between the economic and social aspects embraced by the Lisbon Strategy from the outset , and this is more evident now than it was in 2005 or in 2000 .
Finally , I agree with some of you - Mrs Berès and others - when you talked about the need for coordination of economic policies .
As Mr Verheugen was saying , there is no capacity to carry out many of the reforms and many of the policies of the Lisbon Strategy at European level .
What we must do is better coordinate the Member States ' economic policies ; Europe has tools for this , they are contained in the Lisbon Strategy , which is an exercise in economic policy coordination , and they are unquestionably contained in economic and monetary union .
I undertake to discuss that aspect with you in particular as from May when the Commission will present a report and guidance based on the analysis we are carrying out on the first ten years of economic and monetary union .
rapporteur . - ( LT ) I would like to talk about coordination .
Numerous suggestions have been made regarding the course of action to achieve it .
To my mind , if we were to implement them all , that would create an immense economic crisis within the European Union .
The right course of action is to decide on priority actions and objectives .
We are not in a position to eliminate poverty and deprivation by 2010 , as foreseen in the Lisbon Strategy .
It would not be right to encourage aggregate demand all over the EU .
If we encourage demand in the new Member States , we will have an economic crisis on our hands ; our economies will become overheated .
It so happens that very often we fail to notice what our neighbours are doing .
Researchers have already proved that the biggest problem within the EU is the failure to appreciate national differences and the attempt to excessively harmonise .
In order to encourage individual achievement a favourable environment has to be created .
I do agree with Mr Verheugen that the EU policy should be one of cooperation , not dictatorship .
I come from the former Soviet Union , where there used to be many set indicators , every one of which had to be achieved .
However , the shops were empty .
Indicators are not a goal in themselves .
I also disagree with plans to base the EU social model on benefit distribution , otherwise our next discussion will be solely on migration .
All the world would come to us to claim benefits .
We are talking about the need to achieve a social environment in Europe that would enable Europeans to find employment , find their place in life and express themselves .
To my mind , that is the ultimate purpose for Europe , as well as the essence of its social model and human life .
I have received two motions for resolution tabled in accordance with Rule 103 ( 2 ) of the Rules of Procedure .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Wednesday , 20 February 2008 .
( The sitting was suspended at 20.00 and resumed at 21.00 )

Written statements ( Rule 142 )
in writing . - The aim of creating a dynamic and innovative society in Europe bringing growth and employment by 2010 will be successfully achieved only through an approach that genuinely takes into account the fight against poverty and the social dimension .
While refocusing the growth and jobs strategy on an improved performance-based approach , social inclusion and environmental standards should at no cost be left aside for achieving economic targets .
The prospect of creating new jobs in an innovative-based economy should bring developments in the fields of education and training to improve the equal integration of the most vulnerable and disadvantaged categories of the population EU-wide .
Investments on innovation , research , transport and energy efficiency should focus on bringing real benefits to the European consumers in a free and fair trade economic Union .
As a matter of fact , economic growth is not an end in itself and , of course , economic figures are not to be confused with the welfare of European citizens .
The real aim of the Lisbon strategy should in the end still be the improvement of the quality of life for our citizens and future generations ; therefore , a strong social dimension is required .
in writing . - ( HU ) We are gradually coming to the end of the ten-year period during which the European Union was supposed to have become the most competitive economic zone in the world , with a sound social safety net and exemplary environmental indicators .
One does not have to be very bold to predict that we will not be able to work miracles over the next two years .
The task we set ourselves was too ambitious , and the results have been rather modest .
If , however , we take also into account the fact that the European Union has undertaken an expansion of historic proportions , reunited Europe , created a common currency and drafted common legislation on numerous matters for 27 nations , then we should by no means be disappointed in what has been achieved .
In terms of our environmental commitments , Europe in many respects continues to set an example to the world in terms of green thinking and legislation .
We know full well , however , that there are contradictions in this area too .
Many laws are just a dead letter in some Member States , and permissible environmental levels in some cases are more permissive than in many non-EU countries .
The Lisbon goals are therefore appropriate , but implementing them in the era of consolidation following the great boom of EU expansion will require a lot more effort than before .
in writing . - I welcome the efforts to fulfil the goals of the Lisbon Strategy , but I am not very convinced that fulfilling its plans is practically possible by the set deadline .
It is , therefore , highly important to emphasise the knowledge-driven society .
Spending on science in the EU is less than in the US and today we are facing the fact that we cannot compete on the world market in the field of inventions or technology .
The EU and its Member States have to put more effort and allocate more financial resources to developing and updating European education and science .
The Baltic Sea has become an internal sea of the European Union , showing stable , high economic growth .
The Baltic Sea region has the potential to become one of the most competitive regions in the world .
The Baltic Sea strategy foresees sustainable development and growth , it foresees and maps all the areas which can be further developed , and therefore can in reality become maybe the only region actually fulfilling the Lisbon Strategy .
Therefore I strongly urge the EU , and especially the Member States around the Baltic Sea , to use this strategy to its fullest .
The Baltic Sea strategy has the potential to become a success story of Lisbon Strategy .
in writing . - ( RO ) The fundamental objectives of the Lisbon Strategy cannot be achieved without developing competitiveness , taking into consideration all the current global challenges ( globalization , climate changes , fluctuations on the financial markets , international markets openness ) .
In order to increase competitiveness , the EU should accelerate its efforts to build a society based on knowledge and to continuously improve the administrative capacity .
The development of stable communities and the coherence of industry and cross-industry policies cannot be achieved without good operation of the local and regional potential , by enhancing the competencies of local and regional authorities , and fully complying with the diversity and consolidation of inter-regional and cross-border relations and exchanges .
Romania has planned to follow the convergence process and to reduce the gaps existing at the moment of accession .
Its human and material resources are an important source of competitiveness for all the Member States , which represents one of the main advantages that our country 's accession has brought to the Union .
The growth potential of the Romanian economy , of the energy resources and the overall natural resources , its attractiveness and territorial accessibility are an advantage for the interdependence of the European economies and we rely on the solidary support of the older Member States so that , beyond any conjectural and temporary dissensions , the Romanian resources would be showed to be an advantage at their true potential , to the Union 's benefit .
in writing . - ( FI ) The EU has many good intentions , one of the older ones being the Lisbon Strategy we are now debating and one of the more recent ones being the latest energy package .
The means employed to achieve these purposes are not in line with the targets .
You could sum it up by saying that the Lisbon Strategy is not being implemented in the way planned and that the Member States are not actually committed enough to realise its objectives .
In a way that is good : the Lisbon Strategy is designed to run counter to the construction of a socialist Europe .
Non-implementation might also go the way of energy targets : they will not be achieved by 2020 .
The markets are moving in another direction , and the EU does not go against market trends .
Given this situation , the Lisbon Strategy needs to be reconsidered : we should defy the power of the markets .
Commission Question Time
The next item is questions to the Commission ( B6-0010 / 2008 ) .
The following questions were put to the Commission .
Part I
Subject : EASA airworthiness assessment procedures
In the autumn of 2007 , three accidents occurred , each involving Dash8 Q400 aircraft in Aalborg , Vilnius and Copenhagen respectively .
Provisional findings from the investigation indicate that the accidents occurring on 9 and 12 September could be attributed to a design error , a conclusion which the Scandinavian civil aviation authority ( SLV ) and the European Aviation Safety Agency ( EASA ) concur .
The accident which occurred on 27 October may be attributed to a combination of faulty design and subsequent inspection errors .
The Scandinavian civil aviation authority has now grounded the aircraft , making its re-entry into service subject to a number of conditions , while the EASA has concluded that the design error was of a minor nature only .
Is it not true that the task of the EASA is to ensure high safety standards ?
How is it possible for the EASA and the SLV to reach such different conclusions following an investigation by the airline revealing in 16 of their 18 Dash8 Q400 aircraft the same design error or construction defect as in the aircraft forced to carry out an emergency landing in Copenhagen ?
Vice-President of the Commission . - ( FR ) I am happy to reply to Mrs Jensen 's question .
Pending the final reports of the investigations into the three accidents involving DASH8 Q400 aircraft , the Commission feels that it is premature to speculate about the factors which caused these specific events , as well as any possible design errors or construction defects .
The task of the European Aviation Safety Agency is , of course , to ensure the highest possible level of safety .
The Agency has monitored this case very closely , and is continuing to do so , given that 170 aircraft of this particular type have been supplied around the world and are therefore in operation today .
According to detailed information received from the EASA , there has been contact on a number of occasions between the EASA , the civil aviation authorities in Norway and Denmark , the Canadian civil aviation authorities and the aircraft manufacturer .
A number of things have been done as a result , including the publication by the EASA of airworthiness directives prescribing corrective measures to be taken .
A detailed evaluation of the landing gear retraction system in this type of aircraft led the EASA to conclude that the safety of the aircraft was not in doubt .
The Scandinavian authorities were therefore recommended to restore the aircraft 's certificate of airworthiness , once the necessary corrective measures had been taken , of course .
The Scandinavian authorities informed the airline of the conditions to be met in order to have the airworthiness certificates restored for the fleet of aircraft concerned .
However , the airline has not yet provided the proof needed for its aircraft to be deemed to have undergone the inspections and modifications requested .
At this stage the European Aviation Safety Agency has not been informed that the Danish authorities have restored the airworthiness certificates for SAS ' fleet of Q400s .
The EASA remains in contact with the Danish authorities in an attempt to clarify this question .
Mr President , this was the answer I wanted to give to Mrs Jensen .
( DA ) Mr President , I would like to thank Vice-President Barrot for this account .
It is true that the disagreement that I referred to in my question may have been partially corrected ; however , it is still the case that the Danish aviation authority does not permit SAS planes to take off before they have resolved the technical problems , while other aviation companies are actually using planes which have these technical problems .
I feel that the fundamental problem here - apart from the discrimination between SAS Scandinavian Airlines on the one hand and other aviation companies such as Flybe , Augsburg , Tyrolean and Luxair on the other - is that we citizens may not be able to expect aviation safety .
What would you do , Mr Barrot , to ensure that I can be just as confident in the common aviation authority as in the national aviation authorities , as it is after all these authorities that we are talking about ?
Vice-President of the Commission . - ( FR ) The EASA has given definite instructions which , if they are followed , will mean that these aircraft are airworthy .
There is therefore not a safety problem , it is just that the Danish authorities have not notified the EASA of the replies from the airline in question .
Mrs Jensen , the fact of the matter is that the EASA has issued full instructions for rectifying the problems that might arise from the use of these aircraft .
For the time being the EASA is having to wait for the results of the investigations before it can take a final view on the matter , but I would stress that the Agency has obviously given full instructions for the safe use of these aircraft , which have not actually caused accidents in which anyone was hurt , but which have , as you said , nevertheless been involved in accidents , and action must be taken to put matters right .
( DE ) Commissioner , paradoxically the situation now appears to be that one European air safety agency is forbidding aircraft from flying while another , like the Austrian agency , believes they could so after all .
My question to you is this : will the EASA find things easier now , as a result of the wider competences we have decided on in this area , given that it seems - as you have said - that the company that produces these aircraft is creating certain difficulties at present ?
If the EASA can now do what we have agreed , namely also impose fines and not immediately withdraw a licence , will it find things easier ?
I think these wider competences we have decided will make things easier for the EASA in future .


Vice-President of the Commission . - ( FR ) Let me make it quite clear that the EASA has issued instructions , and all the airlines are required to apply the rules laid down by the Agency .
Your question is broader than that , however .
Yes , the EASA has responsibilities when it comes to certifying aircraft , and it has responsibilities for issuing design approval certificates all over the world , but it relies on inspections in the EU Member States to monitor whether the joint rules are being applied uniformly .
In other words , as you rightly said , we have extended the Agency 's powers , but not to the point where the civil aviation authorities in the various Member States have no responsibilities whatsoever .
The Member States must carry out their responsibilities through their civil aviation authorities .
One day we will perhaps be able to go further , but for the moment the EASA has a number of difficult tasks to carry out , and it must be able to continue to monitor the application of the joint rules very closely through inspections in the Member States .
In this particular case I think that the EASA has done exactly what is necessary to ensure safety .
Subject : Transparency with regard to management pay
Throughout Europe management pay has been rising steadily .
In Austria , for example , basic salaries of managers rose by around 3.7 % between 2006 and 2007 .
However , the variable components in management pay increased considerably more sharply .
The growth in management pay has led to greater public interest in the level of actual remuneration for management activities .
Not least , as variable pay is not required to be shown in balance sheets shareholders wish to know how their money is being spent .
There are clear demands from European citizens for greater transparency with regard to management pay .
Is the Commission aware of these developments ?
Is European legislation planned that will lead to greater transparency with regard to management pay , or does legislation already exist in this area ?

Member of the Commission . - Management pay is a topical issue and has been for quite some time .
In reaction , the Commission has taken steps to increase transparency regarding management pay .
The Commission recommendation adopted in 2004 provides for annual disclosure regarding both the company policy on directors ' remuneration and the remuneration of individual directors .
The Commission has also followed up on this recommendation by checking whether it is actually applied by Member States .
We have recently made an overview of this .
The large majority of Member States have introduced high disclosure standards on the remuneration of individual executives in their national corporate governance code or in binding legislation .
However , only around 60 % of Member States have followed the recommendation as regards transparency on their remuneration policy .
Only a very few recommend putting this to the vote in the company 's general meeting .
There is scope for improvement here .
The Commission will also evaluate the extent to which companies adhere to the recommended transparency standards in practice .
Remuneration is a field in which some companies have shown strong reluctance to disclose information , despite the recommendations of the national corporate governance code .
We will look into this question .
( DE ) Commissioner , you said yourself that 60 % of undertakings intend to do nothing .
Now I ask you : what does the Commission intend to do ?
I come to my second question .
We have now learned from an actual case in Germany that these gentlemen - for they are mainly gentlemen - not only earn very good money but do not want to pay tax on what they earn , which is why they go to Liechtenstein and elsewhere .
What does the Commission intend to do in future to put a stop to such practices ?

Member of the Commission . - In reply to both questions from the honourable Member , these are matters that should be dealt with by a Member State .
In response to the question regarding what the Commission is going to do , the Commission has already done it .
My predecessor decided to make a recommendation in this particular area .
Why did he decide on a recommendation rather than anything else ?
I have no doubt that it was for a whole variety of reasons , but primary among them would be the fact that there is no agreement on having a universal corporate governance code or company law regime in Europe .
We would never be able to obtain such an agreement .
There are very many cultural differences in this whole area , and that would have been one of the reasons underpinning the decision of my predecessor to issue a recommendation in this particular regard .
With regard to the recommendation , our study has shown that the majority of Member States have introduced high disclosure standards regarding the remuneration of individual directors in the corporate governance code , and some have put it into binding legislation .
The majority have also dealt with the recommendation as regards transparency on remuneration policy .
The second question regarding taxation is certainly a matter for each individual Member State to pursue in whatever way they think fit and in accordance with their national laws .
Subject : Construction of underground stretch of high-speed rail line near the Sagrada Família church ( Barcelona )
As is universally known , the construction of an underground stretch of a high-speed rail line in Barcelona has led to numerous cases of buildings collapsing or subsiding , endangering both housing and major edifices , including the Sagrada Família church and other historic buildings .
Since this is an EU-subsidised project , can the Commission provide information on the prior environmental impact assessments carried out under Directive 85 / 337 / EEC ( 1 ) , and state whether those studies have assessed the risks to the Sagrada Família and other historic buildings ?
Do the dossiers which have reached the European institutions include the study carried out by the Universitat Pompeu Fabra , which advised against the underground option in view of the overall risks involved ?
Member of the Commission . - ( EL ) Mr President , I should firstly like to remind you of the Commission 's firm resolve : however useful or necessary a project may be , it should never be realised to the detriment of the environment , public health or the cultural heritage of a Member State .
The Member States must take all the requisite steps to protect and safeguard cultural heritage . This is especially true of their historic city centres , which occasionally suffer from the additional pressures of increasing urbanisation .
As for the question by the honourable Member , I should like to point out the following : the high-speed Madrid-Saragossa-Barcelona rail line construction projects have been co-funded only partly by the Cohesion Fund .
The Trans-European Transport Networks Fund co-finances the preparation of studies on projects along the whole length of the track , including the extension from Barcelona to Gerona and Figueres .
Nevertheless , resources from the European funds may not have been accounted for or used for projects connected with the Barcelona underground line .
It should also be noted that the planning and completion of projects is the exclusive responsibility of the Member State , which has an obligation to comply with and strictly implement the relevant rules of Community legislation .
In this particular case , there was no Community funding for the preparatory work on the section linking Sants and Sagrega stations , or for the tunnel to be opened near the Sagrada Família . The Commission was thus not kept informed , nor did it receive a copy of the environmental impact assessment completed by the Spanish authorities .
The Commission is aware that the relevant Spanish authority , namely the Secretariat-General for the Prevention of Pollution and Climate Change , has approved the environmental impact assessment pursuant to its decision of 30 May 2007 .
The text of the approving decision was published in the official Spanish Government journal in June 2007 .
The text contains references to the effect the project will have on cultural heritage , such as on the Sagrada Família .
Finally , the Commission has not been informed about the study drawn up by Pompeu Fabra University .
The Spanish authorities are responsible for taking into account both the content of studies , as in this case , and public opinion .
The Commission will continue to monitor the situation . We hope that no harm will be done to this historic monument of cultural heritage belonging to the city of Barcelona .
( ES ) Mr President , I have no doubt that the legal procedures have been followed correctly ; with a minimum of compulsion shall we say .
I am approaching the Commission to seek its help as guardian of the Treaties and I appeal to its conscience to reject the measures and to apply the environmental impact directive scrupulously in that capacity .
The fact that this part of the tunnel is not going to be funded by the European Union is beside the point as we are all aware that splitting projects into sections is bad practice and , indeed , one which the European Union has had occasion to criticise .
Why was the AVE not declared a major project requiring detailed impact studies given that we know that it will go under very sensitive areas such as the Pedrera and , especially , alongside the Sagrada Familia ?
The spirit of Article 3 of the EIA Directive requires assessment to be made of potential repercussions on the cultural heritage .
The 40-metre-deep protective wall which is to be built is only one and a half metres away from the façade of the Sagrada Familia , which weighs 40 000 tonnes .
Moreover , given the characteristics of the terrain and the fact that the cathedral is an extremely intricate work of genius , all I ask is for all sides to be heard and taken into account .
I am very glad that the AVE is on its way but this is not a party-political issue , it was the PP that changed the route and I now think that it should be changed once again to run along Valencia Street .
Member of the Commission . - ( EL ) Once again I should like to stress that the Commission does not have the authority to intervene .
Certainly , the honourable Member is right in saying that we must take particular care in maintaining our cultural heritage and especially that of our architectural masterpieces . Hitherto , however , we have not been alerted of any danger : the draft environmental assessment carried out has not been presented to us as incorrect .
All that has been brought to the Commission 's attention is the matter of the petitions submitted to the relevant European Parliament committee by the Llave para Litoral association , the members of which want a shoreline route different from the underground one .
These , however , remain problems for the local authorities , regional authorities and central government to solve by applying the Environmental Impact Assessment Directive .
They have an obligation to do so in order to maintain our cultural heritage .
( ES ) Mr President , I would just like to add a few details and say , to put people 's minds at rest perhaps , that full geological information is available for these works , the building technique is appropriate for the conditions on the ground , preventive treatment will be carried out before work begins alongside existing structures , there will be continued soundings to immediately identify the slightest possibility of movement or settling of the ground , there will be no negative impact on neighbouring structures and guarantees of transparency will be provided in respect of information provided to the public .
What I am trying to say is that I do not believe anyone has a greater interest than the Spanish , Catalan and local government authorities in ensuring that neither this historic monument nor the people who live in the area suffer any damage whatever .
Member of the Commission . - ( EL ) I do not think that I have anything to add to the information that the honourable Member has given us .
Part II
Subject : Inclusion of Ancient Greek and Latin in the European Indicator of Language Competence
Given the Commission 's intention to establish a European Indicator of Language Competence for the five most widely spoken languages , will it say whether it intends to include Latin and Ancient Greek in the programme for the targeted teaching of European languages , since they constitute the basis of European languages and many words derived from them are used in all European languages whatever their origin ?
In view of the importance of these languages , the European Union of Classicists , Euroclassica , has already established levels and certified competence in Latin ; a similar programme is being prepared for Ancient Greek .
The teaching of these two key languages of classical antiquity will provide an opportunity jointly to deepen the foundations of European civilisation and establish closer relations between European citizens , while the certification of such linguistic competence will constitute an additional qualification in professional life .
Member of the Commission . - ( RO ) The Commission 's Communication , named the European Indicator of Language Competence , adopted in 2005 , proposed a detailed strategic approach for conducting a European survey on language competence , an instrument that will allow the collection of the necessary data to prepare a European indicator in this field and improve knowledge regarding the teaching of foreign languages .
On this basis , in May 2006 , the Council presented its conclusions on a series of fundamental problems regarding the European Indicator of Language Competence .
As regards the foreign language to be tested , the Council decided that the European Indicator of Language Competence shall be decided for the official languages of the European Union .
This means that only living languages are aimed at by this project .
Consequently , the possibility to test Latin or Ancient Greek has not been taken into consideration .
For practical reasons , the Council decided that , during the first phase of the European survey on language competence , the pupils ' language competence will be assessed for the first and the second foreign language of the most studied official foreign languages in the European Union , namely English , French , German , Spanish and Italian and data shall be collected for three competencies : reading , listening and writing .
Nevertheless , the testing instrument will be available for all the countries that want to make sure that the tests , other than those for these five foreign languages , can be included as national options .
The Commission will also take the initiative to make sure that the next stage of the survey will comprise all the official languages that are studied in the European Union .
( EL ) Mr President , I see that teaching is not within your sphere of responsibilities , nor dissemination , nor , as I also mentioned in writing , the maintenance of the common heritage which springs from the Classical languages .
Is this within your sphere of responsibilities or not ?
That is my first question .
My second question is , does the European research programme relate to research in these languages or not ?
Do you know anything about this matter ?
Member of the Commission . - ( RO ) The question I was asked was related to the European Indicator of Language Competence .
As I answered , only the official languages of the European Union are subject to this action .
On the other hand , the European Commission has no information regarding possible research or studies conducted in the Member States or in regions of the Member States regarding the mentioned languages .
( EL ) Commissioner , as rapporteur on the European Indicator of Language Competence , I should like to point out that the duty of the indicator in question is to assess at regular intervals the overall competence in modern languages of all the Member States .
We agreed that this indicator would initially measure linguistic competence in the five most widespread languages in the EU 's educational systems : English , French , German , Italian and Spanish .
Nevertheless , Parliament called on the Commission and the Council to take the requisite steps to extend this test as soon as possible to a wider spectrum of official languages of the Union , provided this did not adversely affect the teaching or development of modern languages .
Can the Commissioner tell us what stage we have reached and , if possible , which languages will be included in the next stage ?
( DE ) Commissioner , there is a Polish-German-Czech meeting centre in the former monastery of Haindorf in Northern Bohemia , where all the inscriptions and signs are in Latin .
Could we not do the same in the European institutions buildings ?
Second proposal : could we not produce a Latin text for the European anthem that everybody can sing in unison , which the individual Member States can then translate into their own languages , while the common text would be in Latin ?
Member of the Commission . - ( RO ) Regarding the European Indicator of Language Competence , as I said and you noted correctly , in the first phase only five languages will be assessed .
At present , the schedule is the following : this year , we are preparing a pilot project and in 2009 we will make all the preparations for this assessment so that in 2010 we will have clear results of the situation regarding these five languages .
Afterwards , as I said in my speech , the Commission wants to extend this indicator to all the official languages .
Nevertheless , it is still too early to say the exact moment when this extension will be made .
Of course , we have to see and examine in detail the results of the assessment regarding the indicator on the five languages we start with .
On the other hand , regarding the second question you asked , the European Commission 's objective is to defend the language diversity .
From this point of view , by all the actions it takes , the European Commission aims at defending both the official languages and the other languages spoken in the European Union .
We have 23 official languages , over 60 regional languages , minority languages , and languages less used .
From this point of view , the actions we take especially aim at these languages we have called living languages .
As regards the European Anthem , of course , the points of view differ .
It is not the European Commission 's role to decide on this matter .
Subject : Support for linguistic minorities
What linguistic minorities received support from the Commission in 2007 , and what possibilities does the Commission see in 2008 and 2009 for German-speaking minorities to benefit from greater support ?
Member of the Commission . - ( RO ) In the 2007 call for proposals , one network and three projects were selected , which address minority languages for financing in the lifelong learning programme .
Key activity 2 : foreign languages .
The network designed to promote language diversity , coordinated by the Welsh Language Board , aims at the following languages : Basque , Breton , Catalan , Cornish , East Frisian , Scottish Gaelic , North Frisian , Welsh , West Frisian , Slovak , Ladin , Galician , Friulian , Sardinian , Estonian , Irish , Latvian , Lithuanian , Maltese , Finnish and Swedish .
The European Office for less widespread languages is one of the partners of this 3-year project , meant to facilitate the exchange of current good practice and the development of new and innovative ideas in the field of education and language planning in the context of regional , minority , indigenous , cross-border languages , languages of smaller nations and less widespread languages .
The 3 multi-annual projects funded in 2007 include minority and world languages such as Catalan , Basque , Sardinian , Sicilian , Irish , Russian , Arabic and Hindi .
For the period of 2008-2010 , priority will be given to the projects aiming at less widespread European languages .
In the context of the 2007-2013 lifelong learning programme , all languages are eligible for financing , thus including German-speaking minorities .
( DE ) Commissioner , did I understand you correctly that German-speaking minorities cannot receive support until 2013 ?
Surely it is the case , for example , that real minorities exist , like the Germans in the Czech Republic , the Poles in Lithuania , the Poles in the Czech Republic etc .
So if they have media or cultural projects , they cannot receive any support at all at present .
Or have I misunderstood ?
Member of the Commission . - ( RO ) Maybe I was not clear enough .
I definitely did not say that certain languages , including the German language , could be supported only after 2013 .
The answer is categorical .
In the lifelong learning programme , all the languages spoken in the European Union , therefore , of course , including the German language , are likely to receive financing .
The only thing that matters is the quality of the project or projects submitted .
Therefore , my answer is , categorically , that such languages can be financed in the lifelong learning programme , including during this period between 2008 and 2013 .
I repeat , including during this period .
Subject : Lesser-used languages in Europe
Can the European Commission state if it intends to bring forward any new programmes in the near future to promote the use of lesser-used languages in Europe , and to state the nature of such programmes and the likely financial support which may be given to such programmes ?
Question No 45 will be answered in writing .
Member of the Commission . - ( RO ) The Commission has no intention to present a new programme of concrete promotion of the use of less widespread languages in Europe in the near future .
In fact , the Commission 's 2007-2013 new generation of programmes , namely the lifelong learning programme , offers a broad range of financing possibilities for these languages .
All the languages are eligible for this programme .
Financing is accessible in all the 4 sub-programmes of the lifelong learning programme : COMENIUS , ERASMUS , Grundvig and Leonardo da Vinci .
This financing is also possible in the newly-created transversal section of the lifelong learning programme , especially by way of the key activity - foreign languages - which proposes the financing of projects and networks with the established purpose to promote the learning of foreign languages and language diversity .
Following the 2007 general call for proposals , a network and three projects designed for less widespread languages were selected for funding as part of the key activity 2 .
For the period of 2008-2010 , priority will be given to the projects aiming at less widespread languages in Europe .
In 2008 , the available budget for the key activity 2 is of 9.9 million euros but , taking into account that the funding of language-related activities and projects is part of a dominant trend , additional funds are available in the lifelong learning programme .
( GA ) Mr President , I would like to thank the Commissioner for his response .
Does he accept however , that it is important that help is given to lesser used languages in their own context and not to tie them in too much with lifelong learning ?
These languages are vulnerable and if they do not receive significant support they will be even more vulnerable in the future .
Of course , financial support is important , but symbolic support is even more important .
Would the Commissioner agree that this should be increased ?

Member of the Commission . - ( RO ) I can only repeat what I have just said , namely that , by the actions taken by the European Commission to support language diversity , not only the 23 official languages are supported , but also the other languages spoken in the European Union , including the regional languages , the less widespread languages .
Moreover , via the data I supplied , I have shown that this support is a concrete one , an important financial support provided to the development of these languages .
( GA ) Mr President , my colleague Mr Seán Ó Neachtain speaks Irish fluently .
I am unable to however .
My apologies .
Could I put a question to you ?
I agree with the premise of your answer .
Money is important , but is it not more important that we know how to teach languages better ?
In countries like Ireland , where people , like myself , would dearly love to speak the language but came through a system that did not give us the ability to do so , we need to find ways of teaching us how to speak our native tongue , because we would dearly love to do that .
Member of the Commission . - ( RO ) The European Commission intends to present a new strategy regarding multilingualism in the second half of 2008 .
In this strategy , the educational component will hold a very important place .
The composition and ways of learning foreign language will play a very important role .
As regards the Irish language , I would like to inform you that I have recently made a visit to Dublin , I have had the opportunity to discuss with the Irish authorities , at that moment and afterwards and I have insisted on the need for the broadest possible training of people capable to work , at Community level and not only , as translators or interpreters .
This is an essential element in order to be able to ensure a completely equal position for the Irish language together with the other official languages of the Union .
Mr President , I really expected to have an answer from the Commissioner tonight .
The floor is given to people to make statements and ask questions .
I have a question and I would like to have an answer to that question .
It is as simple as that .
Time is being wasted on statements tonight .
Could you please , in this case , let the Commissioner answer very quickly ?
I will not ask any particular questions after that .
Honourable members , when people ask to speak I cannot guess whether they are going to make statements or whether they are going to ask questions .
This is not yet in my mental capacity , I do not have divinatory powers .
What I do have to do is to manage the time according to the regulations and custom of the House , and unfortunately I do not have time to give you .
That would be detrimental to our fellow Members who have asked questions .
I must point out that 70 questions have been put to the Commission for this session alone .
Obviously it is not possible to answer 70 questions .
We have rules , and we must stick to them .
I apologise sincerely and understand your frustration .
If I were in your position - and when I am in your position I feel frustrated too - but I cannot give you an answer .
The Commissioner will in any event naturally answer you in writing , and you will therefore get your answer .
I hope you understand .
Subject : Regional Development Fund and minority groups
Most of the structural funds for regional development for the coming period of 2007-2013 have been agreed .
In view of this , how is the Commission going to ensure that the funds will not be used in discriminatory ways , and make sure that ethnic minorities , such as notably the Roma , will also benefit from them ?
Will the Commission be publishing information on the take-up of the funds by different minority ethnic groups ?
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , let me say that , in the process of preparing for the new generation of cohesion policy programmes for 2007-2013 , the Commission has insisted that , during the negotiations , the Roma issue , which is of particular importance to the honourable Member , is included in planning and programming .
I must admit that Member States have responded very positively by including the Roma issue as a cross-cutting issue in many national strategic reference frameworks and also through direct references in operational programmes .
This is particularly strongly visible in the case of countries like Hungary , the Czech Republic , Slovakia , Romania , Bulgaria , Estonia and Spain , but also in the case of Poland , Slovenia , Lithuania and Finland .
Due to the decentralised way of managing the Structural Funds , it is not possible for the Commission to identify clearly which projects are targeting and will in the future target , and how much money will be available for , the Roma issue .
However , our presence in the monitoring committee for the period 2000-2006 clearly shows that there is a multitude of very interesting and complementary programmes and projects which support Roma inclusion .
We have , in many ESF and ERDF programmes , either specific implementation allocations or support for Roma inclusion indirectly , through references to vulnerable groups .
This is , for example , the case in Estonia , Finland and Poland .
On the issue of the publication of data , I must say that , for the period 2007-2013 , Member States , as you probably know , are required to publish details of the beneficiaries under each programme , but this system does not extend explicitly to identifying the ethnic background of the beneficiaries .
Nevertheless , on the basis of this list that we will receive , we will be able to identify areas in which the European policy is active .
Let me also say that DG REGIO has prepared , for the period 2007-2013 , guidance for internal Commission work on the Roma issue , which has been used across the services in the programming period .
There is a Roma inter-service group working on Structural Funds chaired by DG REGIO .
Let me also say that in many Member States - and Hungary is a good example here - we also have steering mechanisms which are specially created for the process of new regional policy .
In Hungary , for example , there is a network of advisers of Roma origin to assist Roma applicants in preparation of the project at different stages .
The Commission is also currently working on , and will present by June 2008 , an overview of all the Community instruments and policies , including the Structural Funds , and their impact on Roma inclusion .
Thank you , Commissioner , for that very comprehensive answer .
I would also like to thank you for your recent work in my constituency in London in sorting out our own Structural Fund problems .
Can I take you deeper into the question of identifying whether ethnic minorities are actually being targeted properly ?
In December the European Council specifically asked you and the Commission to look deeper into this issue .
Do you feel , aside from the comprehensive answer you have given me , that there is some scope for identifying whether the Roma and other groups are in fact being targeted well , or whether money is being filtered in other places ?
Is there scope for you to go further on this issue ?
Member of the Commission . - It is actually Commissioner Špidla who is in charge of the preparation of the Commission document in response to the Council request .
Nevertheless , through the inter-service groups we are all participating in this process .
As I said , we will have the information from the report on final beneficiaries , so we will know what is being done for the Roma or for other minorities .
We will not have ethnically-segregated data with regard to the background of beneficiaries .
Nevertheless , the area in which the project will be functioning will be absolutely clear , so , on the basis of this , we will know for the period 2007-2013 much more than we know so far .
Let me also say that the Commission , in its function as observer within the management system in the committees in the Member States , is also looking at and actively participating in the assessment of the allocation of funds in the areas important to ethnic minorities , so we have different sorts of information .
But I must admit that we do not have a fully-fledged instrument to identify the entire scope of the intervention taking place through the policy , but we are certainly very aware and we are using all the opportunities that we have .
We will see .
We are now preparing the input into the Commission document for the Council .
We will also see where the black areas are , where we do not have information , and what kind of action we might still need .

( EL ) Mr President , I should like to ask the Commissioner if single-parent families and poor families with a large number of children are included in the definition of vulnerable groups , whether they are minority groups or not . Further , can the criteria be combined and can benefits to groups of this kind be increased ?
Member of the Commission . - I should just like to say that nothing has been excluded .
With your help we have been through the preparation of the regulations .
We have been sensitive to vulnerable groups , and there are clear references in the general ERDF regulation with regard , for example , to equal opportunities policies .
So it is a priority .
There is also the system of reporting on how equal opportunity policies are implemented in the new generation of cohesion policy programmes .
The extent to which this is used by the Member States , by the regions , depends on how strong the partners participating in all the structures of the management fund are in this process .
It is a joint effort .
The Commission has created the general framework , in order to take into account all the vulnerable groups .
Its use depends not just on the Commission , but also on the Member States .
I would strongly encourage all those present on the ground to see that this issue is taken into account .
The Member States are now also going through the process of deciding on the selection criteria , and the Commission is participating in this process .
Nevertheless , it depends on the Member States and on the partners , because the monitoring committees include all the social partners .
I hope that all the partners , along with the Commission , will bring these issues to the attention of the Member States , and that the selection criteria will include criteria that allow us to have full representation of all the vulnerable groups in our programmes .
Subject : EU regional funding for Ireland 2007-2013
Can the Commission indicate if it is satisfied with the level of regional parity in the recently approved EU funding for Ireland for the period 2007-2013 and if it is concerned that figures show that Ireland 's two regions are not converging ; rather that the BMW region continues to lag behind the S & E region , which continues to be the focus of government spending ?

Member of the Commission . - With regard to Ireland and the allocation for 2007-2013 and the division between the two major regions , let me say that the Border , Midlands and Western ( BMW ) region , which is a phasing-in region within the second objective , will receive a per capita financial allocation which is four times higher than that of its neighbour , the more prosperous Southern and Eastern region of the Republic .
Of the total EUR 901 million allocated to Ireland , EUR 457 million will go to the BMW region and EUR 293 million to the Southern and Eastern region .
We also have EUR 150 million that will go to cooperation programmes , which translates into a per capita allocation of approximately EUR 400 in the BMW and approximately EUR 95 in the Southern and Eastern region .

Let me also say that the BMW region has performed very well over the recent programming period with the assistance of the EU Structural Funds .
The region had already reached 102.9 % of the EU-27 average GDP per capita by 2004 .
But I admit that the gap in regional GDP for the BMW region and the neighbouring region remains a challenge , which is why we hope that in the 2007-2013 programmes , under both the ESF and ERDF , we will see a further reduction in this gap .
( GA ) Mr President , I would like to thank the Commissioner .
I would like to place the major road scheme , which is very important in remote areas , in context .
In 2006 , 14 major road schemes were completed , but not one of them was in the BMW region .
In the same year , there were new road schemes under construction , but only one of them was in the West - in the BMW Region .
In the same year 11 road schemes were started which covered 222 kilometres , but there are only two schemes in the West which cover 25 kilometres .
You are correct in saying , that on examining the GDP or the GVP , for example , that it is clear that the gap is widening and that something must be done about it .
Member of the Commission . - I appreciate that comment very much .
Let me also say that we will be there with the BMW region for the years to come .
As you know , the cut in the allocation for Ireland was extremely deep for 2007-2013 , and that has , of course , clearly impacted on how much we can do together in the years to come .
Let me also say that the good news for Ireland is that there is the Irish National Spatial Strategy , which is a national programme that recognises the diverging levels of economic growth , both between the regions but also within the BMW region .
Let us hope that this joint effort of European contribution and the Irish contribution will make the BMW region move faster in terms of growth .
Let me make a personal comment .
We all know that Ireland has been a brilliant user of European funds over the years and adopted a very wise strategy , which led to this huge improvement in terms of general development when measured by GDP per capita .
However , it is true that the choice was not the infrastructure , which is now an issue and where we cannot help because Ireland has graduated from the Objective 1 programme , where there could also be further investment in infrastructure .
So this has been a very different choice from that of Spain and Portugal , but it is not for me to judge .
Subject : EU support for the peace process in Ireland
Can the European Commission state how much financial support it is giving to Northern Ireland in Structural Fund support between the years 2007 and 2013 , and state how much the European Commission has given in financial support towards the peace process in Northern Ireland since 1994 under the EU Structural Fund programmes , the Interreg Cross-Border programme , and the EU Peace Fund and via the International Fund for Ireland ?

Member of the Commission . - Everyone in this Chamber will know that the Commission has been a very strong and present partner in the peace and reconciliation process in Northern Ireland for years .
For the period 2007-2013 , a little over EUR 1.2 billion will be invested in Northern Ireland overall .
That will come from the European Social Fund and the European Regional Development Fund , but there will also be an additional amount of EUR 477 million allocated to the Peace 3 programme .
There will also be the IFI and Interreg 4 programmes , which will invest not only in Northern Ireland but also in the border regions of Ireland .
Looking at the past , which was also part of the question , with regard to 1994-99 and 2000-06 , the EU will have invested more than EUR 2 billion for 1994-99 and nearly EUR 1.8 billion for 2000-06 .
So , over the whole period 1994-2013 , we will have invested nearly EUR 5 billion in Northern Ireland .
What is also important now , with the new taskforce and the new approach and engagement from the European Commission , is that we can have benefits over and above the financial allocation , deriving from the stronger involvement of Northern Ireland in European policies .
That is what we are working on , together with the Northern Ireland Executive and other partners .
Deputising for the author.- ( GA ) Commissioner , the support for the peace process in Northern Ireland and Border Region has been very successful .
Commissioner , can you say if this initiative will be continued when the expenditure period ends in 2013 ?
( GA ) Mr President , I am in full agreement with my colleague Seán Ó Neachtain and we are very thankful to the European Union for its financial contribution to Northern Ireland , especially in the Border Region .
It is wonderful that there is peace there now and we would all like to thank the European Union for its contribution .
On examining the figures , and I have written a report recently on the International Fund for Ireland , we can see that more than five thousand jobs have been created due to this Fund .
Nevertheless , I fully agree with the question which has been tabled by my colleague Seán Ó Neachtain .

Member of the Commission . - Let me say , in answer to the question of whether we will continue our presence in Northern Ireland after 2013 , that the IFI , which , as we know , is not a Commission programme to which the Commission and the Council are contributing , will come to an end in 2010 .
Therefore , we do not know whether the international community will be willing to proceed with a second stage or second edition of this programme .
With regard to the European programmes , Northern Ireland is an Objective 2 programme .
I sincerely hope we will continue with the Objective 2 programme , because I do not believe in a regional policy which is just for part of Europe , with other parts left out .
If there is no Objective 2 , there will be no qualification for Northern Ireland .
However , I also believe that the cross-border and transnational cooperation in which Northern Ireland participates - especially the new cross-border programme through ' C ' - is also very important , because we believe that this interregional cooperation - especially with a cross-border dimension - is also very important to bring Northern Ireland closer to Europe and to cooperation with other regions and other Member States .
So it is open .
The Commission will certainly be involved in supporting the idea of continuing this presence .
Member of the Commission . - The Commission is aware of the threshold that was introduced by the Scottish authorities .
Let me also say that the Scottish authorities were fully transparent , throughout the negotiations , on the issue of introducing the threshold .
The authorities were transparent not only with regard to the Commission , in our contacts , but also within Scotland , in the consultation process with all the stakeholders and partners in Scotland .
I should like to stress that there is an absolutely clear understanding that the threshold that was introduced does not exclude small projects , but aims to encourage those projects to group together thematically or regionally to reach the required threshold .
The Scottish authorities have committed themselves to ensuring that assistance is given to smaller project holders , so that smaller projects below the threshold can at any time be presented to the intermediate administrative body , which will bring them together , whenever possible , in order to build a more strategic proposal .
This is , in fact , aimed at minimising the financial and audit risk of funding to small projects .
It is also aimed at promoting linkages between smaller projects , to make them a part of comprehensive strategy , and aimed at reducing the administrative burden , which is often seen as a barrier to small projects .
So the intention is good , and there is a mechanism to help small projects to form bigger packages that would then be presented to apply for funding .
Very briefly , Commissioner , because I know we are up against the clock : if the Scottish authorities were to come to you and suggest a lower threshold , would that be possible , and would you look at it sympathetically ?
Member of the Commission . - Absolutely , yes .
The answer would definitely be yes .
Subject : Creation of a regulatory authority for the European telecommunications sector
The Commission has made a number of recommendations concerning the forthcoming reform of the telecommunications regulatory framework including the creation of a European telecommunications regulatory authority , whose functions will include those assumed to date by the the European Regulators Group ( ERG ) , as well as coordination of the national regulatory authorities .
Is the Commission aware of the reactions of the EU national regulatory authorities as a whole regarding the powers and responsibilities of the proposed Community authority ?
Where will the lines of demarcation between the remit of the national regulatory authorities and that of the new European authority be situated ?
Member of the Commission . - The honourable Member refers to the Commission 's proposal to set up a European electronic communications market authority .
We believe that there should be a separate entity which is independent of the Commission and accountable to the European Parliament , and that this entity could assist the Commission in tackling the remaining problems of inconsistency in regulation , which leads to the fragmentation of European markets .
I have ongoing contact with the national regulatory authorities ( NRAs ) and I take note of their views regarding the powers and responsibilities of the proposed authority .
Concerning the European Regulators Group ( ERG ) , which has expressed its preference for strengthening its own model , with a view to continuing to improve the quality , consistency and coordination of regulation across Europe , I would just like to quote the ERG : ' If Europe wants to play a leading role in the global economy , its 27 Members will need to work closely to ensure that business can take full advantage of the European market ' .
That means that it does not today and that we need to find solutions so that it does in future .
The impact assessment accompanying the review proposals states that the European authority would contribute to improving the efficiency of decision-making , most of all in decision-making concerning cross-border actions .
We need this in order to build up the internal market .
We concluded as a Commission , therefore , that there is a need for a separate entity established within the Community 's existing institutional structure , because the ERG is today outside this structure - that means it is just a private organisation .
Inside the institutional structure , it would reinforce the powers of the NRAs by taking over the functions of the ERG and giving them a foundation in Community law .
Concerning the question of the distribution of competences , the authority would assist the Commission in issues having impact on the internal market and would have an inherent crossborder character , and would draw , of course , on the expertise and the daily regulatory work of the national regulators .
This system , based on the experience of 27 national regulators and the experience accumulated by the European Network and Information Security Agency ( ENISA ) , aims at reinforcing the coherence and consistency of EU rules , improving the decision-making process and contributing to promote a high and effective level of network and information security .
( EL ) Commissioner , if a European citizen is affected by an administrative act , to which of the triangle of bodies should he turn in defence of his legitimate interests : to the national regulatory authorities , the European telecommunications market authority currently being established or the Commission ?
Will the decisions of the authority currently being established be enforceable ?
Does the Commission itself intend to bear the additional costs that will arise from the proposed revision of the legislative framework , given the existing asymmetrical development of telecommunications structures among the newer and older Member States ?
Member of the Commission . - Each citizen has the right to complain if something is not going well .
If I were an ordinary citizen , the first place I would complain to would be the Committee on Petitions of the European Parliament , because that is the place where the voice of Parliament will intervene .
The second way is through transparency , which is a very important element of all our rules .
The Commission has tried to get this transparency put in place .
You may remember , for instance , with regard to voice roaming , that citizens were not informed at all about where they could get information about price structures until the Commission established a website giving information on roaming .
That was the first time that transparency had worked .
In the new reform we also make transparency the rule and not only the exception , not only with regard to price structures but also , for instance , when there are breaches of security or privacy .
In such cases , operators have an obligation to inform consumers .
Having said that , citizens will still be able to complain in the normal way , as under the old telecom rules .
Subject : Access to high-speed internet for citizens of all the Member States
On 13 November 2007 the Commission adopted proposals aimed at reforming the regulatory framework for electronic communications .
Can the Commission state whether and how it intends to take quick and effective measures with the Member States to ensure that high-speed internet market are accessible to all citizens , which , given the current wide difference in prices , is far from being the case at present ?
Also , how can the Commission ensure that competition really exists and that the anti-competitive practices which prevent these markets from being opened up are penalised ?
Member of the Commission - The high-speed internet is the internet of the future , and we would not like this internet to be available only to some .
This is why the information society for all is one of the Lisbon Strategy postulates for open and competitive markets .
Because our regulatory instruments today , even before the reform , enable this open approach to the e-communications framework - it is also bolstered by general competition rules - this has made markets too open to competition , which in turn has driven the roll-out of broadband access networks in Europe .
I am worried that in some countries it worked well - these are the countries where competition is functioning well , where you have penetration rates of up to 37 % , even 40 % - whereas in some other countries the penetration rates are very low .
I would like to get rid of this variation .
I would like to bring those who are in the very low category up the ladder .
This is why the Commission proposes , as part of the reform , to enable the Commission to oversee the regulatory remedies put in place by national regulatory authorities , backed up by the possibility of the national regulatory authorities imposing functional separation if they think it necessary in order to open the markets .
In parallel , the Commission deals with anti-competitive behaviour as a priority .
For instance , in 2003 we fined France Télécom and Deutsche Telekom for abusive behaviour in the broadband markets and , most recently , on 4 July 2007 the Commission fined Telefónica for having abused its dominant position by margin squeeze in the Spanish broadband market .
I would also like to say that a communication was issued in March 2006 on bridging the broadband gap .
I really believe that we need broadband for all , and this is why I believe we need to have national broadband strategies which reflect regional and local needs .
Moving to the question raised about transparency , the Commission is about to launch a web portal that should start to operate around May-June 2008 on the question of broadband and the citizens .
Last but not least , the Commission has a favourable view regarding the use of public funds , including EU funds - Structural Funds - to extend broadband in areas where commercial deployment is inadequate .
Several such projects have already been established .
We also support the development of information societies through regional policy .
A provisional estimate puts the investment at about EUR 15 billion , which is 4.4 % of the total spending for the period 2007-2013 , and of this figure EUR 2.2 billion is expected to be spent on broadband infrastructures .
Through these combined efforts we hope that the penetration figures of today - where we have , incidentally , four world leaders in broadband penetration - will make many more countries leaders in the world and particularly in Europe .

( FR ) Commissioner , you have had to impose maximum prices for roaming , and you said last week that you might be forced to do the same for e-mailing .
Will you not also be forced , in the near future , to control internet access prices at European level ?
I know that there are plans for harmonisation in some countries , which will reduce the number of operators .
Will this mean that prices will come down ?
I doubt it , if you do not mind me saying so , Commissioner .
Member of the Commission . - ( FR ) Mr President , in reply to Mrs Corda , I would point out that we do not interfere with market prices lightly ; we usually leave it up to the market to solve such problems .
However , if the market is unable to do so , politicians must take account of their responsibilities .
This was what we did with voice roaming , and this is what I do not want to do with SMS and data roaming .
This is why - on the basis of my obligation under the regulation on voice roaming , in which Parliament asked me to present an analysis of the situation in 2008 - I have just given the industry fair warning , telling it in no uncertain terms that if it does not bring prices down itself , the regulators , including the European Parliament , will be forced to take action .
However , the market must always be given a chance first , and it is only if the market cannot solve the problem that politicians should intervene .
What will happen with the broadband market ?
I do not know .
For the moment , all I know is that here in Europe we have four countries which are world champions in terms of market penetration , streets ahead of Japan and South Korea , and miles ahead of the USA .
What we can see is that these are competitive markets , markets where there a number of offers on the table , and the consumer is ultimately free to choose whichever service is the best for him .
This is how a market should operate .
Only if the market does not work should we regulate .
This is what the national regulators do .
To enable them to do so more effectively and practically by moving the Single Market a stage further , since this is Europe 's trump card in a globalised world , I am proposing to reform the law governing the telecoms markets .
I am doing this , and Parliament is discussing it at the moment , so that consumers have a real choice .
At the moment there are too many people - and not just individuals but SMEs too - who do not have access to broadband .
In future they will not have access , through broadband , to social developments , and I feel this is an unacceptable situation .
This is why broadband for all has to be a political objective .
It can be achieved if we manage to reform the telecoms market in a way that introduces genuine competition between operators , and therefore choice in the service they want to offer citizens .
Subject : Internet safety
While major benefits continue to be derived from advances in information and communication technology , the risks that children could be exposed to unsuitable or illegal material have increased dramatically . The EU adopted the Safer Internet plus Programme in 2005 to fight against illegal and unwanted content , particularly in relation to children .
Will the Commission report on what results have been achieved in this important policy area , and in particular what real improvements can be identified to improve internet safety in the Member States ?

Member of the Commission . - Mr President , this subject is very dear to my heart , because it concerns children and their safety .
I believe that the new technology is wonderful for children , but it also has dangers , and we have to fight these .
This is why we have established two extensive European networks : the INHOPE network of hotlines , where members of the public can report illegal content , and the INSAFE awareness-raising network , which aims to spread knowledge about the safer use of online technologies to children , parents , schools , policy-makers and the media .
All these are organised under the Safer Internet Programme and are unique pan-European initiatives .
INHOPE 's hotlines exist in 24 European countries , and it also has an international outreach with members in Asia and the United States .
The number of reports of child-abuse material processed by the network and passed on to law enforcement authorities has increased by 15 % in recent years , so we can really see the importance of those hotlines .
The second network is INSAFE , which coordinates awareness centres in 23 European countries and also organises the Safer Internet Day every year - this year it was on 12 February .
We organised the Pan-European Youth Forum , where a number of Members of Parliament and representatives from industry were present to speak directly about their experiences with social networking and mobile phone use .
The EU Kids Online network coordinates researchers from 21 countries who focus on child safety online , and every year the Safer Internet Forum brings together non-governmental organisations , industry researchers and policy-makers to discuss how to fight illegal content efficiently , Web 2.0 and other relevant topics .
The programme also encourages the engagement of the private sector .
The Safer Internet Plus programme will end in December 2008 , which is why Parliament will very soon have the opportunity to look at the review of this programme for the period 2009-2013 .
I am sure Parliament will take an active part in this decision-making process .
We have seen good results so far and we can reinforce these .
The problem is not becoming smaller , it is continuing to grow , so I believe these programmes should continue .
Commissioner , thank you for that response .
Since the problem is growing and is set to grow , can you confirm that you will recommend that the budget will also continue to grow ?
The budget for the last five years was EUR 45 million .
Are you aware that a survey in 2003 showed that 40 % of children said that people they had only met online asked them to meet in person and in 2006 22 % of them actually met the person . 51 % of them never told their parents or their teachers .
In that context , what targets have you set yourself , what measurements have you set against those targets , and what progress will you be in a position to report to Parliament when we next come to renew this programme for the period up to 2013 ?
I strongly support this programme and I would urge you , Commissioner , to seek whatever resources you need to advance it .
Thank you for your answer , Commissioner .
Can I ask what action the Commission will take to intensify its work with parents ?
That is the real problem .
Children are unfortunately way ahead of us in this area .
I am alarmed that this programme will end in 2008 , and am also conscious that not everyone knows about it , even if many do .
I hope you will take this point on board , and I believe that you need to do more , proactively , to encourage awareness .
Member of the Commission . - I completely agree with the honourable Members .
That is indeed a big problem .
For once , children in our society know more than parents , which is not such a bad thing , but it creates problems for parents in helping their children to overcome the problem .
By the way , it concerns not only parents but also grandparents -very often grandparents are the first to buy a mobile phone for their grandchildren , in order to communicate with them .
And it concerns educators , of course .
That is the reason why we not only propose to expand the programme with an increased budget of EUR 55 million - and I hope Parliament will increase that budget - but are also working together with private organisations , such as SchoolNet .
The SchoolNet programme exists in many of our European schools and really tackles this problem in order to make the children aware of the problems and show them that not everybody they may come into contact with is someone they should be in contact with .
It also provides information through hotlines and the Safer Internet Programme activities , and provides awareness centres to make parents understand what is going on .
Very often , parents do not have any idea about the advantages and the disadvantages of new technologies .
I am responsible for new technology and I really believe that the majority of actions through new technology are positive ones .
I would not like a few negative aspects to completely prevent the younger generation from having contact with new technology .
That is why I also believe very strongly in the self-regulation capacity of the industry .
A year ago , I asked mobile phone operators to do something to ensure that , in the third generation of mobile phones , problems with the internet will not directly cross over to mobile phones .
I am very glad to say that , this year , the mobile phone industry came up with very concrete actions to inform parents and children about the difficulties and to block programmes which are dangerous for children in the third generation of mobile phones .
So progress is being made .
I think that maybe the European elections will be a very good moment for the European Parliament to bring to the attention of citizens the actions which have been put in place .
These are concrete actions .
You are right that not everybody knows about them .
So why not take advantage of the huge movement towards the general public during the parliamentary campaign for the elections to explain to citizens what concrete actions the European Community is taking in favour of society ?
Questions which have not been answered for lack of time will be answered in writing ( see Annex ) .
That concludes Question Time .
An EU Strategy for Central Asia ( debate )
( DE ) The next item is the report by Cem Özdemir , on behalf of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , on an EU Strategy for Central Asia .
rapporteur . - ( DE ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , first let me take this opportunity to thank the shadow rapporteurs for their support and valuable suggestions for the report on Central Asia .
I would also like to take this opportunity , however , specifically to thank the AFET secretariat and of course also Group colleagues , who should not be forgotten at this point and without whom this report could not have come into being .
Let me mention just a few of them : Dag Sourander , Paolo Bergamaschi , Rosemary Opacic , Andrew Woodcock , Margaret François and my colleague Rana Aydın .
We in the European Parliament are discussing the report on Central Asia for the first time this evening .
I think this is a special moment for Parliament because it reflects the importance we attach to the Central Asian region in our relations .
Central Asia is becoming an increasingly important strategic partner for the European Union .
After years of neglect the European Union has recognised the need for a coherent strategy towards the five Central Asian republics of Kazakhstan , the Kyrgyz Republic , Tajikistan , Turkmenistan and Uzbekistan .
Following the collapse of the Soviet Union , the five republics became members of the OSCE , which means indeed that they have also undertaken to accept the values , standards and principles we share within the OSCE .
Under the German Presidency of the Council , on 20 / 21 June 2007 the European Council adopted a common strategy for Central Asia .
That strategy offers the five republics a share in Europe 's experience and expertise in key areas , such as good governance , the rule of law , democratisation , human rights and education and training .
The European Union 's dependence on external energy sources and its need for a diversified energy policy in order to guarantee security of energy supplies is a common interest of both the EU and the Central Asian republics .
In that respect we have common interests .
Basically , however , when it comes to energy sources , we are speaking of two countries , Turkmenistan and Kazakhstan .
Uzbekistan and Tajikistan , for instance , have energy problems themselves , as we have learned again in recent times .
When it comes to water , the Kyrgyz Republic is rich in energy , which is why we deliberately mentioned it .
Here we are following the proposal from the Commission and embassies in situ to set up a Water and Energy Academy that can look at the question as a whole , from the point of view also of the environment and sustainability .
It is also in the interest of the countries concerned to diversify their energy routes , because it cannot be in our interest to see a further increase in dependence on Russia .
The Partnership and Cooperation Agreements are important instruments of bilateral cooperation with those states .
The agreements with Kazakhstan , the Kyrgyz Republic and Uzbekistan have already entered into force , while the agreement with Tajikistan has not yet been ratified by all Member States .
To date we have not signed an agreement with Turkmenistan .
The reasons are well known .
They are to do with the regime of isolation that prevailed in Ashgabat until the end of 2006 .
We hope - and I assume I am speaking on behalf of everybody here - that we will see a new beginning in Turkmenistan and we very much hope it will pursue its democratic reforms .
Yet we must also admit at this point that there is still a very long way to go .
We welcome the first steps that have been taken in the direction of more openness .
We hope , however , that this is just the beginning of what we would like to see .
This report sets out clear objectives and priorities for relations with those five republics .
We must combine country-specific and regional approaches .
We are concerned with democracy and the rule of law , without forgetting human rights .
We want clear benchmarks that define indicators and objectives so that our partners know what they are dealing with .
I also hope the Commission and the Council will continue to call very clearly for the release of political prisoners and for media independence .
I hope too that the governments will feel encouraged by this report to take the necessary measures in relation to human rights and in particular will release all human rights activists unconditionally and without any delay .
One thing is clear to us : we will only achieve long-term stability in the region if it goes hand in hand with the development of civil society .
Without active civil societies and the rule of law there can be no stability in the long term .
Even if we want energy security for ourselves , we must not play off democracy against it .

Member of the Commission . - ( DE ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , Mr Özdemir , we too regard Central Asia as a region of growing importance and I entirely agree with you that it forms a bridge between Europe and Asia , has great strategic importance and is indeed a neighbour of neighbours , when you think of the Caucasus .
In fact , as you said , the Central Asian countries are now members of the OSCE and as such also wish for close ties with Europe .
It is important that we continue to support that .
We want to satisfy that wish and we worked together really well with the German Presidency .
We as the Commission submitted proposals that were then accepted by everybody .
As a result we have a new and most important Central Asia strategy .
I am glad that the European Parliament and Mr Özdemir have taken up precisely that question with this sound report .
It is indeed most important to make progress with implementing this strategy in the future .
Of course we must always remember that although the European Union has been active in those countries since their independence , we have now received a kind of new impetus and are devoting more attention to them .
I therefore very much welcome the clear statement in the report that the European Parliament encourages Member States to ratify the Partnership and Cooperation Agreement with Tajikistan in particular .
I hope the same will also happen in the case of Turkmenistan , where a broader contractual framework would also allow more intensive support for the framework conditions and reforms .
As you know , we have been providing bilateral technical aid for many years in the framework of the reform process , as also humanitarian aid .
So we are not starting from scratch .
There is , however , enormous potential for developing our relations further .
That is why we set out quite clearly in the new strategy what objectives we want to achieve through this closer involvement : genuine support for reforms in the field of human rights , democracy , support for economic development , investment support , protection of the environment , environmental sustainability , development of energy and transport links , as also measures to tackle common challenges such as drugs trafficking .
This strategy is also flanked by the European Union 's strategy of regional aid for Central Asia .
That supports our political aims and also makes major contributions to achieving the millennium development goals , especially in the areas of poverty reduction and health .
I believe it is most important to make progress in specific areas such as human rights , but also in education , in the rule of law , in important regional projects in West and Central Asia , in the water industry , in expanding the EIB 's mandate .
You rightly referred to the dialogue on energy policy and to the fact that an agreement should be concluded with Turkmenistan on cooperation in the field of energy .
In that respect both Kazakhstan as also Turkmenistan are of course especially important to us .
In this connection , let me briefly point out that the EU House , the EU information centre , will open in the Turkmen capital of Ashgabat in spring , which will make our measures much more visible there .
I hope I will be able to open it myself .
Finally , preparations for setting up a delegation in Uzbekistan and for upgrading the delegations in Tajikistan and the Kyrgyz Republic are also going according to plan .
Let me conclude briefly with the latest news about the current energy and food crisis in Tajikistan .
My colleague Louis Michel is in the process of looking into the ECHO proposal to allocate EUR 750 000 for a range of urgent aid measures , and I hope that proposal will be approved in the near future .
I could certainly go on for much longer , but my speaking time is limited like everyone else 's .
Draftsman for the Development Committee . - ( ES ) Madam President , as the rapporteur has said , this region requires a consistent strategy from Europe .
Consistency means complying with the European consensus on development and , in particular , the use of the financing instrument for development cooperation aimed principally at eradicating poverty and attaining the Millennium Goals .
It is , however , very unlikely that the region will be able to attain the goals and it is obvious that poverty continues to be one of the most pressing issues in the countries in the region , except those which have oil .
However , this strategy makes no mention either of eradicating poverty or social inclusion among its essential priorities , and neither does it place special emphasis on public health issues or on issues of elimination of gender-discrimination .
The Development Committee asks for these goals to be emphasised in any strategy which aims to be consistent with regard to those countries and with regard to the European Union 's other policy instruments .
We welcome the fact that education matters , particularly in relation to primary school education , are mentioned as one area of cooperation .
They need to be , because education is the millennium objective which these countries are furthest from achieving .
We also welcome the reference to the ILO Conventions on the concept of decent work and stress that these standards must play an integral role in economic cooperation , investment and trade relations , in particular in combating child labour , which continues to be a most serious problem in those countries , especially Tajikistan and Uzbekistan .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( SL ) I congratulate the rapporteur , Mr Özdemir , on his fine work and I would like to thank him for his cooperation on this report , which expresses the clear political will of the European Union for greater strategic cooperation between the European Union and the countries of central Asia , whose democratic and economic progress is important for global stability .
The report welcomes in realistic and favourable terms the progress achieved by the countries of this region in many different areas .
At the same time it is constructively critical of political shortcomings , especially in the areas of human rights , democracy , the rule of law , environmental protection and health .
The report was prepared with full awareness of the diversity of the countries of central Asia and with the conviction that it is of mutual interest to deepen the cooperation not only in the area of energy , but also in the broader area of politics and security and in other fields .
The aspiration for new dynamic relationships is also reflected in the proposal to assess the progress in cooperation every two years , and in the suggestion that the European Commission should urgently provide for the establishment of delegations in all central Asian countries .
The countries of central Asia and all the Member States of the European Union are participants in OSCE and are committed to the same values and principles .
Kazakhstan will take over the Presidency of OSCE in 2010 , and it has thereby gained great confidence and will be the first of the countries of central Asia to take over such an important responsibility .
I hope that this fact will also contribute to further democratic and all-round progress in Kazakhstan and all the other countries of the region , and to closer links with the European Union .
Ladies and gentlemen , I am pleased that , where central Asia is concerned , the European Commission , the Council and Parliament are speaking the same language .
It is time to elevate the relationship and cooperation between the European Union and the countries of central Asia to a higher level on the basis of a clear and binding strategy .
on behalf of the PSE . - ( ET ) Madam President , Commissioner , unfortunately the European Union discovered Central Asia for itself relatively late in the day and I am not entirely sure whether even today we understand the region 's importance in economic and security policy terms .
A glance around this chamber shows that it is not exactly the most popular of places .
In any event , however , the Central Asia Strategy adopted last year during the German Presidency and this European Parliament report mark a good step forward .
I congratulate the rapporteur and thank him for his pleasant and constructive cooperation .
The principal issues affecting Central Asia are reflected in this report , including security issues , combating terrorism , energy , combating poverty , transit of narcotic drugs , trafficking in human beings , environmental issues and the development of relations with the European Union , regional cooperation and the challenges of globalisation .
The important aspects are on the one hand to take a regional approach yet on the other hand to assess each country on its merits , because although we are dealing with a single region here , the countries within it nonetheless differ from each other to a fairly marked degree .
The most important aspect of the report is the good balance it strikes between economic aspects and human rights .
As the countries in question are rich in resources there is a danger that interests may come to dominate over values in our relations .
This may be further complicated by the fact that there is no previous democratic experience in Central Asia , making the implementation of international standards there difficult a result .
The situation is made yet more complex by the traditional clan-based ties and the continuing Soviet legacy .
It could therefore seem that we are using the same vocabulary , such as human rights , freedom of speech , freedom of the press , but the content we ascribe to them is fairly different .
As a result , cooperation is not easy but we must take advantage of the interest which Central Asian countries have in the European Union .
We are not , however , their only life-line .
In recent years Russia has been vigorously developing relations there anew , as have Asian countries .
Nonetheless , the European Union has a better opportunity than ever to develop its relations by using the ties and experiences which the Baltic countries , for example , which now belong to the European Union , along with other new members have previously had with the countries of Central Asia .
To conclude , it is very important to increase our presence in the region , although going by what the Commissioner said and the fact that in Central Asia we are dealing with countries where the majority of the population is , by contrast with European Union , young , our projects should focus on them in particular .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( FI ) Madam President , Commissioner , first of all I wish to thank the rapporteur , Cem Özdemir , for producing a successful report .
He has worked hard in this area and raised some fundamental issues on the EU and Central Asia strategy .
It is evident from the report that the EU views Central Asia from two standpoints .
The Union wants to increase imports of natural gas and oil from the region and diversify transit routes .
At the same time it wants to improve the human rights situation , promote democracy and equality , and reform systems of governance and the judiciary .
Finding the right balance for these objectives will be a challenging task .
The EU will need to step up the implementation of its Central Asia strategy , speed up the implementation of projects , and broaden its approach both at nation and local level .
I want to emphasise how important it is for there to be dialogue and cooperation between the EU and Central Asia .
At the same time the Union must also support relations between the countries of Central Asia and provide technical assistance for the fight against human and drug trafficking .
EU aid for healthcare , social and educational reforms and cooperation in the field of science will increase the number of contacts in civil society and strengthen European values , democracy , the rule of law and human rights .
This will also pave the way for cooperation in energy policy .
I also want to mention the importance of EU support for basic and further education and training , which will bring with it better opportunities for study in the EU and for exchanges with students from universities in the EU .
The EU also needs to support and encourage the countries of Central Asia to take more effective measures in the area of environmental protection and in their quest for sustainable water use and for their use of other natural resources .

on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( PL ) Madam President , I too would like to thank Mr Özdemir for his excellent report .
Energy security , Commissioner , is undoubtedly one of the greatest challenges facing the European Union in the 21st century .
It can be achieved only by diversifying our energy supply sources so as to free EU Member States from dependence on companies controlled by the Russian security services .
The main source for diversification could be the countries of Central Asia .
This would appear to suit both sides : the EU Member States , which are looking for other energy supply sources , and the countries of Central Asia , which would like to sell their raw materials at higher prices .
Meanwhile , extension of the Odessa-Brody pipeline to the Polish port of Gdansk has not taken place , and the Nabucco pipeline , the only pipeline that could carry natural gas to EU Member States independently of Russia , now looks much less likely to be built in view of Turkmenistan and Kazakhstan 's agreement with Russia last year on the construction of a gas pipeline along the shore of the Caspian Sea , as well as the recent agreement between Russia and Bulgaria and privatisation of the Serbian oil industry .
The result is that , owing to lack of solidarity within the European Union and ineffective EU diplomacy , our countries are letting Russia and China push them out of this important region of the world .
I would therefore ask the Commissioner what concrete steps the European Commission intends to take in favour of projects like the Odessa-Brody-Gdansk and Nabucco pipelines .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( CS ) Ladies and gentlemen , first of all I would like to thank the rapporteur for devoting so much time and effort to the preparation of this report .
However , regrettably I am obliged to follow this positive statement with the observation that the proposal in question is extremely rambling and poorly structured , with many elements repeated throughout .
My main question is : to whom is it actually addressed ?
I am afraid that there will be a sense of unease within the targeted nations about this text .
It will be a headache for these countries ' diplomats , as they grapple with the task of navigating the criticisms contained in the report .
I think that for future reference it would be appropriate to separate the resolution and explanatory report .
I would like to quote the example of one of the countries in question , Kazakhstan .
At the end of 2006 the President of Kazakhstan , Nursultan Nazarbajev , came to Brussels .
I think that the Commissioner was present with us at the time .
On that occasion words of appreciation and praise were spoken .
On reading the report , however , the overall impression is that the acclamations were not serious or sincere .
Is the rate of gas and oil supply the measure of our objectiveness ?
Do we not know that Kazakhstan has been actually carrying out a program entitled ' Pass to Europe ' , which reflects this Republic 's sincere desire to move closer to the EU in the fields concerned ?
I feel that the report does not offer an honest answer to the Kazakhs ' question as to whether Kazakhstan can be considered in geographical as well as in more general terms part of Europe .
I also feel that the traditionally patronising tone of the report with which the EU addresses its illiterate poor relatives is inappropriate .
The text does not distinguish at all between the different countries in the region , be it in relation to human rights or issues of economic and social development .
The obligation to include among them the countries of Central Asia and Mongolia appears comprehensible only as an effort to unite under one umbrella states regarded by the rapporteurs as places of similar geopolitical importance , presumably as potential platforms against Russia and China .
Some of the wording in the motion for a resolution is questionable .
What does recital R mean it states that a number of different countries , have had , historically or more recently , vested interests in the region ?
Does it express our support of the colonial ambitions of some European powers in the past or is it an expression of concern for the interests of some oil companies ?
In addition , the statement that Russia and China tried to increase their spheres of influence in Central Asia through the Shanghai Cooperation Organisation does not make sense to me .
In conclusion , I would like to say that the admirable intentions of improving the EU 's relations with the countries of Central Asia and the efforts to support local democratic and socio-political development have been , in the drafting of the resolution , obscured by the highly problematic interests of certain ambitious groups .
Considering the actual objectives and needs of the EU , the resulting text is , in my view , unacceptable .
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - ( NL ) Madam President , Mr Özdemir rightly emphasises in his report that Central Asia is of major strategic significance to the Union .
He also says that agreements with non-member countries must be conditional on a clear commitment to human rights in the partner country .
Dialogue has to be clear and frank .
Turkmenistan is one of the Central Asian countries the rapporteur mentions .
Religious freedom in that country is a total fiction .
Religion is entirely state-controlled .
' Ruhnama ' - the state religion and personality cult surrounding former President Niyazov - remains the standard .
Non-registered faith groups have a hard time of it as a result .
They find themselves between a rock and a hard place .
Intimidation by officialdom curbs their religious freedom and they encounter problems in moving about freely and owning property .
The situation of the Russian Baptist pastors Kalataevsky and Potolov , about whom I put questions to the Commission last autumn , is just one example of this appalling everyday reality .
So I would again ask you to be good enough to consider the amendments I have put down , namely numbers 12 and 13 .
Turkmenistan is a country that matters as the European Union seeks to diversify its sources of energy supply ; that much is beyond dispute .
But it also merits attention on account of the position of the religious groups I referred to earlier and of other minorities .
The same goes for our other partners in Central Asia .
I am counting on your support .
Madam President , a partnership between the EU and Central Asia is long overdue , and I congratulate Mr Özdemir on his report .
This vast and strategically vital region is being pulled three ways : by China , by Russia and by Europe .
It is essential that we do all we can to ensure that central Asia 's rational choice is partnership with the European Union .
Turkmenistan 's gradual emergence from isolation provides the EU with a crucial window of opportunity .
Ensuring regular , reliable supplies of ample Turkmen hydrocarbon resources will diminish Europe 's current overdependence on Russia .
This will require a new trans-Caspian pipeline to link up with the Nabucco project .
Uzbekistan , which was rightfully ostracised following the Andijan massacre , has begun to engage in dialogue on human rights with the EU .
This is a considerable step forward .
Clearly there is much progress still to be made before Uzbekistan can be considered a properly democratic country .
However , Uzbekistan is a vital ally in the war on international terrorism , especially with regard to Afghanistan .
For the EU , Kazakhstan should be considered the jewel in the crown of central Asia .
The country 's vast oil , gas and mineral resources , including uranium , are an obvious attraction .
Although Kazakhstan is not a western liberal democracy in our tradition , it is making considerable progress as a multi-religious , secular , Muslim-majority country .
Given the fact that only 17 years ago it was a republic of the Soviet Union , Kazakhstan 's presidency of the OSCE in 2010 will further consolidate the momentum towards greater political freedom and human rights in that country .
As rapporteur of the eastern dimension of the ENP , I once suggested that Kazakhstan might one day become a member of the ENP .
I believe that something rather like this arrangement , one day , will come to pass .
( NL ) Madam President , my compliments too to the rapporteur , Cem Özdemir .
It is a pity that most of the population of Central Asia will probably have gone to sleep ages ago .
The European Union has long neglected Central Asia .
The strategy now devised is a welcome step towards plugging that gap .
As many speakers have said , the Union has considerable interests in the region .
We are opting for a realistic strategy that takes a cohesive view of the various facets of our relationship with Central Asia and developments there .
As our EU Special Representative , Pierre Morel , has said on countless occasions , there is no way an energy dialogue can develop unless we help with the construction of properly-functioning states .
And properly-functioning states mean democratisation .
There is no guarantee that the new strategy will succeed .
That will depend very much on how it is implemented .
We are looking above all to the European Commission to flesh out the strategy in practice .
Of course the issue of human rights must not be lost sight of in all this .
On Uzbekistan , I stand by my view that we must remain tough in our dealings with that country until such time as the regime there clearly signals that it is genuinely ready to move towards democracy .
Kazakhstan , an important point .
I share the general view that this country is pivotal in the region .
I do not agree with Mr Tannock that it should be included in the ENP , but we ought to look at ways of improving our relationship with Kazakhstan .
I have been there myself and was impressed by the country 's energy - not just economically but also socially .
I am glad that agreement has been reached on whether or not Kazakhstan can take on the chairmanship of the OSCE .
I am glad too that that agreement , that decision , comes with a few conditions attached .
We can keep an eye on Kazakhstan in the years ahead to see if it meets those conditions .
One final comment .
There are all kinds of things we can do in Central Asia . But only if we also bear in mind the role of Russia and China in the region .
So in our policy towards Russia and China we must also think about the form that our growing interest in that region should take .
When I was there , in Kazakhstan , I learned that to them China and Russia are not their only major partners ; they also want closer ties with the European Union .
Our new strategy may prove a very good response to that .

Madam President , I wish to begin by congratulating Mr Özdemir for preparing this very comprehensive report .
As chairwoman of the Delegation for relations with the Central Asian countries , and in connection with this resolution , I would like to address a few issues which I consider important .
Firstly , Central Asia has an obvious growing importance for the European Union and the world as a whole , no doubt owing to its rich energy resources .
We have many shared interests in promoting security and tackling threats such as terrorism and drug-smuggling .
I am glad that the European Union 's strategy for a new partnership with Central Asia addresses those matters very firmly , as does as this resolution .
This region occupies a crucial geostrategic position , particularly as it shares a border with Afghanistan , China and Russia .
Therefore , we must clearly define our objectives and priorities , bearing in mind this context .
In 2010 , Kazakhstan will become the presiding country of the OSCE , which is responsible for ensuring democracy and fundamental human rights .
I am pleased for my colleagues , but I worry about the people of Kazakhstan , where the current elected Parliament does not include a single opposition member .
All the countries of Central Asia still have a long way to go on the road to economic and political reform and the building of democratic societies .
The example of the former Soviet republics , including my country , Lithuania , shows that 17 years of independence is not long enough to fully achieve real change .
However , we must deliver our overriding message , which is that Europe will not seek material benefits at the expense of human values .
( PL ) Madam President , Commissioner , the achievement of independence almost 20 years ago by the Central Asia countries discussed in Mr Özdemir 's report brought a complete culture change after years of enslavement .


Obviously , these countries used their newfound freedom in line with past practice and habits .
Change is hard to achieve in such a short time .
These nations endured through the centuries thanks to cultural difference based on long tradition .
That is something we should and must respect .
Change must come slowly , so as not to arouse hostility to our own culture and expectations .
Economic ties with the Russian Federation remained after independence , and are still strong .
Russian culture , its science and its economy had an enormous influence on what are now independent states .
Unless we build alternative ties with the European Union we are bound to fail , despite the expectations which these countries have of us .
We must start with the economy : let us replace Russian pipelines by ours , Russian technical plant by ours and the Russian language by English . That will bring about a systematic change in culture .
Madam President , this report expresses concern that the new Kyrgyz Constitution , voted on in a referendum in October 2007 without wide-ranging debate , could alter the balance of power .
The Kyrgyz Constitution was amended in a controversial referendum in 1996 , and in 2003 there was another referendum which approved further constitutional change .
The report goes on to deprecate , in the Central Asian republics , the ' anxiety to maintain internal control ' , which ' is a given in regimes which show little interest in seeking popular consent on which to base their rule ' .
Hang on a moment , who are we talking about here ?
Constitutional change that will ' alter the balance of power ' .
' Anxiety to maintain internal control ' , with ' little interest in seeking popular consent ' on which to base the rule of a political elite .
This sounds like an extract from a UK Independence Party report on the European Constitution - sorry , I mean the Lisbon Treaty .
I doubt that the five Central Asian republics are models of democracy and the rule of law , but at least when the politicians of Kyrgyzstan wanted to change the constitution , they had the decency to ask the people for their approval in a referendum .
That is something the European Union has had neither the decency nor the courage to do of the European people .
( LV ) Thank you , Madam President , Commissioner .
First of all I would like to thank the rapporteur , the shadow rapporteur and their assistants , since the report is very comprehensive and contains a great many references and documentary research , with a separate analysis for each country .
However , I would like to draw your attention to a few matters that in my view have not been tackled adequately .
Yes , I would also like to add that the Commissioner 's description of the specific activities to be carried out in those countries in the near future was very welcome .
It seems to me , however , that in the report and in the European Union 's strategy in general there are not enough strategic decisions or actions relating to these countries , whereas it appears to me that Russia , China , South Korea and India all influence those regions very significantly .
I would also like to draw your attention to something that I think my fellow Member Adam Bielan has already mentioned - on 10 October 2007 the leaders of several countries met in Vilnius to discuss energy supply pipelines from the Caspian Sea .
A week before that , Mr Putin , who is not at all a frequent visitor to other countries , went with Mr Nazarbayev to Turkmenistan and , offering a slightly higher price for gas , signed a political agreement to the effect that all existing gas from Turkmenistan and Kazakhstan would go via Russia 's pipelines .
Thus , in fact , we might say that he hurried ahead of the decision by our fellow Member .
Likewise , I think , a certain similarity can be seen to the events at Andijan , where afterwards , a few months later , the President of Uzbekistan was forced to demand the closure of the US base .
It seems to me that we also need to pay more attention to these aspects ...
I would simply like to draw attention to the fact that we need to analyse much more attentively and take account of these strategic aspects too . Thank you .

Madam President , I would like to begin by congratulating Mr Özdemir on his excellent report on the EU strategy for Central Asia .
Central Asia is part of the road which has connected the great Euro-Asiatic civilisations since antiquity .
In today 's global context , the ancient Silk Road can be taken as a symbol of the high political , cultural and trade potential of that region .
Central Asia is the region where the European Union , China , India and Iran meet .
There is no doubt that the countries of this region - Kazakhstan , the Kyrgyz Republic , Turkmenistan and Uzbekistan - will be one of the main areas of EU external activity in the coming years .
By the way , Central Asia is a region in which the EU and Turkey have a shared interest .
Turkey 's cultural , linguistic and strategic influence in the region is one of the arguments for Turkish membership of the EU .
Let me make two points .
Firstly , the EU should provide assistance in these countries in a perspective of human rights , democracy and education .
There is a need for EU support for the development of civil society , liberal democratic change and the rule of law in these countries .
Secondly , I would like to stress the importance of partnership in the field of energy policy .
Special attention should be given to projects connecting oil and gas fields and the distribution system in Central Asia to pipelines connecting with the European Union , including future projects such as Nabucco .
Further strengthening cooperation between Central Asia and the Black Sea region in the fields of energy and transportation is essential for the accomplishment of the EU 's goals .
( SV ) Madam President , Commissioner , the EU strategy for Central Asia is a big step forward .
Increasing our common visibility through a special representative and planning to set up delegations in the Kyrgyz Republic and Tajikistan will give us better opportunities to conduct an intensive dialogue with the individual countries and will change the way we can work in the region .
Central Asia will become more important , in particular , as has been mentioned , with regard to access to energy that is not controlled directly or indirectly by Russia .
The region is composed of new states that need support in developing and strengthening their democracy , support in combating crime and in stopping the passage of drugs to both Russia and the EU through certain countries in the region .
At the same time these countries are of course important partners in combating a global breeding ground for terrorism .
The EU has an opportunity to show its benefit in terms of foreign policy , by using all the tools of soft policy , both aid and trade .
In addition , the EU can help to build democratic institutions and a working state based on the rule of law which respects human rights and genuine freedom of speech and of the press .
The Central Asian countries have a strong interest in creating an opportunity to diversify their oil and gas exports .
We in the EU must put forward effective , properly financed alternatives to Russian and Chinese gas pipelines .
The EU must accept its responsibility for our common energy security .
Otherwise there is a risk that all our common efforts will founder .
More Russian-owned oil and gas pipelines from Central Asia is not the independence in the energy sector that we should aim for in the EU .
( PL ) Madam President , Kazakhstan is the Central Asian country I know best .
It is a large country stretching between China , Siberia and Europe .
Paradoxically , we count countries as Central Asian when part of their territory belongs geographically to Europe .
Kazakhstan , with a population of 16 million and over 100 ethnic groups and religions , is distant from us in its traditions and history , and yet the politics of this country and the aspirations of its people show a strong desire for rapprochement with Europe .
From the cultural point of view , moreover , Kazakhstan is more European than Asiatic .
It is grappling with problems , but it is a stable country engaged in democratic reforms , and stability in this region is very important for the security of the whole world .
We should support the process of stabilisation and rapprochement with Europe in Kazakhstan and the other countries of Central Asia .
We should support everything that serves to bring the Central Asian countries closer to Europe , especially as they can play an important role in ensuring Europe 's energy supply security .
( RO ) Ladies and gentlemen , as Rapporteur for the Black Sea cooperation , I would like to emphasize the major importance of the inter-regional cooperation between Central Asia and the Black Sea region .
I thank the Rapporteur for taking into consideration my suggestions on this theme and I hope that both the Commission and the Council will submit sustained efforts in order to put them into practice by implementing the new strategy for Central Asia .
The cooperation between the two regions and its consolidation represents an objective both for the European Union and for the countries of Central Asia and the Black Sea region .
This appears most explicitly in the field of energy and transport , since Central Asia represents an important source of energy resources for the European Union .
Consequently , I welcome the fact that the report is focused on two key ideas in this regard .
First of all , it is necessary to develop the transport routes and energy infrastructure connecting the sources from Central Asia to the Black Sea region and , finally , the European Union as an important element for ensuring energy security and diversity in the European Union .
Therefore , I insist on the crucial importance of the Nabucco project and I join the report in its call to pay increased attention to its successful development .
Secondly , a strong policy in the energy field also involves the creation of a transparent and competitive energy market .
It is important for the European Union to encourage actions in this direction , both by intensifying the dialogue with the countries of Central Asia and the Black Sea region , and by additional measures , such as stimulating the accession to the World Trade Organization .
Nevertheless , these objectives should integrate into a global strategy for Central Asia , focused on sustained stability and development .
For these reasons , besides the energy policy , it is very important to promote reform in all the five republics , while human rights and good governance , education and lifelong training should represent its essential elements .
( DE ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , first I want to congratulate Mr Özdemir on his very successful report .
The European Union joined the race for Central Asia with very hesitant steps and was late to take an interest in the region , following behind Russia , China and the USA .
Until now , Central Asia has not perceived the European Union as a global player .
An EU strategy for Central Asia is long overdue , especially as a means of reducing its energy dependence on Russia .
The German Presidency initiated it .
It is important that we now see a follow-up .
Sadly it keeps emerging that the EU still does not speak with one voice in its external energy policy .
We in Europe should focus above all on diversification , on representing our common interests and on solidarity in the event of crises .
Yet the bilateral energy agreements the EU Member States concludes with third countries keep putting in question the European Union 's ability to take a common stand .
But it is in the interest of the European Union and its citizens to pursue a common external energy policy .
We must not , however , regard energy supplies , which are extremely important to our citizens , as the only reason for EU relations with that region .
We are not trying to profit unilaterally from a strategy for Central Asia .
In that respect Europe must distinguish itself from other players in the region .
It is far more a question of helping the Central Asian republics to develop the rule of law and democratic forms of society , together with a sound economy .
If Europe does that , the citizens of the region should become far more aware of it .
Yet Europe must also move with the necessary caution , because advice from the West could all too easily be mistaken for patronisation or intervention .
The world is growing closer together outside the EU too and we should seek a constructive partnership with the Central Asian countries , a partnership that does not give the impression that Europeans are concerned only with what is useful to them , a partnership founded on mutual advantage .
( HU ) Madam President , Madam Commissioner , 150 years ago , a countryman of mine by the name of Ármin Vámbéry was the first European to bring news of the closed societies of Central Asia to the wider world , and information on the cultural , administrative and economic situation of this region prior to the Russian conquest .
Even at that time this region , like the Silk Road , had for centuries formed an overland umbilical cord linking Europe and Asia .
Following a long period of Russian and Soviet domination , the five countries of Central Asia can once again assume this role of umbilical cord linking Europe and Asia .
In many instances , it is unfortunately already doing so ; a large proportion of the illegal trade in people and drugs arrives in Europe via these countries , as does natural gas .
This is why Europe needed , and needs , a strategy to develop its relations with Central Asia .
Europe cannot , however , expect cooperation to be only about preventing the dangers emanating from there , or about gaining access to energy and raw materials , or about how Europe can teach this region about democracy and human rights .
We must develop genuine cooperation with this region , and this is why I support European Union efforts to promote WTO membership for the countries of Central Asia and their integration into world trade .
Europe must use all means at its disposal to foster the economic , social and political development and modernisation of this region .
This , however , can only be done on the basis of mutual trust .
This is why it is important to prioritise environmental protection as part of this cooperation .
Climate change , chronic problems relating to water use and rehabilitation of previously contaminated areas are all issues that warrant greater attention .
In parallel with this , Europe must rigorously eschew any project that pollutes the environment or damages the livelihoods of the people living there .
I have already drawn the Commission 's attention to the criticism by Kyrgyz and Uzbek non-governmental organisations concerning gold mining operations using cyanide technology that are partly financed by the EBRD .
Europe cannot on any account support the use of this sort of technology , either within Europe or outside of Europe .
Thank you very much .
( DE ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I too want to begin by thanking the rapporteur Mr Özdemir and all the shadow rapporteurs who worked on this report .
With this strategy for Central Asia and this first broad debate in the European Parliament , we are actively taking the appropriate steps to promote dialogue and to meet all the challenges that still await us and which the Commissioner addressed .
This strategy will involve small steps down a long road .
I am glad that we will have closer cooperation and that this will not be a one-way street but an exchange of views based on mutual trust .
Today 's debate shows us that we have to do a balancing act when we talk about Central Asia .
The various Central Asian republics present very different features .
We have very different requirements to make .
We want to import energy but on a secure basis , and we want to export democracy and human rights .
We want to combine the two , which is not easy .
Since 1999 I have been a member of the delegation for relations with the Central Asian countries ; I know those countries .
I have learned from the people there and I know they too have a face and that they do not want to lose it .
We must , therefore , proceed very carefully and sometimes pragmatically .
That brings me to Uzbekistan .
Uzbekistan is currently taking big steps that we should strongly welcome .
The death penalty was abolished on 1 January .
I thank the rapporteur for his oral amendment .
Moreover , the habeas corpus principle was introduced , i.e. the principle that the court ascertains whether detention is lawful .
In May this year we will be holding the second human rights dialogue with the Commission .
I am confident it will take place .
That is another good step that continues what we have begun .
May I say here that I will support the amendments tabled by the UEN Group because I agree with them , because I regard them as a step towards dialogue and because we must seek dialogue and partnership .
( PL ) Madam President , the European Union should engage more actively in events in Central Asia and in support for economic and social development in the region .
At present our influence is slight : it is mainly Moscow , Beijing and Washington that are doing business there .
To play a more active role , we must develop a vision for economic and political cooperation and join in projects , investments and programmes designed to meet the needs of Kazakhstan , the Kyrgyz Republic , Tajikistan , Turkmenistan and Uzbekistan .
At the same time we should encourage all these countries to engage in more active intra-regional cooperation .
We must bear in mind , however , that it will not be an easy task , because the region is an ethnic , linguistic , religious , political and social patchwork still under strong Russian influence .
The European Union 's priority should be to intensify cooperation in areas such as energy , trade , education , infrastructure , security and regional integration .
We should concentrate on supporting the process of democratisation , the development of education and the elimination of poverty . That will increase security and social and economic stability in this strategic region of the world and render our cooperation more effective .
( PL ) Madam President , my first point is this : all five Central Asian countries are members of the OCSE , which means they have undertaken , vis-à-vis the international community , obligations regarding respect for basic freedoms , democracy and human rights , although they differ in the degree to which they are meeting those obligations .
Secondly , against a background of regional shortcomings , Kazakhstan stands out favourably . In August 2007 it held parliamentary elections at which I acted as an observer .
Despite certain reservations , those elections were recognised by the international community as democratic .
Thirdly , if the European Union wishes to find other sources of crude oil and natural gas than Russia , it must seek strategic cooperation with the Central Asian countries , especially Kazakhstan .
And that means encouraging and supporting Kazakhstan 's European aspirations .
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , this was a very interesting debate .
I always regret that it is held late at night and maybe so few Members stay , but thank you for staying .
I think that many of you have mentioned what I personally also feel : there is a strategy that is absolutely necessary and this strategy aims to achieve stabilisation and security in this area .
Indeed , we , the European Union , are very much in favour of going forward .
I was Chairperson-in-Office of the OSCE in 2000 and I got to know these countries and , as others have said , they are very interesting countries .
They are all very different .
It is true that Kazakhstan is the star of these countries , but a lot still has to be done .
There is the issue of human rights that everybody has mentioned .
There is the issue of poverty eradication and , particularly , education , but also the questions in the general field of human rights and , of course , the big question of energy .
So I know how much we have to do and I am glad that finally the European Union has done much more than in the past , together , as I said , with the German Presidency .
I shall now say a few words on those different issues .
Poverty eradication is highly important and this is one of the major parts that we focus on in the country strategies .
The policy paper that we have produced for the EU strategy for Central Asia is more a political document on political priorities , but in the country strategies we mention all the requirements under the Development Cooperation Instrument , which is particularly focused on education , on health , on rural development , on social protection and , particularly , on vulnerable families and children in difficulty .
There is also , in terms of public health and communicable diseases , a major factor : the global fund on AIDS , malaria and tuberculosis , where , again , the Central Asian countries are eligible .
So this is one side , and we will certainly go on with that .
On the other hand , there is the question of energy - both the Nabucco pipeline and the Odessa-Brody-Gdańsk pipeline have been mentioned - and , in general , energy security .
I completely agree with you that we want a diversification of our energy policy , even if we have not yet completely reached where we want to go .
But the most important thing is that we have taken this clear decision .
On the Odessa-Brody-Gdańsk pipeline , I would like to say that the Commission is making every effort to diversify EU energy supplies and routes and , of course , Central Asia is absolutely crucial here .
The pipeline you mentioned is an important project in these efforts , and to feed this pipeline , we need to work first and foremost on the trans-Caspian pipeline , to get the Central Asian resources to the Black Sea .
Just a few days ago , we had the first ever regional conference of the Black Sea Synergy , which was a very first step in working on these issues in a regional dimension .
Apart from that , we also face the issue of energy security regarding the Nabucco pipeline .
It is still a priority for the Commission and we will go on supporting it .
It is not dead , as some of you might think .
So we have energy political priorities .
By the way , we are starting to have a sort of memorandum of understanding on energy with Turkmenistan too .
We already have one with Kazakhstan , and we will certainly try to go on building bridges between the different countries of the Caucasus and Central Asia .
Somebody asked me about Mongolia .
The five countries of the Central Asia region share the same recent past , following the break-up of the Soviet Union , and they are all , of course , very young nations .
This means that we face similar challenges regarding the political and economic transformation of these societies , but , as you know , Mongolian history is quite different , and that is why we did not include Mongolia in the strategy .
However , we do not preclude looking to the south of the Central Asian countries and we are looking towards the possibility of working further with Mongolia .
Today , it is a rather democratised country , where we see a lot of positive measures and positive steps .
Kazakhstan will indeed hold the chairmanship of the OSCE in 2010 .
I would like to tell you that I have always promoted that , always on condition that Kazakhstan continues to take a lot of important steps that are still necessary .
More has to be done on the freedom of the media , on electoral law and on the issue of registration of political parties , but it is indeed going in the right direction .
Finally , Kazakhstan is a member of the European Neighbourhood Policy .
Let us please keep the Central Asia strategy and the ENP somewhat separate , although elements of the Neighbourhood Policy can appear later on in a special agreement , particularly with Kazakhstan , because we know Kazakhstan can be the first country in the Central Asia region to start radiating a positive spirit .
I hope that the others will follow .
rapporteur . - ( DE ) Madam President , Commissioner , first I want to thank all the colleagues who took part in this debate and to give thanks also for the input of the committees asked for their opinion and , of course , for the Chair of the Delegation , Mrs Juknevičienė .
I am also grateful to those who tabled amendments .
Mrs Jeggle has already referred to the amendment on the abolition of the death penalty in Uzbekistan , which we very much welcome .
I find myself obliged to point out , however , that we note with concern that opposition politicians and journalists in countries that are neighbours of Uzbekistan are dying in mysterious circumstances .
That should also be addressed in this connection .
The crucial question is this : how can we transmit our values without denying our own interests in the matter ?
This is precisely where the European Union has an opportunity , because we simply have more to offer than dependence or even exploitation of these countries .
The simple and acute question is how we can combine long-term stability with democratic development .
In that area , there is still great potential for developing a genuine partnership between the Central Asian republics on the one hand and the European Union on the other .
We are looking at nothing less than a total package of economic and democratic development , together with cultural and scientific exchange , which , however , gives clear priority to protection of the environment and the development of civil society .
Let me briefly address one point I am sure is known to all of you : the environmental disaster on the Aral Sea , which has since become known beyond the region and is one of the greatest environmental disasters in the world .
The countries concerned will not be able to resolve this problem without our help .
Here too we must demonstrate our solidarity and do our part to help .
There is good news too , when we remember that we have an important partner in Turkey , which is a close neighbour and , as a country that wishes to join the European Union , can contribute its expertise to the joint development of a strategy .
The success of the European Union can also be measured by the extent to which it manages to develop a coherent strategy for Central Asia .
If it wants to be a global player , the European Union must also develop a strategy within which it formulates its common interests .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Wednesday , 20 February 2008 .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
in writing . - ( IT ) As part of the work of the Delegation for Relations with Central Asia , of which I am a member , I have had the opportunity to visit the countries of the area covered by the report .
I have thus been able to see the substantial progress that these countries have made in many fields , from the environmental to the social , especially as a result of a strong impetus from the EU .
That being said , it is to be hoped that the EU will continue the work it has undertaken in this part of the world , bearing in mind that these nations are key allies in the fight against international terrorism and drug trafficking , by continuing to step up its dialogue with these countries .
The Council and the Commission are also asked to step up efforts to provide citizens with greater protection in key fields of social life and therefore to strengthen the laws in force on women 's rights and to improve their application , to continue the strenuous fight against the exploitation of children , to implement major reforms of education and , in view of the substantial increase in infectious diseases in the area , a reform of the health service which is considered to be a key priority for these countries .
Agenda for next sitting : see Minutes
Closure of the sitting
( The sitting was closed at 11.55 p.m. )
Opening of the sitting
( The sitting was opened at 9.05 p.m. )
Composition of political groups : see Minutes
Treaty of Lisbon ( debate )
The next item is the report by Mr Corbett and Mr Méndez de Vigo , on behalf of the Committee on Constitutional Affairs , on the Treaty of Lisbon .
rapporteur . - Mr President , Mr Méndez de Vigo and I have the honour to present this report to Parliament on behalf of the Committee on Constitutional Affairs .
It is a report in which our committee has dwelt not so much on the history of how we got here , but on the simple comparison of whether this new Treaty improves the European Union compared to the current Treaties , whether the Treaties as amended by the Treaty of Lisbon make the European Union more effective , more democratic and better for its citizens .
That is what we have done , and our conclusion is clear .
Firstly , on democratic accountability : this Union will have a system whereby any legislation in the future will be subject to the prior scrutiny of national parliaments and then the double approval of the Council of Ministers , composed of ministers accountable to those very same national parliaments , and the European Parliament , directly elected by citizens to represent them at European level .
That is a level of scrutiny that exists in no other international structure .
You can look at the WTO , the World Bank , the IMF , NATO - nothing above the level of the nation state has that in-built degree of parliamentary scrutiny that we will have with this new Treaty .
The new Treaty also improves the powers of the European Parliament in other respects .
We will elect the President of the Commission and we will have full power over the whole of the European budget , together with the Council , no longer seeing agricultural expenditure ring-fenced from parliamentary scrutiny .
Parliament will have the right to block Commission implementing measures where we disagree with them .
Parliament will have the right to repeal the delegation of powers to the Commission if we feel that is necessary .
I see the Commissioner is already looking worried , but it is an important democratic safeguard .
Parliament will also have the right to make proposals for future revisions of the Treaty , and its right to ratify , to approve international agreements has been extended .
This Treaty , if nothing else , is a massive increase in democracy in the European Union .
Secondly , this Treaty improves the situation for citizens of the Union .
There is , of course , the Charter of Rights , which , throughout the Union , is a guarantee that Union institutions and Union law cannot violate basic standards of human rights - European institutions will have to respect them .
It provides greater clarity for citizens over the competences of the European Union .
It also provides adequate guarantees to allay the misplaced fears of some that we are developing some kind of centralised superstate in the European Union .
Finally , the Treaty will make the European Union more effective , more capable of delivering in those policy areas where we want to act together at European level .
The extension of qualified majority voting , the rationalisation of the size of the Commission , the merging together of the external representation posts into a single High Representative , the longer-term presidency of the European Council and other measures should make our machinery more capable of acting effectively and , therefore , our Union more capable of delivering in those policy areas where we want it to deliver .
So all these are dramatic improvements .
There are some , of course , who will bemoan the loss of the Constitution - a Constitution that was , after all , ratified by a large majority of the Member States .
Even in those countries that had referendums , in total 26.6 million people voted in favour of it and 23 million against .
Even in my country , it was approved at second reading in the House of Commons by a large majority of 215 .
So it was a popular Constitution in most respects , but the test is to win the grand slam of 27 ' yeses ' and zero ' nos ' .
That is the very high threshold that it faced .
It did not get through that .
That was why it was abandoned by the Member States and , instead , we have reverted to amending the Treaties that we had before .
However , the content of these amendments makes our Union more democratic , more effective and friendlier to citizens .
I commend it to the House .
( Applause )
rapporteur . - ( ES ) Mr President , I would also like to join you in congratulating Richard Corbett .
I think that this collaboration between Richard Corbett and a member of the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats shows what Europe ultimately is : that , even though we have different ideas and sensitivities , we are capable of doing things together ; we are capable of making progress to improve the life of Europeans .
I would therefore like to thank Richard Corbett for his collaboration and cooperation , which has always been loyal , and has always , I would like to stress , been aimed at doing things together , building , not at being negative or destroying .
Mr President , three years ago Richard Corbett and I presented the Constitutional Treaty to this House , and we are now European Parliament rapporteurs on the Lisbon Treaty .
It is clear , Mr President , that some of us were more ambitious than this Lisbon Treaty , and I think that this House was more ambitious .
It is also clear that this is a unique situation .
The ratification process had not proceeded , so a political solution had to be found , and the Lisbon Treaty is a political solution .
Once again , this is Europe : it is seeking agreements , seeking commitments in order to find a way out of crises and get out of sticky situations .
Mr Corbett has given a very good explanation , and I therefore echo his words concerning the advantages of the Lisbon Treaty over the Treaties currently in force .
I would like to add one thing that Richard Corbett did not say : the Lisbon Treaty is not the Constitutional Treaty .
We had to leave many of our ambitions by the wayside , which I regret , but I also think that the essential elements of the Constitutional Treaty are in the Lisbon Treaty .
Although it is not the same , we have managed to retain the essential elements .
What are the essential elements , then ?
What do we gauge as essential ?
The essential elements are those that will enable the European Union to be more democratic , those that will enable the European Union to be more efficient , those , in short , that will enable the European Union to provide added value for citizens .
Mr President , this is the only thing that should motivate the European Parliament .
We are the representatives of the European people and they should be the point of reference for our actions .
We are living in a very important time for Europe .
We saw this yesterday , with the situation in Kosovo .
Europe must provide an outlet for the expectations that the European people have placed on us .
Europe cannot adopt a head-in-the-sand policy .
Europe needs to have a voice in the world , it needs to have a presence , and it needs to resolve the problems that exist now , whether that means climate change , combating illegal immigration or combating nuclear proliferation .
We need to tackle these problems .
The Lisbon Treaty , and this is a key question , ladies and gentlemen , gives us the tools and power to do this ; obviously there will then have to be the political will to do this , but in this Treaty we have the tools to improve the current situation .
Allow me to say something about building , about doing things together .
As I said before , this is Europe .
Supporting the Lisbon Treaty means doing things together , following the same path .
It is true , as I said before , that we have abandoned some things .
Paul Valéry , who was a great poet , and therefore perhaps also a great European , said that a poem is never finished , only abandoned .
It is true that we have abandoned some things , but it is also true that , in the future , if we need to recover them , the European Parliament will be in the vanguard .
( Applause )
President-in-Office of the Council . - Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , thank you very much .
On behalf of the Presidency I would like to welcome this opportunity to debate the Treaty of Lisbon .
I would first like to thank the European Parliament for its work and , most of all , for the report prepared by Richard Corbett and Íñigo Méndez de Vigo .
I must say from the outset that I agree with the positive assessment of many elements of the new treaty .
The fact is that Europe has for some time been faced with internal and external challenges in the international community .
That is why we undoubtedly need reforms .
The desire to continue the process of improving the efficiency of the European Union and its democratic legitimacy led the leaders of the Member States to sign the treaty in Lisbon in December last year .
Much has been said about the many benefits the Lisbon Treaty will bring .
I will therefore mention just the main ones .
Firstly , it will ensure that all institutions that sustain or link the 27 Member States operate more successfully .
It will improve the efficiency and simplify decision-making processes .
It will increase democracy and the transparency of operations and - this is very important - make the operations of the European Union less remote from its citizens .
Our common aim is to enforce the Lisbon Treaty from 1 January 2009 .
To achieve this , our priority task is ratification of the Lisbon Treaty by all the Member States .
May I take this opportunity to congratulate those five Member States which have already done this .
The Presidency is aware that the ratification procedures fall within the exclusive and sovereign competence of the Member States .
Nevertheless I think that we may allow ourselves to express a wish that the procedures run their course unobstructed , smoothly and without complications .
We are convinced that the Lisbon Treaty is a good instrument and a fine document which will make it easier to confront the contemporary challenges facing the European Union .
Full enforcement and implementation of the Lisbon Treaty requires certain preparatory actions .
The Presidency is aware of all these problems and the related need for a unified framework within which to conduct these preparatory actions .
We have established more intensive cooperation with the next Presidency ( France ) and with other institutions .
The Presidency will ensure that this preparatory work is conducted under supervision at the highest political level , that is to say the European Council , which will follow progress closely .
I would like to stress that many aspects of the new treaty may be realised only if proposed by the European Commission or in close cooperation with the European Parliament .
The Presidency is aware of these aspects and in each case will conduct the preparations in a way that will involve all the parties concerned .
I would like to finish by stating that all those involved in the preparatory work have acted responsibly .
I hope that such conduct will continue because that is the best way of contributing to the success of the ratification procedures and the implementation of the Lisbon Treaty .
Vice-President of the Commission . - Mr President , first of all can I say welcome to this report and congratulate both rapporteurs for their work in bringing it to plenary .
The Commission , of course , fully shares the view that the Treaty of Lisbon is a very positive step for the future of the Union .
As we have already heard , it will bring us further down the road to a more effective , more democratic and more transparent Union .
In politics it is important to do the right things , because that is what gives us democratic legitimacy .
But it is equally important to do things right .
So what we are doing in choosing the political agenda of climate change and energy , roaming charges , toy and food safety , transport policy or agricultural policy or trade or what have you , is extremely important , and we are not going to put our feet up until the new Treaty is in force .
But , at the same time , we must also look at the other side of the coin , how we do things and how the Treaty will change the way we do things ; how we can become more effective in taking decisions and furthering the political agenda and the priorities of this European Union .
One of the core elements of this Treaty is how it strengthens Europe 's democratic legitimacy through changing the role of Parliament , more codecision , a greater say in budgetary matters and international agreements , and a direct link between the results of the European elections and the choice of the Commission President .
It will also provide channels for the greater involvement of national parliaments .
We already have , through these , very positive experience in engaging with national parliaments , in anchoring the policies of the European Union , as well as some elements of participatory democracy for the direct participation of citizens .
Your report , of course , also expresses some concerns on the abandoning of the constitutional approach and on the extension of opt-in arrangements for particular Member States .
We all know - and I have said this before - that this was the price we had to pay to reach a consensus agreement , and I guess we all realise that nothing is perfect - not even the new Reform Treaty is perfect .
It is a compromise , but it is something that we have been able to agree upon .
Ratification is now under way but , with five Member States having approved the Treaty and ten more having launched their procedures , there is clearly still a long way to go , and there is no inevitability about the process .
In the mean time , we need to prepare for what we hope will be the entry into force of the Treaty at the beginning of next year , and the Slovenian Presidency has presented a list of issues where action needs to be taken for its implementation .
Preliminary discussions have already taken place on a number of issues , and these will continue over the coming months .
Some of these issues are subject to Commission proposals , for example , the Citizens ' Initiative , which is an important provision to help connect the Union with citizens .
I am willing to do all I can to ensure that Europeans can use this new democratic tool as soon as possible after the Treaty enters into force .
It requires a Commission proposal to be ready in time , and at the same time it is important to consult fully before adopting a proposal .
We will of course keep you informed of further developments , and we look forward to working together on this issue .
Communication with citizens during the ratification process - whatever method for ratification is chosen - as outlined by the European Council in June , is also vital .
For this purpose , and as also recommended in your report , we are working closely with national authorities and the European Parliament offices .
Can I therefore thank you for calling , in your report , for sincere cooperation between EU institutions and national authorities in order to inform European citizens clearly and objectively about the content of the Treaty .
This is fully in line with our approach , and we are pleased to share with Parliament and its offices in the Member States our communication products and information materials on the Treaty - and we have good things to communicate : a Treaty that will give us the tools to move forward in developing the policies that the opinion polls tell us , every time , our citizens want : climate change and energy , migration issues , growth and jobs , the environment and , of course , the EU 's role on the global scene .
These are the things that will help us to do both the right things and do them right .
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Foreign Affairs . - Mr President , one of the strongest features of the Treaty will be that it marks the coming of age of the common foreign security and defence policy .
It proposes radical changes to the structure of the EU , notably by upgrading the High Representative as Vice-President of the Commission and a chair of the Council , with a tripartite service of diplomats beneath him .
It is crucial that these arrangements are firmly in place as soon as the Treaty comes into force : delay and quarrelling for the spoils of victory will confuse third countries and cause cynicism within European public opinion .
I strongly commend the opinion of the Committee on Foreign Affairs to Parliament .
Mr President , the new Treaty offers great opportunities for development cooperation .
This is chiefly because this new Treaty requires that the Commission 's action in the field of development cooperation complement the Member States ' own initiatives .
This opens up the opportunity for better coordination between the Commission and Member States at long last - which is essential , and which was also called for by the very critical OECD DAC Peer Review .
The focus is on poverty reduction , which is good .
A key sentence has been dropped from the Treaty of Nice : the sentence explicitly excluding the European Development Fund ( EDF ) from the scope of the Treaty - which means that the EDF can now be included in the EU budget .
This is highly necessary , as it gives the European Parliament full democratic control over the other half of the EU 's development activities too , at last - which is both necessary and good .
Without constant control by the European Parliament , however , poverty reduction will not be able to take centre stage in EU foreign policy , still less without the appointment of a separate European Commissioner for Development in future .
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on International Trade . - ( ES ) Mr President , first of all I would like to congratulate the co-rapporteurs on the magnificent work they have done and to thank them because , perhaps as an exception to what usually happens in this House , they have succeeded in including the principal suggestion made by the Committee on International Trade with regard to the drawing up of the Lisbon Treaty .
The Treaty maintains the essential elements of the European Constitution in this respect , and this is very important because , in addition to once again stating that common commercial policy is an exclusive competence of the EU and extending its scope , it also introduces the Community method for decision making under the policy , which means more democracy and more effectiveness , which , after all , is the main message that we need to convey to citizens through the Lisbon Treaty .
I was a member of the Convention .
I am proud that the Lisbon Treaty incorporates the essential elements of the Constitution that we drew up , which was endorsed by the majority of countries at the time , but as the co-rapporteur Mr Méndez de Vigo said , I would also like to say that this is not the end of the road , it is not the end of the story .
For this reason , the Committee on International Trade also points out some matters that were left out .
We therefore have the reality , which is good - this Treaty - and we have the horizon , which will be better in the future through what we achieve .
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Budgets . - ( EL ) Mr President , I have had the honour of being the rapporteur for the Committee on Budgets on the changes being brought about in the budget sector .
It is one of the least known subjects , but I believe it to be one of the most interesting and most typical in the context of what we are debating today , namely the general changes that the Lisbon Treaty is bringing about in our lives .
In the budget sector , Parliament assumes a role equal to that of the Council .
There is no longer a distinction between compulsory and non-compulsory expenditure .
From now on we decide on everything as a Parliament , particularly on agricultural policy , and this is extremely important .
Something else is afoot . An ongoing change is taking place in the distribution of roles between Parliament and the Council within the budgetary procedure .
This lies in the future ; we cannot be certain of the outcome .
I think that this applies to the Lisbon Treaty in general .
The Lisbon Treaty introduces a package of politically far-reaching changes that will serve as a foundation for our political agenda . I believe that this new political agenda is what the EU needs today .
Now , it is wrong to say that the Lisbon Treaty is the end of the road .
On the contrary , it is an important step allowing us to operate in a better and more successful framework with greater possibilities for Parliament . This is especially important , if we bear in mind the lessons learnt from the experience of the European Constitution .
The crucially important outcome of the tortuous road to Lisbon is that Europe did not close in on itself or become more defensive ; it became more social .
As a result , there are now more social clauses , and more rights .
An attempt is being made to open Europe up to the outside by means of this procedure . This , I think , is the most significant lesson ; it is why the Lisbon Treaty ought to be ratified .
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy . - ( SK ) The new European Treaty , although imperfect in some aspects , represents an important instrument for further and deeper integration of the Member States , as well as for more effective and flexible functioning of structures and institutions both between the individual Member States of the European Union and between the EU and the outside world .
At the same time the Treaty opens the door for further enlargement of the Union to include new Member States , so that many people 's dreams of a common European home can come true .
The Charter of Fundamental Rights , which has become a legal component of the Treaty , has of course its own great significance .
However , because it is not very explicit , it can give rise to some questions about natural human rights .
The Committee on Industry , Research and Energy is of the opinion that the new Treaty offers enough space for the realisation of common policies on the one hand , and on the other hand , within the principle of subsidiarity , ensures that the Member States have sufficient competence to push ahead with their own competition policies and strategies , for example in the area of industry .
The European Research Area will strengthen the scientific and technological platform .
This will result in an easier transfer of scientific knowledge and technology and in unlimited cooperation between scientists and researchers , regardless of borders .
As regards the space research programmes , we are pleased that the Treaty offers a platform for a European space policy and explicitly provides for appropriate cooperation with the European Space Agency .
An important success of the Treaty is the agreement on a common energy policy , with emphasis on improvement of the internal energy market , guaranteeing safe supplies , energy efficiency and savings , developing renewable sources and improving network interconnection .
The fact that the Treaty allows individual Member States to continue to make decisions about their own energy mix is also an advantage .
In addition , I am glad to be able to say that the Treaty includes the Euratom Protocol , which will retain its original legal effect : I am sure that this will create the conditions necessary for the logical and safe development of nuclear energy .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs expresses its support for the report by our fellow Members Mr Corbett and Mr Méndez de Vigo .

We welcome in particular the fact that the report highlights - this is obvious but it is good to mention it - that it is in the area of freedom , security and justice that the Treaty of Lisbon brings in the most changes , with , in particular , the pillars being discontinued and judicial cooperation in criminal matters and police cooperation being brought under the ' Community ' method .
However , although this is an important breakthrough , in our sector it is still accompanied by a reservation that is difficult to accept .
Our fellow Members ought to know that under the Treaty of Lisbon , all the measures that would have been adopted under the third pillar before the Treaty came into force will remain beyond the control of the Commission , and moreover , of the European Court of Justice for a period of five years in such sensitive areas as respect for fundamental rights and freedoms .
We find this restrictive provision difficult to swallow , Mr President , and today we confirm our determination to render it ineffective for all the acts to be adopted before the end of the current parliamentary term .
We hope that interinstitutional negotiations between the European Parliament , the Commission and the Council can begin as soon as possible to reach agreement on how to overcome this difficulty .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( FR ) Mr President , President-in-Office of the Council , Vice-President of the Commission , ladies and gentlemen , like everyone else , I would first like to offer our thanks and congratulations to our fellow members Íñigo Méndez de Vigo and Richard Corbett for the report on the Treaty of Lisbon and particularly for the excellent work they have done .
As a friend , however , I can also tell them that that is what they are paid for .
Our debate comes at a time when five Member States have already ratified this Treaty and Poland has announced that it is preparing to start its ratification process .
On behalf of the members of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats , and within the PPE-DE Group , I would like to reiterate how important this Treaty is for the revival of the European dynamic .
After two years of deadlock and institutional misgivings , the European Union has given itself the tools it needs to function effectively .
PPE-DE members believe this Treaty makes the EU more democratic , more visible and therefore more influential within its own borders and in the world .
The Treaty of Lisbon signals the return to politics in Europe .
The increased democracy , clarity and visibility , and the strengthening of the European Union 's effectiveness have been highlighted by our rapporteurs as the major advances of the Treaty of Lisbon .
Democracy is strengthened by extending the powers of the European Parliament , the only institution elected by direct universal suffrage .
Codecision becomes the rule .
The President of the Commission will be elected by the European Parliament .
The role of the national parliaments will be enhanced on matters of subsidiarity .
This is something our group is very keen on .
Europe will no longer be absent from national debates .
They will not have an excuse to criticise us any more .
Citizens will now have the right of initiative .
By collecting a million signatures from the citizens of the 27 Member States , they will be able to issue a direct invitation to the Commission to present a new proposal .
In addition , the rights of citizens will be protected by the Charter of Fundamental Rights , the binding legal force of which is enshrined in the Treaty .
We are very proud of this advance .
With the opening to the public of legislative debates in the Council , Europe will be more transparent , and with clarification of the European Union 's competences , its functioning will become more comprehensible .
The expansion of qualified majority voting in the Council will reduce the risk of institutional deadlock and make it possible to implement necessary common policies .
Furthermore , Europe will affirm its role as a political actor on the international stage .
Where it is competent , the EU will make its voice heard and make the decisions required for energy policy , foreign policy , judicial and police cooperation and environmental policy .
Regarding energy , the Treaty introduces a legal basis for a European policy on energy supply and renewable energies .
In foreign policy , the EU will finally be represented by a High Representative of the Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy .
In the face of a changing world , with many challenges of all kinds , the European Union must have the means to affirm its position as a key player to its partners throughout the world .
I already noticed , a little while ago in the Middle East , that more was being asked of Europe , not just that Europe should pay but that it should bring its full political weight to bear , and this will also be the case in Kosovo and the Balkans .
In the field of police and judicial cooperation , it is essential that the EU takes robust , coordinated measures to fight the globalisation of crime and terrorist threats .
The Treaty of Lisbon gives the EU the means to undertake far-reaching reforms to achieve this .
Through being more intelligible and more united , the European Union will be able to assert itself as the world leader in the fight against global warming .
It will also send clear messages to the emerging countries encouraging them to adopt a genuine sustainable development strategy .
The members of the PPE-DE truly believe that these areas should be the subject of European policies .
Of course , many of us - as the rapporteurs point out - deplore the fact that the constitutional approach has had to abandon any mention of the symbols of Europe .
The big challenge now is the ratification of the Treaty .
On behalf of PPE-DE members , I call upon the Member States to follow the lead of Hungary , Slovenia , Romania , Malta and France , and to ratify the Treaty of Lisbon promptly , so it can enter into force by 2009 .
Thank you for your attention , and I hope that today , the chairman of the Socialist Group , Martin Schulz , will follow my example .
( Applause )
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , in giving my remarks I can certainly save myself the effort of having to go into the details of the Corbett-Méndez de Vigo report once again .
The rapporteurs and co-rapporteurs of the attendant committees have themselves done so well enough .
Therefore , in the middle of my remarks , I can take the liberty of asking a rather more basic question , a question associated with the fact that on a day like today , when the European Parliament is delivering its opinion on a fundamental achievement in the history of European unity , we might pause for a moment and allow ourselves to ask : why are we doing this ?
What is the actual aim of this practice ?
Why do we need this Treaty ?
In the history of the people of this continent , 100 years is a short time .
However , when you look back 100 years to 1908 , a Sultan governed Turkey .
Russia was ruled by the Tsars .
This city here was part of the German Reich ruled by Wilhelm II .
France had a vast colonial empire and Great Britain its own Empire .
Fifty years ago , Adolf Hitler 's takeover - which took place 75 years ago - was already 25 years in the past .
In the meantime Joseph Stalin had been committing his atrocious crimes , Auschwitz had happened and 50 years ago the Soviet Union , led by Nikita Khrushchev and the United States , governed by Eisenhower , sealed the post-war order of Yalta .
Twenty-five years ago the power of the Soviet Union was exhausted and the world instead set off on the wrong track - as far as the economy was concerned - of ' Reaganomics ' .
Today we cannot even imagine what will be happening in 25 years ' time .
One thing is certain : the only chance that the states that ruled half the world 100 years ago - France and Great Britain - still have of being able to secure their influence in the world today and of perhaps still being able to play a part in 25 , 50 and 100 years ' time , is not that we put up attractive flags , but that we ask the question : how do I guarantee , in a smaller world with limited influence - because there are far more players , such as China , India and the Latin American continent , for instance - how do I guarantee as a responsible politician in this global village that my people , my country , are able to play their part in global democracy , welfare and social stability ?
We can no longer go it alone .
We can only do it together - the Europeans , at any rate .
Perhaps the United States can survive on its own in this global-style competition .
Perhaps China , too , and perhaps India - although China and India are already concluding cooperation agreements of a technological nature with each other .
When we talk about this Treaty , I would very much like to talk again about why we never actually discuss the fact that the Industry and Development Ministers of China and India have been meeting over the past year to conclude a cooperation agreement .
Here are two countries , which make up a third of the world 's population , concluding a cooperation agreement !
And we Europeans , what are we doing ?
We are staying on the right track , albeit not consistently enough and not completely , but we are staying on the right track , the track described by the saying : unity is strength !
Anyone who goes it alone will lose out in the long run .
Anyone who sails in an escorted convoy , anyone who brings a ship safely in , not behind a flagship , but in a line of ships on an equal footing , will win - whether we are a large state or a small one , we are all on an equal footing in this Union .
However , we join forces in a framework that enables us to cooperate economically , socially and democratically as equals with other regions of this world , to safeguard human rights and peace in the world .
That is the purpose of this Treaty !
Therefore , we social democrats , we socialists in this House , want to endorse this Treaty and the opinion of our rapporteurs on this Treaty out of a deep conviction because we believe that this is the right path .
To those who preached 100 years ago that the world was to recover in the German manner or that the Pax Britannica was to dominate the world , or that in the Communauté Française French superiority was to reign , or that the Caesaropapism prevailing in Moscow at the time meant that we were to worship one person as Emperor and God ; to those who told the world that the flag behind which we would have to assemble was the most important thing , and not the spirit of the peace we consider most important ; to those who maintained that nationalism and national primacy would lead to the objective , to those we can only say that the 100 years of history behind us proves the opposite .
François Mitterrand was right when he said in this House that nationalism ultimately always meant one thing : war .
In European history , evidence has been offered to suggest that ultra-nationalism always means war .
We would counter this with : nationalism is never the solution of the future !
Solidarity among the nations : that is the solution of the future , that is the purpose of the Treaty .
( Applause )
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Mr President , the world awaits a European Union with a stronger capacity to act across the world stage .
Inside the Union there are plenty of people who wish to see an end to the seemingly interminable quarrels about our system of government .
Although I have enjoyed myself in the IGC and previously in the Convention , I think I can speak for us all in saying that we share the opinion that we should settle some of these quarrelsome problems for a substantial time .
Certainly , I look forward to a time when we can focus on improving the quality of policy which flows out of Brussels and Strasbourg .
That time will come when the Treaty of Lisbon is brought into force , because it successfully connects policy change with desirable and necessary reforms to powers , to instruments and to procedures .
There are some - certainly in this Chamber - who would prefer to reject the Treaty and turn the clock back to Nice , and perhaps even further to 19th-century thinking .
These people include , unfortunately , the British Conservative Party , which fails to proffer a shared European solution to the common problems that we all face as Europeans .
I know that the United Kingdom is a strangely insular place , and it is true that even its Government is too frightened to face up to nationalists and xenophobes and has insisted on asserting self-defeating opt-outs from key areas of European unity , sometimes pushing Britain to the margins .
Liberal Democrats regret that , and look forward to the time when the UK will find a more comfortable place within the stronger and more united democratic and efficient Union promised by this great Treaty .
( Applause )
on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( GA ) Mr President , the leaders of the European Union signed the Reform Treaty on the European Union last December .
This Treaty will ensure that the European Union will operate more effectively in the years to come .
A more effective Union means a stronger economy for Europe and for Ireland .
Any body which as been around for fifty years makes changes in order to address new challenges .
The Irish people have very good reasons for voting in favour of this Treaty .
The economic and financial benefits coming from involvement within the European Union are self-evident to anybody in any Member State .
Indeed , the single market is one of the most important developments that we have seen over the last 30 years of development within the European Union .
And , obviously , any organisation that started off with six Member States does require rule changes as it advances and as it grows .
That is why I believe the Irish people , in the upcoming referendum on this Treaty , will vote in favour .
They will vote in favour because they have seen huge foreign direct investment into Ireland .
They have seen huge development with regard to infrastructure and social development on the island of Ireland .
They have seen tremendous work being created on peace on the island of Ireland , bringing together formerly divided communities .
And those that would point the finger and say ' Europe is wrong ' or ' Europe is bad ' , and ' look at the kind of things it is going to do ' , totally ignore the evidence on the ground : social development , economic development , cultural development .
In fact many people , when they speak about Europe acting on the world stage , forget that , in 2006 alone , the European Union of 27 Member States contributed EUR 46 billion towards the developing world : the largest donor of developing aid in the whole world .
That is why I am confident that the Irish people , when this is explained to them properly in the coming months , will guarantee that we will ratify this Treaty .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , it has taken eight years , two Conventions , three intergovernmental conferences and two draft treaties to achieve the result that we are evaluating today .
Allow me at this point , and after this lengthy period , to offer my personal thanks for the opportunity to represent this House in both conventions and to be present both for the EU Charter of Fundamental Rights and the Constitution , together with Andrew Duff , as EP rapporteur .
It was for me the greatest honour of my political life . Thank you very much .
The contents and achievements of this Treaty can be seen in detail , and few they are not !
The foundation is being laid for the first supranational treaty in history .
The most up-to-date and most comprehensive code of fundamental rights is becoming European law .
The anchoring of social objectives and rights is pointing the way to the next task : the creation and construction of a European social union .
With its own legal personality , the Union is changing from a forum of loosely cooperating states to a historic , independent player .
If we want to succeed in reviving this treaty , political unity will need to cease being a project of elites and state chancelleries and become a res publica .
Today , however , I am not quite sure whether we are aware that we are making this assessment in very difficult and special circumstances in European history .
In the latest edition of Der Spiegel , I have read the statements by Henry Kissinger , the former US Secretary of State , which concluded : ' Europeans do not want to understand ' .
Even though I well understand Mr Schulz 's initial instinctive head-shaking , I would like in this case to quote a voice from outside on this .
Henry Kissinger describes the disappearance of the nation-state in Europe as the foremost challenge of our time .
He writes : ' The problem now is : nation-states have not just given up part of their sovereignty to the European Union but also part of their vision for their own future .
Their future is now tied to the European Union , and the EU has not yet achieved a vision and loyalty comparable to the nation-state .
There is , therefore , a vacuum between Europe 's past and Europe 's future . '
This is the best description we have of this Treaty at the moment .
It shines a penetrating light on what governments have been doing with the draft Constitution , because these marginal notes and the changes we ourselves have constantly been making to the packaging in order to safeguard the achievements , and then trying to endorse while holding our noses , signify a loss of European spirit and power , creating identity , producing loyalty and winning over citizens .
The power to establish new beginnings , create new orders , provide new solutions , again and again , making a new start every day : that is Europe .
This power was very much weakened because of the - I will be quite frank here - reactionary attitude of national governments and state chancelleries empowered by the language of the European Constitution and the reforms associated with it .
Nor should this awareness desert us in view of the genuine achievements of this Treaty .
Having not succeeded in making the citizens sovereigns of the European Union , it is this Parliament 's first task in future to comply with the spirit of this Constitution , to turn the Union into a union of citizens , rather than states , and to find the strength to make a res publica out of European integration and demonstrate Europe 's strength by creating new identities together with the citizens .
( Applause )
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - Mr President , the Lisbon Treaty will be subjected to the democratic scrutiny of the people in Ireland alone .
There is clearly a fear of referendums in other states , and I find myself asking why .
Why so , when we talk so much about democracy ?
Who here fears the voice of the people ?
In this Chamber , we speak the language of peace , and yet Lisbon commits us to further increases in Union military spending and to continuing support for the armaments industry in Europe .
Why do we insist on emulating the United States ?
Do we really believe that creating its European equivalent will promote a peaceful world ?
I do not .
We continue with the myth that the EU values public services and workers ' rights , when all the evidence on the ground contradicts this .
Ask the people of Vaxholm or the workers of Irish Ferries about the EU 's commitment to the vindication of workers ' rights .
Why is it that we congratulate ourselves on being substantial donors of aid to developing countries and , at the same time , we devise partnership agreements that force poor countries to lay bare their markets to European economic ambition ?
How can any of us here today who believe in democracy , peace or public services support the Lisbon Treaty ?
This Treaty is not about reform or efficiency ; it is a carte blanche for further erosion of democracy , and its self-amending clauses alone are evidence of this .
It is a charter for further privatisation .
It offers no advance on the environment , nothing new on the protection of workers ' rights and it gives powerful EU institutions a free hand to further militarise our Union .
Would the people of Europe support such a Treaty ?
I believe they would not , and perhaps that is why they are not being asked .
As an Irishwoman , as a proud European , I want my country to have the freedom to take decisions in the best interests of our people .
I want all Member States , large and small , to enjoy that right equally .
Collectively and democratically , we can bring about positive change , delivering for our people and delivering for the global village .
We need to reform the European Union to enable us to achieve these things , to create the Europe that our people want and deserve .
The Lisbon Treaty is a bad deal for Ireland , it is a bad deal for Europe and it is a bad deal for the wider world .
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - Mr President , what the European Parliament is engaged in here today , with this debate and subsequent vote , is nothing less than a massive exercise in deceit .
A pack of lies is being told because you do not want the peoples of Europe to have the referendums that you promised them .
This represents an imposition of the will of the political class upon the citizens .
We all know the truth , which is that the Lisbon Treaty is the same as the EU Constitution - with exactly the same number of new competences and exactly the same number of surrenders of veto .
It is virtually identical in every regard and it is a constitutional treaty , because it gives the European Union full legal personality , and , worse still , gives it the ability to amend itself in the future without having to refer to any more intergovernmental conferences .
It gives the EU the ability to legislate over literally every single aspect of our lives .
I am told , though , that I should not worry , because the flag and the anthem have been dropped .
Well , pull the other one !
There is a great big flag in front of us here .
It is nonsense .
It is all part of the lie .
The truth is that you are too chicken to have a referendum .
You do not want to hear the voice of the people , and now you are resorting to totalitarian means to get this Treaty through .
We heard Mr Cohn-Bendit say that those who oppose this Treaty are mentally ill .
We heard Mr Schulz say that those of us who objected to the sheer dishonesty of this project were behaving like Nazis back in the 1930s .
Well , I think the ordinary decent citizens of Europe will work out for themselves who the extremists are .
I must say that I wish the people of Ireland , and those who believe in democracy , every success in a couple of months ' time .
I hope they send out a large resounding ' no ' , and I hope the voice of the peoples of Europe will be heard , and not just your voice , the voice of the political class .
You may be complacent today , but you are increasingly being held in contempt .
Mr President , I reject this report and I reject the Treaty that it supports .
Before the French and Dutch referendums , we heard much empty talk in this House about the will of the people .
Why ?
Because , in their arrogance , the EU political elite believed that the people would be conned by their propaganda about the Constitution .
Suddenly , when the people caught on , they ran with their tail between their legs and have been running ever since , petrified that the voters would reject them again .
That is why the key focus of the last three years has been on hatching an intergovernmental conspiracy to foist this Constitution on the peoples of Europe without daring to ask them their opinion .
Such arrogance , such tyranny : fitting , of course , because this Constitution is all about transferring more and more national powers to Brussels despots - those who are , indeed , too chicken for a referendum .
( HU ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , may I first of all point out that it is unacceptable for anyone in this House to proclaim himself or herself to be the sole spokesperson of the people and to speak of everybody else as representing only the opinion of the political elite .
This is an unacceptable attitude .
There are many of us in this Chamber , and there are many citizens in Europe represented by us , who think that a stronger Europe is needed .
In recent times the new Member States have also realised that the problem with Europe is not that it limits our sovereignty or takes away our opportunities , but that it is not sufficiently capable of joint action .
This new treaty , the Lisbon Treaty , will provide the means to do just that .
Of course there are also many of us who are not wholly satisfied with what the Lisbon Treaty entails .
At the same time , we have to say that the time is ripe - after the Lisbon Treaty has been ratified - for an era in which we can put the new Europe , this new structure that the Lisbon Treaty creates , into action .
In other words , we need a stronger Europe and a calm period of consolidation in the years ahead .
I am particularly pleased that the document also expressly prohibits discrimination against individuals belonging to minorities .
In the European Union we talk a great deal about values and about diversity , but European protection of minorities has been on a shaky footing up to now .
This opportunity , and the passage that refers to it , opens up new ways for Europe to translate the rhetoric usually associated with these issues into reality .
After all , we cannot talk of values and common principles if we leave the building blocks of Europe , the minorities and individual ethnic communities , out of the process .
I welcome the treaty and congratulate the rapporteurs .
( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , a great deal has already been said about what people in Europe want .
I can go along with the previous speaker in asking : you want a stronger European Union .
Why ?
Some see globalisation as a great opportunity and want Europe to use this opportunity too .
Many - probably more - people see globalisation as a danger .
They are afraid of it and want Europe to help them overcome its disadvantages .
The question here , of course , is : what is the Reform Treaty - this Treaty on which both rapporteurs have drawn up a very good report - giving back ?
The answer is clear : the Reform Treaty strengthens the European Union without doing away with democracy .
On the contrary : there is an excess of democracy for the European Parliament , for the national parliaments , and yet a capacity for action by the European Union , which this Treaty creates .
This is what is crucial .
I am therefore of the opinion that many of the citizens ' interests are well represented .
What should we do , therefore , with this common capacity to act , which also finds expression specifically through a High Representative , who can do more as Vice-President of the Commission for a common foreign and security policy ?
Together , for example , with the energy issues and with the additional energy competence that the Reform Treaty gives the European Union , we could in the end be pursuing a legally competent foreign energy policy bringing us into a better starting position with regard to Russia and other major energy powers .
Together with the foreign trade competence we can also better represent the interests of our employees and our economy in international trade relations .
Together with our environmental competence we can also ensure that our emissions trading and the other environmental targets we want to reach do not mean that our economy and our employees will be damaged , but that the environment is better understood across the globe .
It is the Reform Treaty 's great merit - I , too , therefore clearly support the work of the rapporteurs - to ensure that the European Union becomes more capable of action and more democratic at the same time .
( PL ) Mr President , the adoption of the Lisbon Treaty by the countries of the European Union will be a major event in the history of Europe and in the history of the European Union .
The report presented to us today has given Parliament the potential to state clearly how important it is to adopt the Lisbon Treaty .
My hope is that it will be ratified as it was signed .
I am pleased that my country , Poland , is announcing the rapid ratification of the Lisbon Treaty .
I would also like to think that there is internal unity between the Treaty that has been ratified and the Charter of Fundamental Rights .
The Charter of Fundamental Rights defines a world of values , the ideological foundation stone of the European Union .
It would therefore be an incomprehensible act - I would go so far as to say an act of political schizophrenia - to divide these two acts .
These two acts are strongly mutually linked .
I am convinced that the Lisbon Treaty provides the potential for our Union to become more united as a team .
It establishes the mechanisms .
It is not the case that this Treaty sets up a rigid and unambiguously defined legal framework .
It sets up mechanisms through which the European Union will now be able to entrench its integration .
This Treaty creates a future in which the European Union has a political dimension .
It creates a future in which the European Union is capable of forging policies of solidarity .
It creates a situation in which many of the European Union 's institutions can work together , and perhaps most importantly of all , it creates a place for the citizen with his everyday concerns , his desire to take part in the European process .
I think that through this Treaty a European spirit is being forged , which will in fact enable this Treaty too to be interpreted .
The ambiguities of the Treaty create a sphere especially for Parliament , but also for all institutions , to come up with the facts of what it is that we want to build , because the role the President of the European Union will play , or the President of Parliament , the Minister of Foreign Affairs , the High Representative - all depends on people , and on cooperation .
I will venture to say , Mr President , that I hope that in future all these four major responsibilities within the European Union will originate from election .
I think that even now the Lisbon Treaty would enable the roles of the President of the Commission and the President of the Union to be combined .
This move would strengthen the European Union .
( PL ) Mr President , the process of European integration is not something bad in itself ; quite the contrary , in fact .
If it were to be conducted honestly , on principles of solidarity and a genuine expansion of democracy , it could be accepted universally .
Meanwhile , the spirit that is emanating from this building and from the European Union today is one of universal hypocrisy .
There can be no doubt that setting up this quasi-European state , on the principles laid down in the Treaty , will significantly restrict genuine democracy , which will effectively become a democracy in name only .
In Parliament itself , there is a restriction on democracy of expression and manifestation of political will by MEPs .
European institutions and the European bureaucracy are taking on key powers , and the largest state is not in a position to de-legalise a clearly fascist party that is calling for a change in European borders .
You are speaking today about a common energy policy .
Why is there not universal outrage in this House at the pipeline that Germany and Russia are to run through the Baltic Sea , going over the heads of Poland , Lithuania and Estonia , in order to give Russia the opportunity to cut off energy supplies to these countries ?
That is why we have no faith in your good intentions .
This faith is the foundation of the future , because building can only be based on truth .
Mr President , I fully accept that it is necessary , in a European Union of 27 Member States , to update the working rules and arrangements which operated in a Union of 15 and less .
I also accept that much of the content of the Lisbon Treaty , such as the increase in powers of this Parliament and the opening-up of Council decision-making , is positive and sensible .
However , looking at the detail from my viewpoint as a representative of Scotland , I have serious concerns about some of the imperfections , as Commissioner Wallström acknowledged .
Firstly , much is made of the new right of national parliaments to intervene , but this of course does not apply to the devolved , national Parliament of Scotland or indeed to other stateless nations .
Secondly , the treaty process failed to address the issue of a single seat for the European Parliament , leaving us with the indefensible situation of trekking between Brussels and Strasbourg .
Thirdly , I cannot support the inclusion of the common fisheries policy ( CFP ) as one of only four exclusive competences of the Union listed in the Treaty .
This , I fear , could seriously impede progress towards radical reform and change in fisheries management , by preserving the over-centralised failure which the CFP has become .
This is particularly incongruous at a time when the Council , last December , took a tentative step towards decentralisation , when it recognised the voluntary measures being implemented by Scotland and gave it an element of local control this year .
My party favoured a referendum on the Constitution .
This Treaty may be different in legal status , but in substance it is the same .
Therefore , the SNP is simply being consistent by supporting a referendum on this Treaty .
We are not afraid of a public debate on Europe .
On the contrary , forging a new relationship between Scotland and the EU is central to our vision .
I want to see Scotland joining the family of European nations and playing a constructive part in decision-making as a Member State , not as an observer from the sidelines .
( DE ) Mr President , I am pro Europe , and therefore , as a Member of the left , I support the Treaty of Lisbon .
I do not agree , however , with the increased emphasis on military aspects .
Today I would like to remind Parliament that the deepening of European integration achieved with the Treaty was hotly debated with the ' eurosceptic ' and particularly the nationalistic positions .
That which has been achieved must now be defended , and I hope that the comprehensive reform of the European Union can now enter into force .
The Treaty of Lisbon retains many improvements from the former constitution .
In particular , it directs the European Union to become essentially more democratic and closer to its citizens .
The Union can also become more socially oriented .
In my opinion , the neoliberal cement of the Maastricht Treaty has finally been broken up with the embedding of Treaty conditions such as the goal of full employment , with the basic principle of a sustainable social market economy , with the horizontal social clause , according to which all legal acts will , in future , have to be checked to ensure that social objectives are taken into account , and with the new Protocol on services of general interest .
The Treaty of Lisbon offers the opportunity to extend the Economic and Monetary Union by adding a social union .
That is why the neoliberal Zeitgeist in Europe must be driven further back .
Its protagonists must not succeed in turning the EU into a free trade zone without social accountability .
The rush to reduce taxes and wage dumping , with its dire social consequences , must be brought to an end and a minimum wage must be introduced in all Member States .
Mr President , I am still offering a bottle of very good wine to any person who can give me just one example of a law which can be adopted with the Constitution and not with the Lisbon Treaty .
In my view , the legal obligations are identical .
The difference is in presentation only .
Sarkozy 's mini-treaty will now be around 3 000 pages instead of the 560 pages in the rejected Constitution .
The majority has the right to endorse the Treaty , but you have no right to refuse normal parliamentary scrutiny of this Lisbon Treaty .
I have asked more than 700 serious questions on the interpretation of the different articles .
You do not know the answers .
You cannot explain why the Danish translation has forgotten the new ' additional citizenship ' or the abolition of the right of national governments to propose their own Commissioners .
Most of you have not read , and cannot read , the Treaty , because you have still not received the full content of the deliberations of the Intergovernmental Conference in a consolidated version .
You approve secrecy instead of transparency .
You approve a reduction in parliamentary democracy instead of insisting on this Parliament 's right to represent our voters , scrutinise on behalf of our voters and question the executive on behalf of the half a million citizens we represent .
( DE ) Mr President , again and again we are told that this Treaty of Lisbon will make Europe functional .
We are told that this Treaty will operate vigorously .
As someone who is very critical of this Treaty , I can only hope , for the sake of our children and our children 's ' children , that this is true , as if it is not the case , if this Treaty takes us down a blind alley , then God help us .
One thing is certain , and that is that this Treaty , which the EU establishment is now pushing through at any price , is ill-fated for the simple reason that it despises everything that it is possible to despise about democratic politics .
The national parliaments will , of course , be marginalised .
The plebiscites in France and the Netherlands were , of course , quietly turned on their heads again , as it were .
Most likely , if Ireland votes against this Treaty , ways and means will also be found to discount that vote .
I am against this Treaty , because I am pro Europe !

Mr President , this report , in endorsing the Lisbon Treaty , clearly states that this is a substantial improvement on the existing Treaties , argues that it is desirable that the Treaty of Lisbon be ratified by all Member States by the end of the current year , and claims that it will provide a stable framework , allowing further development of the Union in future .
I have to say that , as a British Conservative , I sadly cannot agree with all that , but I do so in a friendly way and not from an extreme or nihilist stance , as others seem to argue from .
From the start , I have made it clear that this Treaty or Constitution is not the best way forward for Europe at this time .
Conservatives support a Europe of independent states working closely together to meet the challenges of globalisation , global poverty and global warming , as has already been stated by others .
These are the priorities , and it must be done in a cooperative fashion .
Indeed my colleague , the UK Shadow Foreign Secretary , William Hague , said in a debate in London : ' Conservatives are the strongest advocates of a European Union where nations work together in a way that strengthens our economies , empowers our consumers and turns our common values into effective action on the great issues facing our world today . '
I do not believe that what we have before us will help us particularly in that great challenge .
Our eloquent rapporteurs who quote Shakespeare in their advocacy of haste , should , I think , also note King John , Act V , Scene II , where a supplicant said , ' According to the fair play of the world , let me have audience ' .
Well , perhaps , in the UK , the Prime Minister should note that , and he should then allow his citizens to have their say on this undoubtedly vital matter .
( HU ) Thank you , Mr President .
The report by Richard Corbett and Íñigo Méndez de Vigo is an excellent analysis and in the long term it will become a source document .
It deserves recognition and gratitude .
Hungary was the first country to ratify the Reform Treaty .
It is significant that in the exceptionally fragmented and often contradictory Hungarian political arena a sweeping majority voted in favour of ratification .
There was unanimity on the need for the Reform Treaty in the interests of ending the hiatus that had developed between old and new Member States following accession ; there was also unanimity on the need to strengthen unity within the European Union and to enhance the effectiveness of its institutions and its actions .
For us , however , Lisbon is not merely a treaty that provides an answer to the questions raised by enlargement .
For us , the provisions that reinforce democracy within this complicated network of interests are particularly important , such as those that extend Parliament 's legislative powers and powers of scrutiny , or the changes to Council decision-making procedures .
We are convinced that the smaller , less experienced , poorer and historically disadvantaged countries will benefit from this .
With a simpler decision-making structure we can expect interests to be clearly revealed , and political bargaining processes to be rendered more transparent .
Our future lies in cooperation , and the results and benefits of this must be felt by the citizens of Europe too .
They must also be felt by those who , for whatever reason , have found themselves reduced to a minority , those whom history and wars have made a minority .
Lisbon provides them with a new opportunity and an instrument to combat the menace of nationalism .
The Lisbon Treaty forms a symbolic arch with the Lisbon Strategy since the Charter of Fundamental Rights includes social rights among the fundamental human rights .
We are certain that this will also bring the citizens of the European Union closer together . Thank you , Mr President .
( FI ) Mr President , it is important to have increasing levels of cooperation at European level .
Hopefully , we will have new treaties , so that the debate can move on to core issues .
I want to mention three things .
Firstly , the legislative power of the European Parliament will increase dramatically if the new treaty enters into force .
There will be 40 new fields of policy activity .
This means that the workload of the Members of our Parliament will grow considerably .
It will mean that Parliament 's work will have to be reorganised so that we can operate effectively , democratically and openly .
In future Parliament will no longer be a debating society but a highly important legislative body , influencing the lives of Europeans .
That will require an accountable Parliament ; it will mean that Members of Parliament will have to be prepared to familiarise themselves with a whole range of issues and not just listen to just one or two lobbies , for example .
Next , I want to talk about foreign policy .
It is now high time we thought about the powers and jurisdiction of the new President , the High Representative and the President of the Commission in foreign policy matters .
Otherwise there will be problems .
Otherwise , in the outside world they will not know who to contact .
We all know that backstage there is a fierce argument going on about these power relationships , but this could be an open debate .
Furthermore , this debate on the powers of different actors is , I think , a lot more important than the discussion over personnel .
It is really important .
Finally , I want to say something else about foreign policy .
It remains intergovernmental in the nature of course , but we want the EU to be able to speak with one united voice ; and this will definitely require a real change of attitude on the part of the Member States .
The EU 's Committee on Climate Change just visited India and we learned that there people hardly know anything about the EU and it has barely any significance for Indians .
What does have significance for them is when President Sarkozy or Prime Minister Brown pays a visit .
Moreover , when EU foreign ministers visit external countries , their agenda is completely national .
If the EU is mentioned it may be some small aside , but nothing much more than that .
If this continues we will definitely have a long time to wait until the EU becomes a strong foreign policy actor .
( LV ) Thank you , Mr President .
Perhaps for those who wished to see the Constitutional Treaty ratified , the Lisbon Treaty is not a great achievement , but undoubtedly neither is it an achievement for the eurosceptics , who did not wish to see any new EU treaties .
This means that it is a classic political compromise , and as such it ought also to be ratified in all EU Member States .
Certainly , the European Parliament has increased areas of responsibility under the Lisbon Treaty , and this imposes new duties upon us .
As a whole , too , Europe 's institutions must demonstrate to European citizens that in economically sensitive areas they are able to show genuine European solidarity , so that we do not end up with a new energy solidarity stipulation , just like the introduction of the free market principle in European territory with the Services Directive .
Since a lot depends on us , I very much hope that the representatives of all the Member States both in Parliament and in the other European institutions will understand how vital this demonstration is for European citizens . Thank you .
( FI ) Mr President , Commissioner , the Hungarian Parliament ratified the Treaty of Lisbon before it had officially been sent it .
It thus did not know what it was agreeing with .
On this issue , in which the European Parliament has no legal competence , we are being made a laughing-stock , as we do not have any consolidated version of the treaty as a basis for debate .
Without that , the treaty is just as impossible for us to read as it is for the citizens of the EU .
Our Group does not accept the treaty .
The EU will be militarised and will move towards becoming a military alliance .
It will not further the interests of a socialist Europe nor will it promote any ideal form of democracy .
Under the treaty , the Member States will be committed to increasing military resources for operations outside their territory and in their previous colonies .
The EU 's military operations will be able to be executed without a UN mandate , i.e. illegally from the point of view of international law .
There was no article on a compulsory UN mandate when the European Convention met .
It was blocked by the EU NATO countries , for which it is not an alien concept to engage in illegal wars , like that in Iraq .
The EU also uses NATO-compliant combat troops to enforce the peace , that is to say , wars , in other countries .
The same weapons are also used by the NATO Response Force .
The Treaty of Lisbon is fully NATO-compliant , and will help the EU to wear the NATO hat .
What is meant by the EU 's own collective and military safeguards is vague .
When the Member States commit all the resources available to them to helping other Member States , all these resources available to them might also be military .
If that happens , and they are deployed , the EU then also becomes a military alliance .
Mr President , I object to a report on the Lisbon Treaty being rushed through this House before Members are given the Treaty in a readable , contextual form .
We have been sent amendments that , in that form , are nonsense .
Would we vote on other reports in this House based on amendments , without having seen the document ?
Should we take this report on faith ?
As legislators , this is not what our constituents have sent us to Strasbourg to do .
I come from Ireland .
We are having a referendum .
As news of this spreads , I am receiving requests for the Treaty every day .
When I have to tell people there is no readable version , they are incredulous .
But when I tell them that this is by decree of the Intergovernmental Conference , they are angry .
I have no doubt this feeling is even more intense for other frustrated peoples of Europe , who are denied a referendum .
But I can only imagine how people will react when they hear that their MEPs passed this report on a Treaty that they have not read .
I will let you in on a secret .
Our citizens are intelligent , thoughtful and well capable of playing their democratic role in their own governance .
And what we are doing here today , and throughout this Lisbon process , is a betrayal of our citizens , the very citizens whose cooperation and hard work we will need to further the European project .
I warn you : do not be surprised if , some day , these same long-suffering citizens refuse that cooperation .
Mr President , I would question why , if the Lisbon Treaty is such a good thing , it is so inaccessible .
Is it because Member States are turned from the theoretical masters of the EU into its servants ?
Is it because it makes law , rather than a framework for law-making ?
Is it because it offers no checks and balances to control future law-makers ?
Is it because it consolidates power in a self-perpetuating bureaucracy ?
Like the last Treaty , this one gives the EU a permanent right to seize more powers without any future agreements - an outrageous power grab .
Such undemocratic powers are illegal in the United Kingdom , because no British Parliament can bind its successors .
Mrs Wallström said the word ' constitution ' was being dropped to avoid trouble with the Brits - too right !
We should leave , taking our EUR 2 million an hour with us , and we would all be better off .
( DE ) Mr President , Madam Vice-President , President-in-Office of the Council , I can no longer understand the speeches by the representatives of the United Kingdom Independence Party and other parties .
I was taught that the Westminster system of parliamentary democracy delivered full democratic legitimisation .
That is what is happening here .
We have been elected by the voters and will make a decision , just as our colleagues in the national parliaments do , and we have full democratic authority to do so .
What is going on here , in a populist manner , is the destruction of the authority of parliamentary democracy , and you will have to take responsibility for this .
( Applause )
The second point that I would like to mention here , and for this I thank Mr Corbett and Mr Méndez de Vigo , is that it is clear that this Treaty closes a democratic loophole in the European Union .
Full codecision rights for the European Parliament , the election of the Commission President by the European Parliament , the obligation for international treaties to be ratified by the European Parliament , the strengthening of the national parliaments - I do not want to go into detail .
What we are doing here in the European Union is unique , as we no longer resolve the different interests of our peoples and among our peoples , which will always be present , with tanks and guns , as used to happen , but with debates and democratic voting .
That is the real , magnificent difference compared with what has constituted European history thus far , and all this on the basis of equality of the States and people groups .
We should take our bearings from this .
It has been the good fortune of Western Europe for 60 years , and since European reunification in 1990 , large areas of Europe have shared in this good fortune .
Now we want to strengthen this , so that this internal peace process will give us a better ability to make decisions through the Treaty , and so that we can meet the challenges of the future in this world and can overcome the problems of energy security , external security policy , terrorism and many others .
This is the answer to these challenges .
Mr Méndez de Vigo quoted Paul Valéry , and I would like to quote him again : ' Europe will either unite or be the appendix of the Asian continent . '
That is the point .
Does Europe have a chance of survival , by working together , by combining forces and giving them democratic authority and guidance , or will we as Europeans disappear in the global order ?
( Applause )



( ES ) Mr President , President-in-Office of the Council , Vice-President of the Commission , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to welcome the report by my colleagues Mr Corbett and Mr Méndez de Vigo , because it is a report that is consistent with what the European Parliament has done from the start .
I am sure that presidents such as Robert Schuman and Paul-Henri Spaak , or Konrad Adenauer would have signed the Lisbon Treaty , above all because the line that was defined based on the Spinelli Treaty , which in the mid-1980s inspired the line that took shape in the Constitution , has now resulted in the Lisbon Treaty , in an open constitutional process for the European Union .
In this respect , I think that the report defends and sets out the progress that has been made .
At the same time , however , it is a report that forms part of the desire to consolidate the European Union as a political and democratic union .
I would like to make an observation regarding the lessons that we need to learn and , in particular , on the ratification of the Constitutional Treaty .
I am hearing a great deal of talk about referendums from those who are against us moving forward .
I of course participated in the referendum that we organised in my country and we won .
There is a lesson we need to learn : what we decide together cannot be made subject to , cannot be held hostage by , what is decided by a small minority .
We need to think as democrats about how all of us together ratify what we desire .
It is not acceptable for us all to be dependent on what a small minority may do , and I think that this is an important lesson for the future .
Mr President , I would like to finish with an observation : the European Parliament has always been in the vanguard , at the forefront of Europe .
This means that we now need to get to work on a large number of political decisions that need to be adopted even before the next elections , because the reality is that this Treaty should enter into force on 1 January 2009 .
From the point of view of democracy , codecision , appointments and adapting the European Parliament , there is a great deal still to be done .
( Applause )
Mr President , as one of only 13 Members of this House who will have the opportunity to vote on a referendum on the Treaty of Lisbon , I am satisfied to give it my support .
Like any document , it is not perfect , as Commissioner Wallström has said .
It is a compromise , but it is going in the right direction .
Because of time constraints , I will keep my comments to just one topic .
The Treaty maintains the principle of subsidiarity - the principle that we take decisions at the most appropriate level .
In Ireland one of the arguments used by supporters of a ' no ' vote is to suggest that Lisbon is a self-amending Treaty , yet Article 48 ( 4 ) states quite clearly that any amendments to the Treaty will enter into force only after being ratified by all Member States in accordance with their respective constitutional requirements .
That is the very essence of subsidiarity .
What surprises me about the debate in this House at times - even though I suppose I should not be surprised - is that those who shout longest and loudest about the sovereignty of Member States are the very ones to attempt to undermine that sovereignty by lecturing and hectoring Member States about the need to hold a referendum , when national legislation and , therefore , sovereignty and subsidiarity , dictate otherwise .
Lisbon upholds the sovereign right of Member States to make such decisions , and that is just one of the very many reasons why I support it .
( PL ) Mr President , the Lisbon Treaty was a very difficult compromise for all parties involved , so I am amazed to read words in this report that are nothing less than preparation of the ground for campaigns aimed at constitutionalising the EU .
I would rather propose that we come to terms with an absence of symbolic attributes , with compromises on the Council voting system , or with opt-in / opt-out agreements .
I would also propose coming to terms with the fact that the convention method has brought the EU problems ; problems that we have overcome through traditional negotiations between governments .
The EU does not need a permanent discussion of institutions ; it needs political will and the implementation of common and useful aims .
( SK ) Ladies and gentlemen , it is good to see that the European Parliament is actively monitoring and taking the initiative in the process of ratification of the Lisbon Treaty .
I am pleased that I had the opportunity to be part of the European Convention and to work for 18 months on the drafting of the Constitutional Treaty , despite the fact that it was unsuccessful .
The Lisbon Treaty that has followed on from it represents a political compromise and it is a balanced and good document .
In addition to other important reforms , this document also broadens the scope of codecision : for us in the European Parliament that means that this House will be more powerful than ever before , since it was first established .
I welcome this fact as proof of the modernisation and democratisation of politics in 21st century Europe .
At the same time the document offers more flexibility for the European Union , which currently consists of 27 Member States .
Accordingly , we can see an increased participation of national parliaments in the preparation of documents in the European Union .
In this context , I must express my regret over the situation in Slovakia : there were no problems with the ratification of the Constitutional Treaty but the present ratification has become somewhat problematic as a result of political game-playing .
That said , I trust that the Slovak politicians , too , will realise how necessary this document is and that the ratification will take place without a hitch .
Allow me to add one more sentence .
The debates in this House , Mr President , highlight the difference in terms of how the European Council and the European Parliament are perceived .
They show that communication in this area is probably not very good : in fact , the signatures of the prime ministers who signed the Lisbon Treaty are being questioned .
That is a rather serious matter .
Mr President , before my customary three points , I want to take issue with what Nigel Farage of the UKIP talked about .
He mentioned the word ' chicken ' .
We might , perhaps , expect that something will be going on during the vote and I would like to say that you are what you wear during the vote .
We will see what UKIP looks like .
I have three points .
My first point is that , in the European Union , we are in a constant process of change .
We stood here and dealt with a similar report two years ago , and I would really like to congratulate the rapporteurs , Richard Corbett and Íñigo Méndez de Vigo , on a job well done .
What happened in 2005 was unfortunate .
What we have done since is crisis management .
This is really what Europe is all about .
We need to solve problems ; we solved a treaty problem and , hopefully , we can get on now .
My second point is that I think the Treaty that we have in front of us is a great improvement on the Nice Treaty .
It is an improvement in terms of efficiency : we get more qualified majority voting , we get a legal personality , we get a great deal more on external relations and good stuff on justice and home affairs .
It is also an improvement of democracy .
The European Parliament increases its powers , the Charter of Fundamental Rights comes into the Treaty and the national parliaments get more powers .
So , in many ways , it is a great improvement on the Nice Treaty .
My third and final point , however , is that now it is time to move on .
I congratulate those five countries that have already ratified the Treaty .
The sooner we can push this Treaty through , the better off all of us will be , because it is time to move on , focus on real business , on legislation , on taking smart European decisions .
When we do that , however , we must not forget that we have a vision .
That vision is of a unified Europe , because the European Union is the only organisation that has given us four things .
Those four things are peace , prosperity , stability and security .

( FR ) Mr President , treaties are like births : some need an epidural , others a caesarean .
This one falls into the second category and it will grow up as a beautiful baby , you will see .
We had to have two attempts at it , but that is in the past .
It is imperfect , it is incomplete , but it is better than nothing .
Most of all , it brings to a close the reunification of the continent , which began on 9 November 1989 . In its way , it also brings the Second World War to a close .
Of course , it is being accused of firmly establishing a liberal Europe .
It could have been totalitarian , no less !
I hope that this Treaty does not mark the end of one period , but the start of another .
I am already looking forward to finding out who will be the President of Europe , because the whole world will be watching to see who is chosen , and the person will create the institution .
Already I want to say to that person : ' Do not stay in your office .
Go all over Europe , not just to the capital cities but to every region of Europe . '
I would like to say to him or her : ' Go all over the world .
Go to the places where freedoms are ignored , human rights are restricted , and there is still war and conflict .
Show that Europe has a name , a face , an address , a telephone number . '
I think this person , whether a man or a woman , will have a decisive role .
We will see what will be done with this post .
There will already be a rendez-vous in June 2014 - five years on .
Either the Treaty will have been a good experience , will have proved effective , and citizens will have appropriated it , or the taste for Europe itself will have been damaged .
That is why the forthcoming parliamentary term will probably be a decisive one as far as the commitment of citizens to Europe is concerned .
( RO ) Ladies and gentlemen , first of all I would like to congratulate the Rapporteurs .
Indeed , this is a very good report .
In spite of giving up the Union 's symbols and in spite of all the compromises made at the European Council of June and at the intergovernmental conference , the Reform Treaty of Lisbon preserves the most important innovations from the former constitutional treaty and is truly a great step forward in reforming the European Union .
I am mostly glad about the increase in the European Parliament 's and the national parliaments ' role in making decisions in the European Union .
My country , Romania , was one of the first countries to ratify the treaty with a very big majority of votes from the Members of the Parliament .
In my opinion , conclusion number 10 is maybe the most important conclusion of the report .
Even if the ratification of the treaty will be made in national parliaments in almost all the Member States , with one exception , I believe it is essential to inform the citizens of the European Union countries in order to have successful institutional reforms .
It is the duty of the European institutions to inform the citizens about this treaty .
It is our duty , that of each Member of the European Parliament , to go to our countries and explain to the citizens we represent here the advantages of the Lisbon Treaty for the future of the European construction .
( PL ) Mr President , after two years of discussion on the controversial treaty that was rejected in France and Holland , we have succeeded in reaching a compromise and accepting a text that is supposed to save the peoples of Europe .
There is just one problem : everyone has agreed , and some have actually already accepted a text that does not yet exist in a consolidated version .
The rapporteurs actually acknowledge this in paragraph 9 of the document tabled before Parliament .
The Lisbon Treaty has been made available only as a list of amendments to the treaties .
Even Members of this Parliament have not seen a consolidated text , let alone citizens of the Member States .
Is this how it is meant to look , the proclaimed rapprochement between the EU and its citizens - those citizens who are being denied not only the right to a referendum , but also the potential to familiarise themselves with the text , not to mention any debate on it ?
Was this brought about only through technical considerations , or is it that the authors of this work of genius are once again trying to hide something ?
The history of ratification of the Constitutional and Lisbon Treaties shows that the leaders of the EU are contemptuous of the peoples of Europe and democratic procedures .
This is why this report must be rejected .
( DE ) Mr President , the Eurobarometer always shows that around 30 % of European citizens are eurosceptic and are unhappy .
This 30 % is very interesting .
It appeals particularly to protest groups and others that have no policies of their own but want a share of that 30 % .
It appeals to those who have no policies by which they can be identified ; euroscepticism is a screen to hide behind .
This 30 % also appeals to those whose policies will never be accepted by others .
Euroscepticism is a very useful disguise for xenophobes .
It is considered acceptable to be seen to be sceptical , at least in the eyes of this 30 % .
It is against this background , therefore , that we should consider the call for referendums .
Those involved are not actually concerned about referendums ; they are not trying to achieve more democracy ; rather , all they are after is to harness this 30 % of protest potential and use it to drive their own goals .
The same 30 % of eurosceptics attracts interest from another quarter , however .
They represent market potential for certain media .
EU protest sells well - we see that every day in the tabloids .
In my country , Austria , you need only to glance at the headlines to know what it is all about .
It is not about supposed high treason , and it is not about the EU ' theatre ' . It is about making sure that this 30 % will continue to buy the paper each day .
Who could be against a national referendum ?
Nobody could be against a national referendum , but then they ought to be called for much more frequently and on a much wider range of topics - yet this does not happen .
Basically , the protest serves only the newspaper 's own potential market share , its potential to dominate ; it does not serve democracy .
This is indeed something that should be stated on a day like today .
( Applause )
( PL ) Mr President , I would like to congratulate my colleagues on an excellent report , and I wish to convey to you today three pieces of news : two are excellent , and one is bad .
The first piece of good news is as follows : Poland is ratifying the Lisbon Treaty .
Yesterday the Polish Government passed a draft law on its ratification , and on 27 February the Polish Sejm and Senate will be considering it .
I would like to emphasise that the Treaty has the support of the vast majority in Parliament .
The second piece of good news is that the Polish people are exceptionally strong in their support of the European project .
According to recent studies , as many as 83 % of Poles are satisfied with membership of the EU .
Given such widespread support , a referendum in my country would be irrelevant .
Please remember that my fellow Members who are calling here in this House for a referendum are speaking only for themselves .
The third piece of news , which is bad , is that Poland unfortunately still has reservations about the Charter of Fundamental Rights , so apart from the British , the Poles will be the only Europeans not to enjoy its benefits .
I therefore appeal to the Council and to the Slovenian Presidency to prepare a mechanism for a simplified opt-in that would enable Poland , and in future perhaps Great Britain , too , to sign up to the Charter of Fundamental Rights .

Mr President , can I first of all respond to our good colleague Mr Barón Crespo , who said that we could not allow the will of a small minority to stand in the way of the European project .
In my country , opinion polls show that some 75 % of the British people want a referendum and two thirds of them would vote ' no ' .
If that is what Mr Barón Crespo thinks is a small minority , all I can say is that it is not my view of a small minority .
As a number of colleagues have pointed out , we are actually voting on something that we cannot read .
We have no consolidated text .
It is an absolute scandal !
Many people on the other side of the House are telling us that this is a good thing .
I have heard again and again what a good thing it is .
If it is so good , then why not go out in the streets and argue it in front of the people in a referendum ?
Why are you running scared ?
Today , the European project is abandoning any claim to democratic legitimacy .
Today , we will vote through the renamed Constitution in an act that shows monstrous contempt for European citizens and democratic values .
In 2005 , the voters of France and Holland decisively rejected the constitution .
I am astonished by the bare-faced effrontery of European leaders , who have changed the packaging but are now bringing back the substance in defiance of public opinion .
Most French and Dutch MEPs will support this report .
I do not know how they will face their voters .
I do not know how they will sleep at night .
In the UK , the Labour Government has broken its solemn promise of a referendum , yet in postal polls conducted by campaign groups , more than 80 % of voters vote ' yes ' to a referendum .
By forcing this measure through in the teeth of public opposition , you are hacking at the very foundations of the Europe you are seeking to build .
We must listen to the people .
They demand a referendum .
Mr President , Mr Corbett has now shown us a so-called ' consolidated ' version of the Treaty 10 times .
That version has not been consolidated in such a way as to enable a decision , because it shows the text as it would appear if we had already approved the Lisbon Treaty .
A consolidated version is an edition in which text to be introduced is shown in bold type and text that will disappear is shown in italics , enabling it to be considered in a proper way .
Commissioner Wallström promised us such a version ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
( LV ) Mr President , Vice-President of the Commission , President-in-Office of the Council , while listening to a few of my fellow Members today , I realised the old truth written in the scriptures : to criticise , to belittle , is easy , but to build a house , to create a temple , is a long and difficult task .
I must remind critics of this Treaty that its basis - the Lisbon Treaty , the Constitutional Treaty - was created in the most widely represented democratic forum in European history , with participation by non-governmental organisations , and in the presence of the mass media .
Therefore I would like , today , to congratulate my colleagues Mr Méndez de Vigo and Mr Corbett , who have drafted the report on which we are now going to vote .
This report is in fact a very good summary , a very good summary , and Mr Bonde is right in saying that the consolidated version is currently available only in English .
I would therefore suggest that the document be published as a brochure , as a very good summary , since not everyone will read the full Treaty .
Touching now upon the actual positions taken by the Treaty , there was talk about many good things , and there was also criticism .
It seems to me to be very good that a common foreign and security policy has been formulated , as well as the need for a common energy policy .
At the same time it is a shame that there are no new instruments for carrying out these policies - neither the Commission nor Parliament have been given such instruments .
What does this mean ?
It means that the work is still before us : to introduce these policies and to implement them .
Therefore , in fact , half the work has already been done : the foundation has been developed , but the rest of the work , the second half , namely putting it into practice , still remains for us to do .
I wish us all luck . Thank you .
Mr President , the merits of the Lisbon Treaty have been mentioned and the progress it brings towards a real Union of citizens was described .
The need for its urgent ratification was also stressed .
Let me add to this two notes of concern .
First , the market is globalised , organised crime is globalised , poverty is globalised and the waves of immigrants remind us of this reality every day .
While car , computer , aircraft and steel companies merge , new or renewed global powers emerge .
In spite of that , Europe remains divided .
The ongoing division on Kosovo , which is portrayed by some as a battle between legalist and realist , is the most recent and frightening example , proving that peace and law in Europe are not yet secure .
Against this background , the obsession for opt-out or opt-in arrangements is not a way to protect national sovereignty against so-called European imperialism but a way to condemn each of our Member States to parochialist irrelevance and , ultimately , insecurity .
My second concern : one has deleted from the Treaty references to symbols , fearing that the European symbols could overshadow national ones .
On the other hand , the lack of democratic participation of citizens in national life proves every day that our national myths are in a state of fatigue .
The European Coal and Steel Community was able to mobilise citizens not only by addressing their minds , but also by inspiring their hearts .
It was a plan associated with a myth .
The Lisbon Treaty is another excellent plan , but it lacks soul .
This will not only weaken the capacity of the European Union to inspire citizens but also the capacity of each Member State to rehabilitate their national myths .
For the rest , I fully share the ideas of the report and I commend the rapporteurs for their excellent work .
I share all their views and I think they did a great job .
I hope , however , that one day we all will be able to shout , ' Habemus tractatum rei publicae Europae . '

( NL ) Mr President , as the fathers of European integration always put it , this integration is realised step by step . Sometimes the steps are small , and sometimes they are large .
The rapporteurs have underlined very clearly that the Treaty of Lisbon is an important qualitative step forward - one could even say a quantum leap - for Europe .
It is comparable to the Treaty of Rome , when we created the common market , to the Single European Act with the single market , and to the Treaty on European Union ( TEU ) with monetary union .
The TEU also represented a modest preliminary step towards political union .
By endowing the Union with legal personality and abolishing the pillars , the Treaty of Lisbon gives Europe a definite political dimension .
Europe needs the Treaty in order to be a global actor in today 's globalised world and thus to set the standards this globalised world needs .
In addition , the general application of codecision makes decision making in this political union more democratic .
This Treaty now needs to be ratified and , in this regard , a coordinated text should indeed help achieve a better understanding of the progress made .
Having a text is one thing , however , but ratification is another , and implementation another thing again : this may be the most important of the tasks now facing us .
I was delighted to hear that the Presidency and the Commission , too , are starting to think about and work on this implementation , as various directions are possible , and we could even take the wrong one if we are not careful .
That is why it is also very important for Parliament to concern itself with this implementation , too , in order to set a clear course for the way in which the Treaty should represent real progress .
It is possible for implementation to steer the Treaty in a different direction and we certainly do not want that .
We want the progress that is contained in the Treaty .
( PT ) I congratulate the rapporteurs Mr Corbett and Mr Méndez de Vigo on their excellent work and the good example of cooperation .

The Portuguese Presidency had the historic mission of turning a mandate into a Treaty , the Treaty of Lisbon , which is to be ratified by the Portuguese Parliament next April .
The new Treaty is not the remedy for all the European Union 's ills , but it represents added value for democracy .
The powers of the European Parliament are enhanced , as are the powers of the national parliaments , but participatory democracy is also enhanced - specifically by means of the citizens ' initiative which enables one million citizens to ask the Commission to launch a legislative initiative in a specific field ; in addition the Charter of Fundamental Rights is now legally binding .
The European Union is not perfect , but it is irreplaceable in its world role .
We need a Europe which is more involved and influential in solving world problems , such as climate change , food security , energy policy , international terrorism , organised crime , immigration , etc .
There is now an urgent need for each of the 27 Member States which signed the Treaty of Lisbon on 13 December 2007 to proceed to ratify the Treaty .
That is a decisive stage in our achieving a Europe which is more efficient in decision-making , closer to citizens , better able to respond to the challenges of globalisation and more effective in external relations .
Let each and every one of us assume our responsibilities because the world does not stop .
Whilst Europe was spinning out its pause for reflection and wasting energy looking for a way out of its institutional problems , the emerging economies were continuing to grow , armed conflicts were spreading , climate change was becoming obvious , energy problems were becoming more acute and many people were dying for lack of food and medical assistance .
Notwithstanding ultranationalist opinions and euroscepticism , Europe cannot stop - and it is not going to stop .
( EL ) As shadow draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on International Trade and as a member of the Committee on Constitutional Affairs , I should like to say by way of introduction that the Lisbon Treaty signals the transition from a constitutional ' elitism ' to the reform of the European unification project .
Joint European progress is ensured through constitutional duality , namely the two revised Treaties of equal legal value .
At the same time , however , a multi-speed Europe is emerging .
In other words , the Union is gaining in flexibility , but it is losing a common unification impetus .
The Member State once again has the upper hand in the dialectic relationship between supra-national and national elements .
The parliamentary system is also emerging from the recent European compromise strengthened , with the roles of both the European Parliament and the national parliaments having been reinforced .
Ladies and gentlemen , the European unification process undoubtedly needs a boost .
Citizens are looking for answers to politically dynamic challenges .
They are interested in the quality and productivity of political output .
They democratically legitimise , whether directly or indirectly , the EU 's decision-making bodies and expect successful action .
A successful conclusion to the ratification attempt , and , above all , the lasting democratic legitimisation of projects carried out in full view of European citizens , depend on the initiation of a detailed political debate with the EU on the key political , economic and social approaches , on the relationship of European citizens to the EU , and on the position of the EU in the world .
In this context , the establishment of a lasting , transparent and democratic dialogue with civil society cannot be a mere pretext .
It must reflect an in-depth politicisation of the unification enterprise .
The European Parliament is playing a key role in this politicisation .
I congratulate my fellow Members Mr Corbett and Mr Méndez de Vigo on their fruitful and creative contribution .
Mr President , this Treaty is not an elegant document .
There are many ' ifs ' , ' buts ' and ' maybes ' , because there is no other way for a diverse family of nations to share power .
However , despite the naysayers , it responds to our citizens ' demands for more democracy and a greater capacity to do those things which nation states cannot do effectively on their own : peacekeeping , climate change , migration , financial and market regulation , and , indeed , labour regulation .
At this time of global instability , the European Union is more important than ever for small Member States like Ireland .
Today 's vote will again show up the bizarre alliance of market fundamentalists , ultra-left and ultra-right , which opposes this Treaty .
They have one thing in common : an urge to confine peoples ' democratic reach behind national borders .
The multimillionaires - the Murdochs in Britain and the Ganleys in Ireland - cynically manipulate national chauvinism to seek to deny Europeans reaching beyond their national borders to regulate business in the wider interests of society .
The others , Sinn Féin and their allies , do not trust the citizens and their ability to create an accountable transnational democracy .
Their stock-in-trade is fear , fear of our neighbours , of democratic parliaments , of governments and of globalisation .
They fail to explain how more power for parliaments means less democracy .
They masquerade as internationalists but they object to neighbours helping each other in times of crisis or attack .
They refuse to countenance binding European laws to protect us and our neighbours from climate change , the abuse of workers ' rights and abuse of the market .
The weapons of those who pedal fear is the big lie , eloquently demonstrated here today by Ms McDonald and Ms Sinnott .
They wearily turn truth on its head to claim that elected representatives of more than 80 % of the people of Europe are about to crush democracy , are about to deny people ever again having a say in the construction of Europe .
Before polling day in Ireland , all these big lies will have been shown up for what they are : the nightmares of parties which have learned nothing from their history and are bent on condemning the people of Europe to repeating it .
I am confident that Ireland 's decision will be to stay at the heart of Europe .
Mr President , Ireland has chosen to ratify the Lisbon Treaty by referendum because , on balance , this was deemed necessary under the terms of our written Constitution , but I fully respect the decision of all other Member States in their choice of ratification process .
A few points bear constant repetition .
The Lisbon Treaty does differ from its forerunner , the ill-fated Constitutional Treaty , in that it no longer consists of a single consolidated text .
It merely amends existing Treaties - on the European Union , and establishing the European Communities - Treaties which , in their own right , have been ratified fully .
In addition , the constitutional title and symbolism , and the reference to the EU flag and anthem , have been dropped .
More Europe means more of that to which Europe brings added value to our citizens because , by clearly defining the limits of the Union 's competences , the Reform Treaty or the Lisbon Treaty , gives both the European Union and national parliaments clear definition as to where their competences belong , and confers , incidentally , more subsidiarity on Member States , a point often lost .
The Reform Treaty allows for greater continuity in EU decision-making , notably in the foreign policy domain , by creating the new post of President of the European Council , who will be appointed for a two-and-a-half-year term , renewable on one occasion .
A High Representative for Foreign and Security Policy would be appointed , who would not just be based in the Council but would also be a Vice-President of the Commission .
These developments will not , however , lead to replacement of national foreign policies .
Moreover , the existing rotating six-month presidency will continue as before , a fact often overlooked or misunderstood .
Unlike certain other EU Treaties , this Lisbon Treaty does not create major new chapters of EU competence .
There would , however , be new legal bases for patents , tourism , sports , space and administrative cooperation , a reinforced legal basis on energy policy and , most importantly , an explicit new reference to fighting climate change with existing legal bases on environmental policy .
For all these reasons , my colleagues in Fine Gael and I will be supporting our Government .
All the Irish parties , with the exception of Sinn Féin , will be supporting the Government and working hard to ratify this Treaty and to get the message across .
Sinn Féin will not , because they are afraid of ' greater militarisation of Europe ' - ironic given that party 's particular history !
Colleagues , while your goodwill and support is most welcome , a gentle word of warning - please do not be tempted , in your eagerness for a positive outcome of our referendum , to tell the Irish electorate how to vote .
And , Commission , please stop picking rows with Ireland on administrative and other issues such as the REPS , which can be misrepresented , deliberately or otherwise , by the Treaty naysayers .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Treaty of Lisbon brings to an end a prolonged and perilous deadlock .
We are emerging from the crisis with a stable and more effective institutional structure that is open to further developments .
We are entering a new phase in which - I hope - the way can also be reopened towards a Constitution for Europe .
To this end , however , a special effort is needed to promote European citizenship , based on the Charter of Fundamental Rights .
It is not demographic calculations , which suit a national , intergovernmental logic , but European citizenship that is the cornerstone on which the political edifice of Europe will be built in the future .
This is also the only way of giving this Treaty soul , the soul that Mr Severin was talking about earlier .
The future is therefore , first and foremost , in the hands of a great alliance between Parliament and European citizens in the fullness of their rights and duties .
Perhaps the first test of this alliance is the choice for the new post of President of the EU .

( PL ) Mr President , allow me , if you would , to begin by congratulating the authors of this report , since through their work a text has come about that is not just a political document , but an astute guide to the new realities of the Treaty .
One could almost say that it is a didactic aid for students throughout the European Union and beyond .

In drawing up their report , Mr Méndez de Vigo and Mr Corbett have highlighted the positive changes introduced by the Lisbon Treaty , but have also acknowledged the fears brought about by difficult intergovernmental negotiations .
At that time , Poland was seen as one of the states that was holding back progress in European integration .
Much has changed , however , since the recent elections .
The new government is more open to European cooperation and understands that a strong EU is in the interests of our country , Poland .
It should , however , be borne in mind that a section of the Polish population shares some of the fears linked to the superior standing of EU law in the hierarchy of regulations of civil law , and especially of family and property law .
We need time and more experience of collaboration in the European Community for these fears to diminish , and perhaps to be extinguished .
My country 's government has therefore refrained from signing the Charter of Fundamental Rights , particularly as there was a serious risk that the ratification process in Poland would effectively be blocked if a different decision were to be taken .
I am very pleased that the authors of the report have appreciated these circumstances and decided to remove from the primary text the names of states whose stance might be viewed critically by the European Parliament .
The Lisbon Treaty is the result of a compromise between dreams of a European federation and fears that are currently prevalent not only among citizens of the new states , but also in countries that are the founders of our Community .
With the unsuccessful process of ratification of the Constitutional Treaty constantly in mind , I feel that it is better to posit smaller but stable steps than to attempt leaps that are always associated with the risk of a fall .
The reality of our changing will come very quickly .
It is therefore certain that in a few years ' time we shall be debating a new text , a new treaty , one that is more appropriate to the realities that are to come .
It is important for us to be able to discern them in time , and for the European Union to retain the capacity to adapt to new challenges .
( PT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Lisbon and Rome are departure points for a humanity without borders .
The dream of global justice and cosmopolitan law is at the heart of the history of the European Union .
It is the history of how moral will took root in the institutions and transformed the old political paradigms .
The method followed was sharing , the criterion applied was reason , the goal set was human dignity and sovereignty of rights took precedence over sovereignty of borders ; those factors all served to make Europe the home of enlightenment .
In this journey towards large-scale democracy , the Treaty of Lisbon has restored to the European Parliament its parliamentary nature , has broken the legislative hegemony of the Europe of governments and brought new leading figures to the fore to enhance the competitive and political components and reduce bureaucracy .
It is true that the European Constitution , with its potential for unity and cohesion , has been delayed but a post-national Europe is emerging .
Babel will undoubtedly build its tower .
( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , if you have followed the debate this morning , you will have noticed that this Treaty is accompanied by great expectations .
First there is the expectation that it should be ratified and enter into force .
Then there is the expectation that it will put the European Union in a better position to live up to its task in the world , a position from which it will be able to deal with the consequences of globalisation , and so on and so forth .
I would like to add a further expectation to this : I believe and hope that the Treaty offers another opportunity to take a further step towards reconciling the European Union with its citizens , as there is a gap between the Union and its citizens .
This gap was highlighted by the referendums in France and the Netherlands , and it needs to be closed .
The Union needs the endorsement of its citizens , and the new Treaty offers good opportunities for this .
It gives the national parliaments the opportunity to participate in creating legislation .
Within the framework of subsidiarity , it includes national parliaments , and quite rightly .
Therefore , because approval from citizens depends , among other things , on the allocation of tasks between the EU and the Member States being clearer than it has been until now , and managed in a more balanced way .
The national parliaments have a contribution to make here .
I do not see us as competing with the national parliaments , but I believe that we must cooperate .
I am of the opinion that the national parliaments should also make use of these opportunities .
I want to challenge them outright to do so .
It will be fascinating to see whether or not this new instrument for monitoring subsidiarity is effective .
One further point : if we look at the European Union from outside , we see an example of regional cooperation , successful regional teamwork , of which there is only one other example in the whole world , and it is not nearly as successful or advanced as the EU : the ASEAN states .
As regards ASEAN , they keep a close eye on the European Union as they attempt to cooperate and make a contribution to peace and security in the world .
( SK ) Ladies and gentlemen , because the European Union needs a Reform Treaty that will make it more effective and modern , I will vote for the report by the rapporteurs , Mr Richard Corbett and Mr Íñigo Méndez de Vigo , on the Lisbon Treaty .
Allow me to congratulate those five Member States that have already ratified the Lisbon Treaty .
I am convinced that the act of ratification of the Lisbon Treaty faces no danger in Slovakia either .
Only one parliamentary party is against it ; other than that the Treaty enjoys overall support and the overwhelming majority of members of the national parliament will vote in favour of it .
The current Slovak opposition that deserves most of the credit for Slovakia joining the European family will give its support to the Lisbon Treaty as soon as Slovakia 's press law that has been criticised by such European institutions as Freedom House , the OSCE and the European Federation of Journalists is re-written in accordance with their recommendations .
( HU ) As an MEP for Hungary , the first country to ratify the Reform Treaty , I am well aware that ratification alone is not enough .
It has already been mentioned in this Chamber that we need to explain to people - to the citizens of Europe - in what ways this document provides more than national constitutions , to explain the added value of this Reform Treaty .
European politicians need to be made aware of the fact that prime ministers often make the mistake of calling this an institutional reform .
It is much more than that .
Now we are becoming a political union and a genuine community of interests .
Within this community of interests , we must spell out to the citizens of Europe the ways in which the Charter of Fundamental Rights provides added value in the sphere of social rights .
I must give special mention here to the fact that the rights of individuals belonging to minorities have at long last been included in the eighty-thousand-page acquis communautaire , since every seventh citizen in Europe , in the European Union , belongs to a long-standing minority .
This is a great advance for the treaty .
Mr President , I would like to ask those colleagues who oppose the Treaty to explain precisely what is they mean when they speak about a ' self-amending ' treaty .
Could they bring me the clause that provides for this sort of protean development ?
I do not see it in the Treaty myself .
The fact is that a single change requires the unanimous agreement of all the prime ministers and national parliaments of all the Member States , and important changes that confer fresh competences upon us in the EU require the procedure of a convention , an intergovernmental conference and formal ratification in all Member States .
( DA ) Mr President , the Treaty of Lisbon is , as everyone knows , the Constitution Treaty without the flags and music .
It is actually rather strange that this is being said so bluntly here , because this is not how it is being done in Denmark .
Rather , in Denmark the government is saying , that there is nothing of any significance whatsoever in this Treaty , as it believes that by saying this , it can make its citizens believe that they do not need to be allowed to vote on it .
However , with this Treaty , we are witnessing the most far-reaching development of the European Union that there has ever been : more power , more political areas than ever before and a greater loss of control for the European nations than there has ever been previously .
It is incredibly unwise of the EU 's old core states to coerce the rest of us without asking our citizens .
It will lead to negative consequences .
Citizens feel that they are losing control and will react against this .
A union is not created at a negotiating table within the EU .
It can work only if it grows out of the wishes of the people , and this is not what this Union is doing .
I therefore intend to vote against it .
( CS ) If European integration is to last , there must be deepening and strengthening of international law .
What is happening at the moment is the precise opposite .
The recognition of Kosovo 's independence has been a terrible blow to international law and the first casualty of this breach of international law will be European integration and transatlantic relations .
I think this is plain to see .
The ethnic principle was rejected as a basis for the delimitation of boundaries in the case of Bosnia , yet in the case of Kosovo it has been taken as the only criterion and the only principle .
I believe that international law must not be violated with impunity : this results in documents such as the Helsinki Final Act suffering in terms of their credibility .
( RO ) Mr. President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to join my colleagues who welcomed the drawing up of this report and to emphasize its fundamental value for the future of Europe .
It is important that the Lisbon Treaty focuses on the role of citizens and the responsibility of institutions .
This is why I believe that , via this report , the European Parliament proves that it undertakes its new role in the functioning of the European Union .
In this regard , I reiterate the support for all the treaty provisions that stipulate a consolidated role of the parliaments , both at national and European level .
Secondly , I would like to mention the changes that the Lisbon Treaty proposes in the field of the European Union 's foreign policy .
Their transposition into facts is crucial for consolidating the European action in this direction .
Consequently , the essential element of the report is the call for ratification by all the 27 Member States .
I express my satisfaction that Romania ratified the Treaty in February 2008 , thus becoming the fourth country that has proved its European vocation and firm wish to contribute to the ever more prosperous future of the European Union .
( SK ) I would like to thank the rapporteurs for their excellent work , which clearly defines all the positive aspects of the new Treaty as well as its weaker points .
As the saying goes , nobody is perfect .
At any rate , let us be thankful for the high quality of the Treaty and for the fact that it reflects the present reality within the European Union and opportunities thus offered at the level of the Treaty .
As the rapporteurs correctly point out , this Treaty strengthens democratic responsibility and decision-making powers , and in this way gives citizens more control over the Union 's activities .
However , in this context I would like to appeal to the governments of the Member States to provide their citizens with an adequate summary of the Lisbon Treaty , so that it is understood by everyone and so that each person can make an informed decision on whether he / she agrees with the legislation or not : this should be the rule with regard to all European ( and not just European ) legislation .
I am sure that the citizens of the European Union , if well informed , will give the Treaty their unqualified support .
I would also like to stress that such an important document should not become an object of political games as is the case in Slovakia , where the opposition is blocking the adoption of this progressive and democratic document .

Mr President , I rise here as - I hope - one of the ordinary and decent citizens of Ireland referred to by my colleague MEP , Mr Farage - although I think he has left the Chamber .
I am not surprised that ordinary , decent Irish citizens are confused , because they have strange bedfellows on the ' no ' side - Ms McDonald and Mr Farage .
It beggars belief !
Could I say to Sinn Féin in particular : can they not acknowledge the role of the European Union in peace in Northern Ireland ?
That is what will be enhanced by this Treaty , not ' militarisation ' , as they call it .
On the role of national parliaments , can I say this : let national parliaments take the power this Treaty will give them and let the ordinary decent citizens of the countries force them to use that power effectively .
To Mr Duff : there is falsehood being peddled in Ireland on the ' self-amending ' Treaty : it is the invention of a negative mind .
It is not true and it is not so .
Lastly , let me say that , contrary to the naysayers , like Ms McDonald and Mr Farage , this Treaty is a good deal for Ireland , a good deal for the EU , a good deal for Europe , and I urge citizens in Ireland to vote ' yes ' !
Mr President , I did not expect to be called so quickly .
I already made a contribution , but I would like to make just a further point here .
We have listened to all the naysayers , the people who tell us that Lisbon will further militarise the Union , that it will lead to social dumping , that it will lead us all in the wrong direction .
Well , I have missed a little bit of the debate , but I did not hear anybody comment on Article 49 , which states that , if Lisbon is ratified , any Member State can decide to withdraw from the Union in accordance with its own constitutional requirements .
That means that all of those who believe that they should not be in Europe can advise their citizens to withdraw from the Union after we ratify the Lisbon Treaty .
Therefore , they have no excuse not to wish to see this Treaty passed .
Mr President , a ' yes ' for the Lisbon Treaty is a ' yes ' for the Charter of Fundamental Rights .
The EU Charter of Fundamental Rights was initially drawn up to strengthen the protection of fundamental rights within the EU , in the light of changes in society , social progress and scientific and technological developments , by making those rights more visible in the form of a charter .
That Charter covers such diverse areas as care for the elderly , care for people with disabilities , respect for private and family life , the prohibition of torture and the right to effective remedy and to a fair trial .
Those rights apply to the EU institutions and bodies and the Member States only when they are implementing EU law .
While the Charter does not establish any new powers for the EU , it does make it easier for citizens to find out what their rights and responsibilities are under European law .
The Charter was only a political declaration when it was initially agreed in 2000 .
If the people of Ireland vote ' yes ' to the Lisbon Treaty , they will also be conferring legally-binding treaty status on the Charter of Fundamental Rights , to the benefit of all Irish and EU citizens .
( FR ) Mr President , I note here the fairness with which you chair these debates .
Ladies and gentlemen , I would just like to raise a moral problem by referring back exclusively to statements by people in favour of the ratification of the Treaty , who told us that it is exactly the same as the Constitution .

Such is the case - and he is the expert - with Mr Giscard d 'Estaing , who said precisely that , that it is the Constitution but filed in different drawers .
Such is the case with Mrs Merkel , who said these exact words - she was speaking in English : ' Let us keep the substance , and change the wording . '
Such is the case with Mr Amato , the former Italian Prime Minister , who said that the text was made unreadable because if it had been a simple text , everyone would have realised it was a Constitution and would have called for a referendum .
Such is the case with our former fellow Member , Mr de Gucht .
Such is the case with the Prime Minister of Luxembourg , Mr Juncker .
I therefore think that this deception being practised on the European people poses a moral problem .
( CS ) The European Union is not a state and so it does not need a constitution .
This had to be admitted , albeit reluctantly , even by the advocates of the old European Constitution .
Unfortunately , not all of them have come to terms with the disappointment , which is why we find paragraph 6 of this report expressing regret over the changes made in the new Treaty in contrast to the draft European Constitution .
I consider this to be a serious mistake .
After a difficult journey a consensus was reached among the 27 Member States .
Some governments wanted changes to the draft European Constitution and now the report by Mr de Vigo and Mr Corbett indirectly criticises them for their approach .
In my opinion , if the European Parliament votes in favour of paragraph 6 of the report , it will be expressing disrespect to the complex consensus obtained by the 27 Member States , and that could only be harmful to the whole matter .
I certainly cannot support that paragraph .
( NL ) Mr President , in addition to social and economic cohesion , this treaty lays down the third objective , territorial cohesion , expressly for the whole Union .
There may be clustering in top regions in Europe , but at the same time we are advocating opportunities for employment and economic development throughout the Union .
This is an important basis for social and regional policy .
It is important to elaborate this in this way and to make it possible to transfer knowledge about entrepreneurship and the use of money and instruments - think of the Structural Funds .
I should like to remind the House of this , since it was not raised during this morning 's debate .
This way , we also show citizens throughout the Union that we are able to offer new solutions for our new circumstances .
( PT ) I think it is essential at this moment to stress the importance and significance of signals in politics ; it is our duty to send the right signals to citizens .
Rather than continuing the debate in this Parliament on the differences between the Constitutional Treaty and the Treaty of Lisbon or on how the Member States should go about ratifying the Treaty , should we not be discussing what we shall do after the Treaty comes into force , as we hope it will ?
That was what we told our citizens - that institutional reform was necessary in order to achieve more and better results .
That reform is now actually here .
Will Europe be better prepared in a year to tackle globalisation , energy dependency , the demographic crisis , terrorism , financial instability and employment change ?
It will have to be .
Will the European Parliament be more vigorous in order to take an active role in the approval of these reforms ?
Again , it will have to be .
That is the right signal to send out from here today ; let us not fulfil the words of the Chinese proverb which says that when the wise man points at the sky , the fool looks at the finger .
Let us look towards our future , Mr President , and accept our duty to build it .
( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I would be interested to learn , Commissioner , the degree of acceptance for the different protocols and texts of the Reform Treaty .
Are there any analyses of which points are particularly popular with the public and which points are more problematic ?
Do you have any market research results to show what the public believes are the three most important goals of this Reform Treaty , so that we can see what the 500 million citizens of the European Union are interested in , that would show that this Reform Treaty is absolutely necessary ?
Is any analysis or market research available on how well informed people are about this Reform Treaty , both quantitatively and qualitatively ?
That would be the basis for revealing the importance of this reform step for the European Union .
What steps do you , as Commissioner , plan to take in the immediate future to make this information more readily available to people ?
Mr President , if the European Union were a car , this Treaty would be about tuning that vehicle .
It is very important that we have new structures , especially in the field of foreign and security policy , and I agree with those people who have stressed the importance of good common foreign and security policy , but it is not enough just to have good structures in place .
If we cannot coordinate our action , and if we cannot really work together and produce common messages to give to a Kissinger or a Rice , then those messages are worth nothing .
We need to bring more substance to this debate , and we really need to work towards common views .
We now have the perfect vehicle .
We need to start driving it in a certain direction and we need to take on our role in the world .
This Treaty gives us the tools with which to do that .
( HU ) Thank you , Mr President .
As an MEP representing one of the new Member States , I would also like to take this opportunity to express our gratitude for the Community solidarity being shown towards us .
Without it , the countries of eastern Europe would have been incapable of recovery following 40 years of Soviet occupation .
Please allow me first of all , as chairman of the delegation to the EU-Croatia Joint Parliamentary Committee , to say that the treaty will make for closer and more effective cooperation among the Member States , while at the same time enabling further expansion of the European Union to include those countries that accept and comply with the EU system of values .
In my opinion the treaty sends a positive message to the countries of the western Balkans that have already begun accession negotiations ; it will encourage them to speed up reforms , since it puts EU accession easily within their reach .
To conclude , one of the most important and innovative passages of the treaty as far as I am concerned is undoubtedly the passage guaranteeing minority rights , making protection of national and ethnic minorities a fundamental principle of the European Union . Thank you .
Mr President , as far as I know I am the only Member who is a director of elections for referendums , and I feel no obligation whatsoever to tell the German people that their decision is any less legitimate than the Irish decision simply because we are having a referendum and they have a constitutional reason for not having a referendum .
What sort of referendum do those who argue for a referendum want ?
Do they want a referendum in which 50 % or more of people across the European Union make this decision for them , in which case it will be the big states , or a mixture of small and big states , which will decide for everybody ?
Or do they mean that it must be over 50 % in each Member State , in which case each Member State gives up its right to make the decision to every other Member State !
Where is the rationality in that ?
Winston Churchill used the phrase ' terminological inexactitudes ' .
I will say nothing more than that in respect of the yellow-bellies on my right , but they certainly are disingenuous at best !
President-in-Office of the Council . - It was a great pleasure for me to be present at this extremely interesting and dynamic debate .
Let me split my observations into three categories .
The first category concerns the preparatory activities which have to be completed in order for the Lisbon Treaty , if and when enforced , to be implemented fully .
These activities are numerous .
It is necessary to prepare for the election of the President of the European Council and the High Representative for Foreign and Security Policy , to establish a common external service and organise activity in the field of justice and home affairs .
These activities have to be conducted patiently and responsibly .
I am convinced that no one would like to give the impression that the institutions of the European Union or Member States are trying to grab the largest part of the cake for themselves before it is fully baked .
We therefore have to be aware that , although the preparatory activities have to be completed , the fact remains that the last word in the implementation of the Lisbon Treaty rests with the Member States , that is to say with the national parliaments and , in one case , with the voters .
This calls to mind a dilemma which has been mentioned several times today and widely debated over the last few years : referendum or parliamentary ratification ?
I would like to thank Mrs Doyle , Mr Mitchell and others who pointed out that it is necessary to respect the decision of the Member States .
I stressed in my initial address that the decision on the method of ratification of the Lisbon Treaty falls exclusively within the sovereign competence and responsibility of each Member State .
Nevertheless , I must add the following : there is nothing wrong with parliamentary ratification .
Absolutely nothing .
All the Member States of the European Union are representative parliamentary democracies and , after all , this honourable assembly , the European Parliament , is a powerful symbol of representative democracy .
Now a few words about the significance of ratification .
In my opinion , the ratification of the Lisbon Treaty should be considered not only in the current context , but also in a historical context and with a view to the future .
I would like to remark on what was said by Mr Schulz and others , namely that we must remember what was happening in our continent a hundred years ago , seventy-five years ago or perhaps , as in the case of my own country , twenty years ago or less .
In short , it is our past which has to remind us constantly that it is the European Union which has made a considerable contribution to the peace , stability and prosperity of our continent .
At the same time we have to take the future into account .
We must prepare ourselves for the already recognisable challenges awaiting the European Union .
It is our firm opinion that the Lisbon Treaty represents a step forward in the right direction and offers us answers to challenges that can be seen on the horizon .
Vice-President of the Commission . - Mr President , this has indeed been a lively and interesting debate , on which I would like to make three remarks .
First of all , I will deal with implementation , since several of you have raised particular , specific issues on implementation and follow-up .
I would also like to say something about the discussion on democracy that has taken place here , and to link that to communication and debate .



To start with the questions from Mr Deprez , Mr Dehaene , Mr Barón Crespo and Mr Duff , several of you have asked about what happens now in terms of preparing for the implementation of the new Reform Treaty .
I expect that preparations are going on in all the institutions , in that we are looking at what will be required of our respective institutions - in the case of the Commission coming forward with specific legislative proposals - and what this will take in terms of interinstitutional cooperation and practical preparations .
This will have to be done with full respect for the ratification process that is now going on .
Our approach in the Commission has been to do this in a formally absolutely correct way and to respect the ratification processes - not to anticipate but to be prepared .
I believe this has also been the approach in the Council , where an inventory has been carried out , and we are , of course , looking in the same way at the obligations that will fall on the Commission .
We will , of course , cooperate with Parliament and will sit down and look at what has to be done in practical terms .
It is good that a discussion is also under way in the respective institutions to ensure that everything is ready and can be handled in a formally absolutely correct way .
We are getting ready , of course , to start the practical work .
A lot has been said about democracy , bringing to mind what Churchill , who has already been referred to , said about it : ' democracy is the worst form of government except for all those other forms that have been tried from time to time ' .
Whichever ratification method is chosen - and it is up to every government and every Member State to decide which one to use - the Commission will respect it , and will also consider ratification by national parliaments to be democratically legitimate .
Whichever method is chosen , there will have to be communication with citizens .
I would inform everyone who has asked for a consolidated text that the message from the Council is that such a text will be produced , hopefully as soon as possible , and that in the spring we will definitely have a consolidated text from the Council .
I know that , to date , a good dozen consolidated texts are available in different language versions .
I know that the House of Lords has produced a consolidated text ; I know that the French Senate has produced a consolidated text ; and I know it also exists in Germany .
It is available on the internet .
This means that one cannot use the lack of available information as an excuse .
All the texts are available , and there is also information available on the Commission 's website , which gives questions and answers and factual information about the Treaty , relating to the specific substantial issues .
There is an obligation on all of us to help citizens to have access to all the factual information that they need , and also to have answers to their specific questions .
In response to what Mr Rübig said , we know from previous Eurobarometer opinion polls that people are interested in the substantial issues first and foremost , and not so much in the institutional issues .
But I expect that several Member States will also carry out specific opinion polls to check on public opinion in the respective Member States .
We will see more of this in the coming months .
The Commission will monitor these issues in general , through the Eurobarometer .
Please refer citizens and everyone you meet to our new website , which is called ' Debate Europe ' .
We have relaunched ' Debate Europe ' to include the new Reform Treaty .
Follow the debate , and please encourage people to make interventions and participate in the debate on the internet .
Let me also say that I hope we can engage young people and women in this debate , because in talking about democracy and representative democracy , we also want to see more women in the debate , hopefully also as leaders of our institutions and of the European Union in the future .
If women do not see that they are represented , they will hesitate before they give their support to our different projects and decisions .
So this is also a democratic task and mission for all of us .
Finally , Mr Nassauer made a very important point about the national parliaments and how we can follow up in this area and ensure it is complementary .
The increased and strengthened role of the European Parliament fits well with anchoring this matter into national parliamentary procedures in every Member State .
This is also something we will have to prepare properly and thoroughly , with the national parliaments .
They have a big role which should be fully prepared .
Thank you for this debate .
The Commission will work closely with Parliament and with the Council in order to prepare for implementation and will definitely make every effort to communicate and make sure that people have access to all the information and the debate fora that they need to discuss the future of Europe .
rapporteur . - Mr President , this debate has shown that , in this Parliament , the elected representatives of the peoples of our 27 countries approve this Treaty by a very large majority .
Every single party that is in government in our Member States and almost every single one of the principal opposition parties in every Member State - except the British Conservatives , of course - support this Treaty .
All the main Christian Democrat parties support it .
It is supported by all the Socialist parties in each of our countries .
It is supported by the Liberal Democrat parties in each of our countries , the majority of the Green parties and even the Conservative parties , except , of course , the British Conservatives .
Opposition to this Treaty is mainly from the far right and some on the extreme left of this House .
It is , though , curious to see this new political alliance being forged by Sinn Féin and the British Conservative Party in opposing this Treaty .
Some of those have argued here today that this Treaty is being adopted without us having access to the documents - that no consolidated Treaty has been published .
But , as I pointed out yesterday , several Member States have published a consolidated version of the Treaty .
Then they complain , like Mr Bonde , that this does not show the amendments to the Treaty , but the amendments have , of course , been available since December in every language in the Official Journal .
Frankly , any Member of the European Parliament who says he or she has not been able to read this text is not doing the job which they have been paid to do .
It is pure laziness .
Secondly , some of them have come here and said that the European Parliament should call for a referendum .
I find it quite amusing that those who oppose the European Parliament having powers , that are against the European Union being able to tell Member States what to do , come here and say that we should tell sovereign Member States what their internal procedures should be to ratify an international treaty .
That is hypocrisy in the extreme .
Finally , I notice that many of them were absent from the debate for long periods , because they were outside the Chamber dressed as chickens .
I think that is very symbolic .
They are chicken , because they chickened out of the debate here , as they are afraid of the verdict of this democratic debate , a verdict which is overwhelmingly positive about this Treaty : that it is a good Treaty that will improve and democratise our Union .
( Applause )
rapporteur . - ( ES ) Mr President , today reference has been made to European integration from a historical point of view .
The European Union that we have built in the last 50 years is the Europe of debate and dialogue , the Europe of respect for others , the Europe of putting ourselves in the shoes of others in order to understand them .
This idea has been highlighted by the vast majority of this House in the debate that we have had today .
However , in the debate there was also another Europe , Mr President , which I call the Europe of the three ' c 's : the Europe of conflict , condemnation and contempt .
As democrats we do not like this Europe , because we believe that there can and should be debate and dialogue but there should not be any condemnation .
I think , Mr President , that many things have been said here today , some of which are entirely false .
I am going to mention one in particular : when it is said that this Lisbon Treaty incorporates new doses of qualified majority , that is true , but what is not said is that the Lisbon Treaty means greater participation by the European Parliament .
How can someone be a Member of this House and not want it to have greater participation in the political decisions that affect the European people ?
( Applause )
I will conclude , Mr President , by quoting Miguel de Cervantes who , when old and at the end of his life , said that there were occasions when we had to decide whether to be a road or an inn .
Being an inn is staying where you are .
Being a road is moving forwards .
I hope , Mr President , that , as my political group is going to do , and as the majority of the political groups in this House are going to do , we will vote in favour of the Lisbon Treaty with our hearts and minds .
Let us use the democratic vote to give democratic recognition to those of us who want more Europe for all Europeans .
( Applause )
The debate is closed .
We shall now proceed to the vote .
This is the first item of voting time , which starts straight away .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
in writing . - ( GA ) When everything is taken into account it must be said that the European Union has been good for Ireland .
However , this referendum is about the Lisbon Treaty .
Whether or not the European Union has been beneficial for Ireland is irrelevant .
The Lisbon Treaty gives exclusive competence in the area of commercial policy to the European Institutions including negotiations of international commercial agreements .
It empowers the Commission to initiate and conduct negotiations , including negotiating international commercial agreements , before reporting to the Council of Ministers .
Article 10 ( a ) mandates ' through the progressive abolition of restrictions on international trade ' and it is a guiding principle for the Commission in its interaction with non-Member States .
From October 2006 the EU has made an effort to end ' cross-border obstacles ' in its dealings with developing countries .
Obstacles , such as environmental regulations , consumer protection regulations and health regulations irrespective of the consequences associated with removing these regulations .
When these two aspects are considered , much is revealed of the significant step back of the EU in terms of its approach in dealing with world poverty and inequality .
in writing . - ( PT ) Just when the ratification process of the Treaty of Lisbon is under way , the European Parliament is once more overstepping its powers , attempting to influence public opinion with a report expressing its approval of that Treaty and pressing all EU Member States to ratify the Treaty in time for it to come into force on 1 January 2009 .
That is a real political ploy , since Parliament 's competence does not extend to adopting European treaties .
Member States have competence in that sphere : initially via the Intergovernmental Conference and thereafter via ratification by each Member State , in accordance with each country 's fundamental legislation .
Since the EU now wishes to side-step referendums so as to avoid another rejection of the Treaty , as happened in France and the Netherlands in 2005 , in principle only Ireland will have a referendum .
Evading referendums by means of a whole variety of pretexts , shows up a fear of the consequences of giving citizens the vote in Portugal and the other EU countries .
These countries know that the content of the Treaty of Lisbon is the same as the content of the ' European Constitution ' .
The name has been changed simply to try to trick citizens in what constitutes a true political fraud .
We therefore oppose the report .
in writing . - ( ET ) The most crucial topic for the European Union is the Lisbon Treaty because the future of Europe is in the balance , as is the way in which it will cope in a world which is changing year on year more quickly than we are .
I have three observations to make :
1 ) First , to welcome the fact that France , where the crisis accompanying the referendums shock began , was the first ' old European ' country to ratify the treaty , thereby acting as an example to others that European integration must certainly continue .
2 ) Second , I hope that during ratification Member States will not start to use the treaty as a political tool , as occurred in Slovakia where the opposition , although in favour of the Treaty , made ratification conditional upon the governing party withdrawing a draft law with which the opposition disagreed .
The most important EU matters must not be scuppered by domestic issues !
3 ) Finally I wish to express the hope that the Reform Treaty will put an end to the nonsense put about by some European politicians that we can continue with the old treaties .
Quite the opposite , globalisation not only requires greater dedication to making aspirations a reality , but also broader agreement as to the form of the Union 's policies and a new basic document with which to achieve it .
1 . (
- Before the vote on Amendment 29

rapporteur . - Mr President , I just wish to clarify that this amendment should be addressed , as on our voting list , to paragraph 2 ( c ) , which is where it actually fits in properly in the text , instead of paragraph 5 ( e ) .

- After the vote on the motion for a resolution
( Standing ovation )
( Protests from the IND / DEM Group )
Ladies and gentlemen , you have voted in favour of the Reform Treaty by an overwhelming majority .
This is the expression of the free will of the people you represent .
I congratulate you sincerely on this convincing result .
The European Parliament represents the peoples of Europe .
This Treaty gives the European Union more legal capacity to act and ensures more democracy .
( Applause )
We defend Europe 's common values and we will never permit those with the loudest voice to dominate the open discussion of reasons for and against .
This is a free , democratic Europe .
Many congratulations on this convincing result !
( Applause )
( Protests from the IND / DEM Group )
Those who demanded these roll-call votes on amendments that contain nothing but questions ought to explain to their voters how much that cost .
I tell you , as surely as you sit here now , what you did will harm your reputation .
I think your parents would be ashamed to see you like this .
( Applause )
2 . (
3 .
Lisbon strategy ( vote )
- Before the vote on Amendment 12
( DE ) Mr President , I would like to suggest a change to Amendment 12 which , naturally , does not replace the amendment but inserts an additional formulation in the second sentence .
This additional formulation is worded :
' or through collective agreements in accordance with national traditions ' .
This comes after ' generally binding arrangements ' , and before ' that enable full-time workers to make a decent living from their earnings . '
( DE ) An amendment suggesting this supplementary formulation is designed to take into account conditions in Scandinavia and has been agreed with the co-rapporteurs and the groups who are also requesting it .
( The oral amendment was accepted . )
4 . (
- Before the vote on Amendment 39
rapporteur . - Mr President , we now have a text which says : ' Instructs its President to forward this resolution to the Council and the Commission ' , and I would like to add the words ' and the governments and parliaments of the Member States ' .
( The oral amendment was accepted . )
- Before the vote on Amendment 6
rapporteur . - Mr President , I would just like to clarify the issue .
If those amendments are rejected , then we need to delete points 2 and 3 in guideline 7 , which I repeated in guideline 15 .
This also applies to the PSE Group Amendment 13 , and I would like to ask the groups to vote as I said , in order to avoid duplication of the text .
- After the vote on the motion for a resolution
( FR ) Mr President , we have just amended the economic policy guidelines by a very large majority .
Mr Almunia is not here , but I ask Mrs Wallström to give very strong support to the new proposals the European Parliament is making to improve the economic situation of all our citizens .
( Applause )
5 . (
- Before the vote on paragraph 63
Mr President , I would like to inform my colleagues in the PPE-DE Group that there is a mistake in the second part of the split vote .
The right decision is ' no ' , not ' yes ' .
- Before the vote on paragraph 69
Mr President , this oral amendment is intended to make the text more precise and up to date .
By tabling it I have also carried out the wish of the shadow rapporteur .
I will read it out in English :
' Welcomes as a positive step towards reform of the criminal justice system in Uzbekistan the approval by the Uzbek Parliament of the laws on the abolition of the death penalty and the authorisation of courts to issue arrest warrants .
Calls for a comprehensive overhaul of the criminal justice system that would effectively promote the implementation of these reforms . '
( The oral amendment was accepted . )
- Before the vote on Amendment 17
( DE ) Mr President , before we come to the final vote , I just wanted to say that I am bewildered , because all my yellow neighbours have disappeared .
There is only one left .
We will note that in the minutes , although I would prefer not to comment on it .
Voting time
We shall now proceed to the vote .
( For results and other details on the vote : see Minutes )
Explanations of vote
Oral explanations of vote
( NL ) Mr President , the vote on the Corbett / Méndez de Vigo report that has just been held is a further confirmation by this Parliament of the attitude we have been taking for a very long time now : that of total disdain for the democratically expressed will of the majority in France , the Netherlands and elsewhere .
Although this Parliament claims to represent all European citizens , in reality those citizens do not have the slightest say .
When the President of this House , Mr Pöttering , said just now that , with this vote , Parliament was expressing the opinion of the majority of European citizens , it was nothing short of a pathetic lie .
Parliament has made not a single demand for the will of the people to be respected , nor a plea for a referendum to be held in every Member State .
On the contrary , the only thing this Parliament has required is that this duplicate of the late Constitution enter into force as quickly as possible .
Unfortunately , this Parliament represents not citizens , but simply the elite consensus of the official Europe .
Mr President , I voted against the report because , once again , the political elite of the European Union is trying to ram through the Constitutional Treaty without consulting the peoples of Europe .
The British Government promised a referendum on this Treaty , yet now it is pretending that it is somehow different .
You only have to listen to leader after leader , such as Valéry Giscard d 'Estaing , to realise that there is actually no difference .
I say to you , the European political elite , that if you think you are building a European project but are building a European project without the will of the people , then you are in fact building a castle made of sand .
As the late , great Jimi Hendrix once said , castles made of sand fall into the sea eventually .
The ratification of the European Constitution , despite its rejection in two referendums , is undemocratic , cowardly and illegitimate .
Mr President , in my eight years in this Parliament , I have heard some rather absurd claims made in this Chamber , but a special humbug prize must go to the assertion that what we just did in pushing through this Treaty by a huge vote represented a free exercise of will of the peoples of Europe .
You know very well that is untrue , those of you who applauded so heartily when those lines were spoken .
You know it , and I can prove that you know it , because you used to support referendums until it became clear that you would lose them .
In fact , what this vote did was underline the remoteness of the Members of this House from their own constituents .
The cancellation of the referendums is an act of cowardice and an abdication of leadership , and you know it .
If I am wrong , prove me wrong .
Put the Treaty to the referendums that you supported when you thought you could win them .
Put the Lisbon Treaty to the vote .
Pactio Olisipiensis censenda est !
( FI ) Mr President , I would like to give a brief explanation of why I abstained .
I think we ought to remember that our Parliament has no competence in this matter : it falls within the competence of the Member States , and we have to respect that .
It is the Member States that have to decide whether or not to adopt this new Treaty of Lisbon .
Now I think we should stop and recall what the power relationships are .
Personally , I am of the opinion that it should be left to nation states to take this decision .
It would not be such a bad idea if the public were asked about it , as the decision-making process will acquire greater legitimacy if the people are allowed to influence it .
There is much that is good in this treaty , but there are also parts which cannot be accepted , and if I think about it from the point of view of one Member State , Finland , which is where I am from , it has many aspects which are not acceptable to us .
In any case , however , the powers of decision in these areas lie with the national parliaments .
( Applause )
( SK ) I voted in favour of the motion for a resolution on the Lisbon Strategy , which will be on the agenda of the spring European Council .
I agree with the draftsmen that the Lisbon Strategy will be successful only if it draws on human resources in an environment that is favourable and conducive to learning , knowledge , science , research , culture , information and innovation .
In order to meet the goals of the Lisbon Strategy we need three players : universities as architects of knowledge , businesses that know how to use this knowledge in practice , and a public sector and local government bodies that can create permanently sustainable infrastructure for science , research and development at a national and regional level .
Innovation needs financial investment : funding will bring knowledge .
Knowledge invested in innovation will boost this financial contribution .
Only those small and medium-sized enterprises that are inventive and creative can survive tough competition .
I believe that Europe will be able to find its place alongside the American / Japanese knowledge express of the 21st century .
( CS ) I voted against the report and , with your permission , I would now like to state my reasons for doing so .
Firstly , the text as a whole presents the European Union as being a global economic and social power .
Secondly , it talks about a so-called leading role for the EU in the world and blindly believes that the rest of the world will develop in line with the EU 's own wishes .
Thirdly , it states that the European Union will play a leading role in the creation of some kind of global standards .
Fourthly , the Lisbon Strategy makes economic cooperation with other countries conditional on enforceability of the main labour standards .
Fifthly , the Lisbon Strategy is explicitly derived from the so-called Lisbon Treaty , despite the fact that it has not as yet been ratified by most of the Member States .
The declaration calls for the introduction of a minimum wage in Member States that do not have a minimum wage .
( DE ) The Austrian People 's Party Europaklub in the European Parliament voted enthusiastically in favour of the Corbett / Méndez de Vigo report because the Lisbon Treaty strengthens the citizens of Europe , the Member States and the European Union .
The citizens of Europe and the parliaments that represent them are the winners .
In the light of the Kosovo debate , we see how important this Treaty is because through it we are far more likely to achieve a common foreign and security policy .
Making the Charter of Fundamental Rights legally binding shows us the way forward to make fundamental rights a possibility for all citizens in the European Union .
Anyone not in favour of this Treaty as a whole is against the citizens .
We must continue to stand with the people and bring this treaty closer to them .
( DE ) Mr President , I voted in favour of the report because I believe in it wholeheartedly , as it creates a balance between economic and social measures that must be found because , for the first time , a social Europe is being introduced here and because for the first time , the Member States are being called upon by a large majority in Parliament to take measures to introduce a minimum wage .
I am pleased that the majority has been able to prevent measures that were intended to do away with social achievements such as , for example , the Working Time Directive , and the export of social benefits across borders .
Overall , then , I voted enthusiastically to approve this balanced package of measures .
Mr President , I want to say I voted against the report on the Lisbon Treaty .
The cat is out of the bag , and we have thrown the baby out with the bath-water .
While we are trying to create a common market , we have actually , by stealth , created a common country .
We have refused to get our people involved in the process .
We have denied them their natural right to be able to speak about how they should be governed and we have ignored , as much as we can , the fact that they should have had a referendum .
How can we say to our people , our constituents , that this Parliament represents their views , when their views are not allowed to be heard ?
The British Government - Mr Brown , in particular - promised a referendum .
Mr Brown , in particular , and Mr Blair , in particular , said they would give the British people a referendum .
I am very , very sorry for this day and I am very sorry for the broken promises of the Labour Government .
( PL ) Mr President , in the vote on the Lisbon Treaty I was obliged to abstain .
In my language , and in Poland , the Treaty is not accessible .
My electorate has not been given the opportunity to familiarise itself with it , and I am here , after all , to represent its views and interests , and not just my own convictions .
On Monday , here in the European Parliament , a decision was taken to vote today on a document that some of us have no opportunity to read in consolidated form in our own language .
A decision on a document of inaccessible content can be taken only by someone who is either stupid or dishonest .
That is why I abstained .
( CS ) Mr President , I voted against the report for the following reasons .
The report talks about a fairer distribution of profits and introduces the concept of full employment through public investment .
It is trying to compensate for the so-called failure of the market through taxation : introducing eco taxes and supporting science and research by means of tax write-offs , which will make the tax system less transparent and require new European legislation .
( NL ) Mr President , I voted against the Starkevičiūtreport , as the passage about immigration shows the typical short-sightedness that has already cost us dearly .
There are evidently those who want to see a repeat performance of the mistakes of the 1960s and 1970s , when people thought only of the short term and imported human beings like commodities .
The results of that policy can now be seen in our cities : wholesale unemployment , crime , the development of parallel societies .
Instead of learning from the mistakes of the past , we are stubbornly continuing on the same path .
It is becoming even worse now that there is a proposal to conduct a European migration policy to ' complement ' Member States ' policies .
This is guaranteed to bring even more laxity than we are already seeing , and that is probably the last thing we need .
( NL ) Mr President , like my fellow Member , Mr Claeys , I voted against this report .
Of course , many aspects of the report are undoubtedly true and relevant .
Examples are the modernisation of labour markets , investment in entrepreneurship and simplification of tax systems that it advocates .
Nevertheless , this House is completely missing the mark if it regards a European migration policy of attracting economic migrants as a spearhead of the Lisbon Strategy .
Moreover , it is not economic openness that is a miracle cure for illegal immigration , as is being argued , but rather enforced control of the external borders of the Union , a rejection of any national mass-legalisation policy and a firm policy of deporting illegal immigrants .
( PL ) Mr President , we have accepted an important document concerning relations between the EU and Central Asia .
This is an example of our wishing to share experience and values that are universal in Europe , and to win developing democracies in this region of the world over to those values .
These countries have made huge progress on the road to economic development .
They must , however , take firm steps to prevent the violation of fundamental and essential human rights and freedoms .
They must cope with a series of problems , namely increased drug smuggling , organised crime , corruption and human trafficking .
Another basic issue should be improved contacts between our citizens , promoting cultural exchange and setting up a special programme of grants for young people to study at European schools , thus becoming familiar with EU values and standards .
We wish our partners from Kazakhstan , the Kyrgyz Republic , Tajikistan , Turkmenistan and Uzbekistan success on the road to prosperity , freedom and democracy , to enable them to support others in the future and share their achievements .
Written explanations of vote
in writing . - ( SV ) We Swedish Social Democrats voted in favour of the report on the Treaty of Lisbon today .
We support the new treaty .
However , we realise that the fact that two Member States rejected the proposed constitution meant that we were forced to make changes .
We do not therefore share the view that it is to be deplored that the flag and the anthem were taken out of the treaty .
Unlike the majority in Parliament , we believe that it is good that an ' emergency accelerator ' has been introduced into the decision-making procedure in areas that are sensitive in terms of national sovereignty .
We are advocates of the subsidiarity principle and therefore reject the call made by the European Parliament for referendums in the Member States .
It is a matter which each Member State must itself decide .
Lastly , we would like to comment on the vote on Amendment 36 concerning the Laval case .
We chose to vote against the first part because we consider that there are differences between the old treaty and the Treaty of Lisbon , for example in the Charter of Rights , which lays down among other things the right to take strike action in accordance with national practice .
We support the provisions of the Charter of Rights and we also support the second part of the amendment which safeguards the right to industrial disputes .
We wish to point out that this view is shared by our political group in Parliament which chose to vote against the proposal because the report concerns the treaty and not the Laval case .
in writing . - Although UKIP rejects the Lisbon Treaty , we abstained on amendment 31 because we do not agree with the justification for the amendment .
I still firmly believe that , as President Sarkozy was not going to organise a referendum , abstention was the position the Socialists had to take in the French parliament .
However , just because the French President did a poor job of negotiating this Treaty and ignored the vote of the French people , that does not mean we should not respond to the question being put before us today .
The Treaty is far from perfect , but it enables us to bring the institutional debate to a close and equip Europe with rules that allow it to function .
Today , the Socialists should make themselves heard on policy changes , the main issue in the revision of the financial perspective , on the French Presidency of the European Union , and on the PSE 's commitment in drawing up its manifesto for the next European elections .
A ' no ' would have made it possible to remove the policies from the text of what should have been a Constitution , as it forced Europe to focus on the issue of what the European project was all about .
This is very important .
However , because I want this text to be passed so I can get fully involved in the forthcoming negotiations on policies , because my ' no ' more than two years ago was pro-European , I am shouldering my responsibilities and approving the Treaty of Lisbon .
in writing . - ( PL ) I abstained in the final vote on the report on the Lisbon Treaty , because the report has gone well beyond the agreements reached at the EU summits in Brussels and Lisbon .
The Lisbon Treaty was a very difficult compromise for all parties involved .
Going beyond this compromise - as evidenced by the mentions of an absence of EU symbols , agreements on the Council voting system relating to opt-in and opt-out clauses and the Charter of Fundamental Rights - is politically damaging to the process of ratification .
Moreover , I cannot support the points that prepare the ground for campaigns aimed at constitutionalising the Union .
in writing . - ( PT ) The Treaty of Lisbon is the best compromise for overcoming the institutional crisis and bringing greater flexibility to the decision-making mechanisms that are essential for an enlarged European Union of 27 Members to function in today 's globalised and constantly changing world .
I applaud the fact that the EU is given legal personality , that the three-pillar structure is abolished in favour of a single institutional framework and across-the-board application of the Community method .
I applaud the measures to improve transparency and accountability , and to strengthen the participation and rights of European citizens both at the information level and through the people 's legislative initiative .
I welcome the changes in the area of freedom , security and justice , where action will have more ambitious goals and more effective procedures , no longer using intergovernmental instruments and procedures .
I applaud greater involvement of the national parliaments , in particular in monitoring respect for the principle of subsidiarity .
I am sorry that various concessions had to be made , for example postponing the implementation of important elements , such as the new voting system in the Council , and the British and Irish opt-outs / opt-ins on matters previously covered by the third pillar ; I fear that establishing an elected President of the European Council will mean losing the advantages of the rotating Presidencies without bringing any added value for the functioning of the EU , creating problems in relations between the different institutions .
The European Parliament has just approved the Treaty of Lisbon , though nobody was asking it to do so .
The Mouvement pour la France delegation in the European Parliament obviously voted against this report , aware of the purely symbolic nature of doing so .
It is significant that French and Dutch elected representatives sitting in Strasbourg are voting in favour of a Treaty while clearly admitting that it is a clone of the defunct European Constitution , even though their people formally rejected that text .
It is also significant that the European Parliament is voting on a Treaty even though none of its Members has been able to read a consolidated version .
After the Hungarian Parliament ratified it in the dark , the European Parliament is approving a text it has not read .

The MPF delegation in the European Parliament now wishes all the freedom-loving Irish luck : their referendum will not be theirs alone , they will be voting on behalf of everyone who has not been given the chance to do so , particularly the French , whose vote was cast aside .
I voted in favour of this report and support the respective resolution .
However , at the last moment , there was a problem with the voting machine , so I was not physically able to express my total approval .
To place that appropriately on record , I am submitting this explanation of vote .
This is a lamentable European Parliament resolution aimed solely at confusing citizens and putting pressure on Member States to ratify the Treaty of Lisbon , since the European Parliament does not have competence for such approval .
Only the Member States can ratify it .
Even so , during the debate and the vote , we supported democratic actions aimed at introducing an element of pluralism into the debate and we stressed the need for greater democracy , demanding referendums .
That is why our group tabled some motions for resolutions which were , unfortunately , rejected , specifically motions expressing our opposition to the Treaty of Lisbon , underlining some of its more worrying aspects , such as the trend towards the militarisation of the European Union in close liaison with NATO , imposing an increase in military spending and providing for the conducting of military operations in order to protect the Union 's values and serve its interests .
We also condemn the fact that the provisions of the current Treaties , on which the European Court of Justice recently based its judgments ( Judgments in the Laval / Vaxholm and Viking Line cases ) to justify social dumping and subordinate the rights of workers to take collective action to respect for the freedom to provide services , have been included in their entirety in the Treaty of Lisbon , requiring that the right to take collective action shall remain under the exclusive competence of the Member States .


in writing . - I welcome this report by Mr Méndez de Vigo and Mr Corbett , which both emphasises the fact that the Reform Treaty is not the Constitution , while also enabling Europe to pursue the new global role it will have to play in the coming decades .
It strengthens the institutional power of the Union .
It enhances democracy by empowering the European Parliament .
It enables the Union 's Common Foreign and Security Policy to develop to ensure that Europe 's economic and industrial power is reflected in global politics , and in particular will allow the EU to play a key role in tackling global warming .
I voted ' yes ' to the Treaty of Lisbon because there is - unfortunately - no alternative .
However , we must be clear .
It is not with a 300-page mini-treaty that is as unintelligible as it is obscure that the EU will win the trust of its citizens , particularly as the multiple opt-outs will lead to a Europe of constant deadlocks , or even a ' variable-geometry ' Europe .
This new Treaty is just a last resort .
We need very quickly to draw up a treaty of radical reform , to be ratified by a single referendum of the European people .
All countries where the voters say ' no ' will be free to leave the EU or else submit to the common rules .
That is the price to be paid for a truly integrated European Union with more cohesive policies .
We have rarely come across such a Stalinist report here in this House : it is pure , mendacious propaganda !
It is only here and in ' Sarkozia ' that it can be said that the Treaty of Lisbon is fundamentally different from the European Constitution , when the vast majority of EU heads of state and government and the father of the Constitution itself , Valéry Giscard d 'Estaing , state the exact opposite .
The rapporteurs have indulged in a bit of culture at the start of the explanatory statement , quoting a few lines from Shakespeare 's Julius Caesar .
This quotation explains in substance that you need to follow the underlying forces that lead to the great changes in society , otherwise you will end in ruin and failure .
The problem is that , for them , these forces are the Treaty of Lisbon and the artificial , forced creation of a centralised European superstate , when the real forces , in this affair , are the increasing rejection of this project by the people .
The people aspire to rediscover their roots and their identity , and to find protection against changes they reject but that others want to impose on them : the political constructions that take away their freedoms and the financial globalisation that ruins them .
in writing . - ( SV ) The majority of this Parliament is showing once again how divorced from reality it is .
The results of referendums clearly have no value if they go against the will of the political establishment .
We in the June List advocate a referendum on the Treaty of Lisbon in Sweden .
It is first and foremost for each Member State to decide whether it holds a referendum .
The entire process surrounding a new EU treaty has been a disgrace .
A Convention whose working method was heavily criticised put forward a proposal for an EU constitution .
Then debate was avoided , things were tinkered with and tweaked in order to push through an even more federalist treaty despite a ' no ' from the French and Dutch peoples .
We want to see a new treaty that is based on the EU being a forum primarily for intergovernmental cooperation .
We have therefore voted against Parliament 's report on the Treaty of Lisbon .
in writing . - ( PT ) Well might the majority of the European Parliament - which includes members of the Portuguese socialist ( PS ) , social democrat ( PSD ) and popular right ( CDS / PP ) parties - proclaim their ' approval ' of the proposed EU Treaty which , as many well know , has no value or legal consequence .
They have a different objective : pressure , specifically to ensure that the proposed Treaty is ratified so that it can enter into force on 1 January 2009 , and propaganda .
That is why the report deals in obfuscations and omissions , in an attempt to conceal the real content and consequences of the proposed EU Treaty .
To give just a few examples :
On the one hand it describes as ' greater effectiveness ' the increased domination of the decision-making process by the great powers of the EU and as ' an increased role for the national parliaments ' the transfer of the national parliaments ' competences to the supranational institutions of the EU .
On the other hand , it omits : the militarisation of the EU within the framework of NATO ; the liberalised single market with its free movement of goods , capital and services in which competition is paramount ; Economic and Monetary Union with its euro , its European Central Bank and its Stability Pact ; and the liberalisation of international trade as EU policies and objectives .
That is why we voted against it .
in writing . - I am voting plus for this amendment , even though the Lisbon Treaty can only come into force after it is ratified by all Member States - it therefore automatically respects the outcome of Ireland 's referendum .
However , I am voting for this amendment , even though it adds nothing to the Report .
in writing . - ( SV ) As before in matters in relation to the EU 's new treaty , I chose to differ from my group and voted against the report on the Treaty of Lisbon .
There are certainly plenty of improvements in the proposal , but I am opposed to the Union 's current move towards greater supranationalism .
I want European cooperation at intergovernmental level .
I firmly support the idea of international cooperation to resolve common problems .
There are important tasks that we must carry out together , not least in relation to the environment , human trafficking and social dumping .
However , I believe that the proposal strengthens the primacy of EU law over national law , that more power is taken from the Member States , and that the larger countries are given more power than the small countries .
This is something I am opposed to .
I chose to vote against the amendment proposing that the EU decide on referendums throughout the Union because I believe that it is for each Member State to decide this itself .
in writing . - ( PL ) In the final vote on the report by Mr Corbett and Mr Méndez de Vigo on the Treaty of Lisbon , I abstained .
The reason I did so was that the conclusions that arise from this report go significantly beyond the framework adopted during the talks at the summits in Lisbon and Brussels ( 13 and 14 December 2007 ) .
The compromise reached at that time was the result of certain concessions on the part of all the interested parties .
I therefore think that the express criticism of these settlements that is to be found in some of the points of the report in question is not helpful to the process of finding solutions that are capable of being accepted by all parties to the compromises .
This concerns , for example , opt-in and opt-out clauses , the Charter of Fundamental Rights , the Council voting system and EU symbols , and it also relates to the formulations that lead to a return of the idea that was , after all , rejected , that of a European constitution .
in writing . - British Conservatives voted against this report .
From the start , we have made it clear that this Treaty ( Constitution ) is not the way forward for Europe .
Conservatives support a Europe of independent states working together to meet the challenges of globalisation , global poverty and global warming - as our priorities - in a cooperative fashion , and we have been clear and consistent in our approach , in full knowledge of the likely effect of the Treaty on our aims and ambitions for Europe .
These things are not achieved by this text or by the aspirations of those who want an integrated European State .
in writing . - I voted for this report , not because I consider that the Lisbon Treaty amendments offer the way to a European Union which is firmly based on a commitment to sustainable development , peace and human rights rather than the market and competition , but because I consider it does have factors which are more positive than our current Treaty arrangements .
The Charter of Fundamental Rights is an important addition .
All EU legislation and its implementation at Member State level will now have to be checked against the Charter and can be challenged if it falls short .
Greater codecision will mean more scrutiny and more daylight in the decision-making process .
The Citizens ' Initiative is an important step forward .
I have grave concerns about greater military cooperation , which is already under way , and want our national and European Parliament to closely scrutinise this development .
It is crucial that the EU builds on its strengths as a diplomatic and peace-building power .
I believe it is important that EU citizens are involved in the ratification process through referendums and that those results should be respected .
It is the task of governments and the Council to respond practically to that general principle , not this Parliament .
in writing . - ( DE ) I am voting in favour of the report on a European Parliament resolution on the Treaty of Lisbon because this Treaty is vital to Europe 's further development , and that is absolutely necessary for the further blossoming of the Austrian welfare model and the security of our citizens .
I share the view that , overall , the Treaty represents a major improvement on previous treaties and that it will ensure increased democratic scrutiny in the Union .
I see the growth in democratic value of the European Union firstly in the extension of the co-determination procedure , secondly in the double majority voting mechanism and thirdly in the election of the Commission President by a majority decision of the European Parliament and , last but not least , in the stronger representation of national parliaments through the opportunity to object to violations in relation to the distribution of competences and the opportunity for national parliaments to comment on all of the EU 's legislative initiatives .
in writing . - I voted against this report in order to register my objection to the arrogance and disregard shown by political leaders throughout the EU towards the wishes of EU citizens , and to state very clearly that I believe the people of the EU should be given a referendum on this issue .
The Treaty of Lisbon is essentially a repackaging of the old Constitution , which was rejected by France and the Netherlands - two countries where referenda had been allowed .
As a key architect of the original text , Valéry Giscard d 'Estaing , himself has said that ' The proposals in the original Constitutional Treaty are practically unchanged . They have simply been dispersed through the old Treaties in the form of amendments . '
I do not oppose the principle of a constitution .
But I oppose this particular one ( and the Treaty which reproduces it ) because EU citizens deserve better .
While the Treaty includes some positive measures , these are outweighed by negative ones - the further militarisation of the EU , for example , as well as measures to promote greater liberalisation and privatisation .
Worse , it squanders a perfect opportunity to put sustainability and climate security genuinely at the heart of the Union , and fails to bring the EU institutions closer to European citizens .
If there was a competition for the best doctoral thesis on the Treaty of Lisbon , the text of the report by the Committee on Constitutional Affairs would deserve first prize and the highest praise .
The resolution is an excellent analysis and critique of the content of this completely incomprehensible Treaty .
Anyone who dreaded the emergence of a centralised , almighty ' superstate ' should be more than reassured .
No substantial advances have been made compared with the contents of the Constitutional Treaty , but many things have been abandoned or withdrawn .
The co-rapporteurs note a lack of vision and ambition shown by national leaders in the European arena , and even downright mistrust of the EU and its institutions .
The eurosceptics should be pleased with the concessions : the delay of its entry into force , the retention of unanimity in 72 cases including taxation and the adoption of the multiannual financial framework , derogations , opt-ins and opt-outs , particularly for the UK , and the possibility of ' voluntary withdrawal ' from the EU .
Those who deplore the ' concessions which are difficult for Parliament to accept ' should take comfort on the one hand from the enhancement of the European Parliament 's role as co-legislator and the sharing of its budgetary powers to give parity with the Council , and on the other from the fact that the principle of a double majority will make decision-making in the Council easier .
in writing . - In this report on the Treaty of Lisbon we clearly see that the Treaty will bolster the democratic credentials of the EU .
With greater involvement from both National and European Parliaments in decision-making procedures , we are giving the European people what they have always asked of the EU : a greater voice .
The Treaty 's focus on efficient and coherent policy-making , highlighted in the report , will give us the ability to face ever tougher global challenges .
I voted in favour of this report and would like to congratulate the rapporteurs on what is an excellent report on a very sensitive and pivotal issue for the future of the Union .
The hallmark of the draft Constitution voted down by two Member States in 2005 was that it responded to the desires of big business , national governments and the majority in national parliaments , but had little support among voters .
The referendums in the few countries that held one revealed that intense public debate and high turnout lead to many dissenting votes .
People do not want Europe imposing decisions on them that they themselves would never have wanted to take .
They do see Europe as useful in resolving cross-border problems peacefully and in tackling large-scale problems that individual Member States cannot solve alone , but they do not see the use of a Europe that increasingly takes the place of the country in which they live .
The Constitution was a case of tied selling of good and bad things , without the opportunity to edit out the bad points in the fields of the economy and armament .
The new Treaty still bears a strong resemblance to the Constitution .
Rejection of referendums reflects fear of the electorate .
The adoption of the amended Constitution by a clear majority today conveys a clear message : ' People keep out ; this Europe is for professional politicians only ' .
in writing . - ( EL ) The EU and its deeply unpopular Treaty cannot hide behind its demagogic claims to be more democratic and social .
Imperialist infighting has been temporarily covered up in order to launch an even greater onslaught on workers ' rights and freedoms , and to stage an increase in monopoly profits .
The report on the Lisbon Treaty and the renamed European Constitution is a call for EC legislation to combat the opposition of workers in the Member States .
The alliance of EU political supporters , including the New Democracy and PASOK parties , do not want referendums because they are aware of the opposition of the workers who suffer barbarous capitalism and imperialist aggression .
The Lisbon Treaty and the European Constitution strengthen the EU so that it can operate more efficiently and benefit European monopolies . As a result , the Lisbon Convention and the European Constitution :
strengthen the unpopular arming of the EU ,
promote capitalist restructuring ,
develop new policies for exploiting workers and infringing their social rights ,
intensify the militarisation of the EU ,
adopt the dogma of preventive war ,
ratify imperialist interventions , even in Member States ,
restrict the sovereign rights of Member States ,
abolish the right of veto to the benefit of the stronger countries ,
boost and create new mechanisms of repression ,
further restrict individual rights and people 's freedoms .
The workers of the EU have the power to condemn the European Treaty and the EU itself .
in writing . - ( EL ) The Lisbon Treaty is a step backwards compared with the European Constitution .
The former has jettisoned none of its neo-liberal cargo : there is absolutely no concept of democratic accountability at the European Central Bank , the Stability and Growth Pact is one-sided and the free market is championed .
At the request of Mr Brown and the Kaczyński brothers , the Lisbon Treaty has rejected certain positive symbols freely available to each state , such as flags and anthems .
The binding nature of the Charter of Fundamental Rights has been distorted by an opt-out clause .
We have called for referendums to strengthen public dialogue and citizen participation .
Refusing to hold referendums shows how much of a gap there is between the European elite and the hopes and needs of European citizens , and Euro-indifference and Euro-scepticism are strengthened .
We , the SYN ( Coalition of the Left ) and the Confederal Group of the European United Left / Nordic Green Left , say no to this Treaty : in our daily struggles we are clearing a different path for the EU .
We want to be more part of Europe .
The Europe we crave is politically more united ; it has a stronger social and environmental policy , with a substantially increased Community budget , without relinquishing control over the ECB . Such a Europe is active and independent in its handling of the problems of world peace ; it is not at the beck and call of President Bush .
in writing . - ( DE ) The Lisbon Treaty will make a militaristic Europe possible .
Previous EC and EU treaties do not allow a permanent EU military budget , but the ' start-up fund ' ( Article 28 paragraph 3 ) now pays for operational EU military spending .
In addition to the individual states ' military budgets , it provides for the EU to have a military budget of its own .
Article 28c paragraph 3 contains the much-criticised mutual aid and assistance obligation to be implemented via a European Defence Agency ( Article 28 ) .
Institutional collaboration between the EU and NATO is stipulated in the Treaty ( Article 28a paragraph 7 ) .
The right of the Bundestag to decide whether the German Federal Army will be deployed in other countries is significantly undermined .
The Reform Treaty allows for the formation of a military core Europe via ' permanent structured cooperation ' .
This creates a primary legislation framework for increased deployment of EU battle groups ( Article 28 , Protocol 4 ) .
The European Court of Justice is explicitly not competent ( Article 11 , 240a ) .
Nor is the European Parliament competent ; it is merely kept up to date ( Article 21 ) .
This releases future military intervention from democratic control .
This enabling of a militaristic Europe is accompanied by repressive partitioning off of the external borders .
The new Article 62 of the Reform Treaty is designed to effect ' the gradual introduction of an integrated management system for external borders ' .
Thanks to the undemocratic enforcement of the Lisbon Treaty by circumventing referendums , the codifying of neoliberal economic policies and the militaristic parts of the document , Europe is developing in completely the wrong direction .
in writing . - ( PL ) I voted with profound conviction against the Lisbon Treaty , as it violates the principles of democracy .
It is a treaty full of lies and contempt for the voice of the peoples of Europe .
It is a treaty of euphemisms .
Despite the rejection of the Constitution by the French and the Dutch , an expanded version is being introduced in a camouflaged fashion , playing with words and ignoring their votes .
The word ' Constitution ' has been replaced by the word ' Treaty ' .
The EU President ( Prezydent ) is called the ' Przewodniczący ' , the Minister of Foreign Affairs the High Representative for Foreign Affairs .
This is pure hypocrisy and is aimed at ushering in a new ' superstate ' over the heads of the peoples .
At its inception , the EU was about deep economic cooperation .
I also voted against the report because this Parliament has rejected the potential to appeal to the supreme form of democracy : a referendum .
Such an important legal act , of constitutional rank , should be adopted in this particular form .
The scandal is that this Parliament has rejected Amendment 32 , obliging the result of a referendum in Ireland to be respected .
Moreover , we have voted in a document that we are not yet familiar with , since there is still no printed consolidated text of the Treaty in the languages of the Member States .
This is controlled democracy , which ignores citizens and refuses to give them a right to vote .
I do not wish to have anything to do with such a democracy , and President Pöttering 's derisive comments after the vote show that democracy in this Parliament , as in Europe , too , is dying .
in writing . - ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I strongly oppose this report .
From the outset I have expressed my opposition to the way the Treaty of Lisbon has been devised and ratified .
In fact , I believe that a Treaty cannot simply be ratified by the national parliaments , but it needs a referendum .
Then , looking at the merits of the text itself , I totally disagree with some sections .
In particular , in the third indent of paragraph 6 , I utterly deplore the reference to Italy , though implicit .
In fact , the text expresses regret about ' the extra parliamentary seat attributed to a Member State in derogation of the principle of degressive proportionality ' .
The truth is , this is all completely false .
With this attribution , even if it comes in the form of an extra seat , discrimination orchestrated to harm Italy has been partially revived .
in writing . - ( SV ) The Treaty of Lisbon is a crucial step in ensuring a more effective and better-functioning European Union .
I therefore welcome the fact that , together in the European Parliament , we adopted the report on the Treaty of Lisbon .
This means a clearer decision-making structure and more power for the EU 's only popularly elected assembly , the European Parliament , a strengthened common foreign policy and new posts , such as the High Representative for Foreign Policy and the President of the European Council .
The treaty means sweeping changes and I therefore support the proposal for a pan-European referendum , an interesting alternative to a Swedish referendum which I think is necessary to give the citizens the opportunity to express their opinion on matters which are of crucial importance for them .
in writing . - This is a very historic moment , the moment when the European Union attempts to drag itself into the 21st century .
Many on the far right of this Parliament fear an effective European Union because it will diminish their ability to stoke up fear at a national level .
Hence their almost hysterical demands on the one hand and total unacceptable behaviour on the other .
I congratulate our twin rapporteurs on their work .
We must all remember that what we have here is a reform treaty and an amending treaty that will ensure that an EU of 27 can work effectively and , more importantly , work closely with the citizens of the European Union .
I will support this report in the hope that this will send a message not only to our citizens but to our member state Governments that this Parliament is serious in its desire to see a more accountable and more effective European Union .
in writing . - I would like to add my support to Commissioner Wallström 's point on ensuring that women are represented in the four senior posts in the EU .
For too long these top EU posts have been seen as ' male , pale and stale ' .
We must move away from the perception of an ' all boys club ' to a more representative grouping running the EU .
Women deserve to be represented .
in writing . - ( PL ) I am voting in favour of the report by Mr Corbett and Mr Méndez de Vigo on the Treaty of Lisbon .
The report correctly points out that the changes introduced by the new Treaty will make the principles by which the EU acts more democratic and more appropriate to the future development of the Community .
One important element is the strengthening of the role of both the European Parliament and national parliaments , as well as the introduction of the Charter of Fundamental Rights .
It should also be pointed out that a more effective decision-making process has been introduced for EU institutions .
in writing . - ( SV ) The constitution should be rejected .
We need a new constitution , not just a new name .
A fundamental revision is needed which , like a constitution in the normal sense , limits and clarifies the powers of the European Court of Justice and the role of the EU .
It is important to define which matters are of a supranational nature , i.e. matters such as free trade , climate change , the fight against international crime , terrorism , and integration .
It is notable that in all these areas Britain has been a driving force throughout the development of the EU .
My view is that Sweden should demand the same exceptions Britain was given , both its opt-in and its opt-out clauses .
There is no reason to treat Sweden any differently .
Sweden 's citizens have voted ' no ' to the euro and it would only be reasonable for the next treaty to make clear that Sweden is not required to participate in monetary cooperation .
None of this can be found in the current proposal , which is why I have chosen to vote against the report .
In the first place , we think it should be up to each country , in accordance with its practices , traditions and specific needs , to decide how to organise , collect and compile the relevant data , although we would acknowledge that sometimes it is necessary to have agreements in order to have comparable data and carry out comparable studies for various countries .
In our opinion , however , the proposal for a regulation presented by the European Commission did not seem to us to offer due protection of confidentiality or to respect the various aspects entailed in the whole complex process of collecting such data .
In the debate in the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs it was strongly argued that the proposal should be adopted at first reading , reflecting there too an eagerness to see all the conditions in place for the possible entry into force of the new Treaty .
Although we supported some of the proposals introduced during the parliamentary stage of work , we have our doubts about the results achieved on the basis of the agreement between Parliament 's main political groups .
That is why we abstained .
in writing . - ( SV ) This report recommends that Member States ' population and housing censuses be harmonised to a degree that is slightly absurd .
In our view the Member States must decide independently whether they wish to register everything from the generational composition of private households to the distance from the place of usual residence to green spaces and recreation grounds .
We consider that both the Council regulation and Parliament 's report make excessively detailed and intrusive proposals .
We have therefore voted against both on Parliament 's amended proposal and in the final vote .
in writing . - ( SV ) Today we voted on Ona Juknevičienė 's report on population and housing censuses .
We chose to vote against it in the final vote .
The Member States are capable themselves of dealing with matters relating to population and housing censuses and this is an area in which the EU does not need to interfere .
in writing . - The accuracy and reliability of information on population and housing is essential for effective policies to be implemented at EU and national level .
In the past , the inconsistencies arising between different Member States have rendered international comparisons difficult and so I welcome moves to clarify the issues involved .
I have also been aware , however , that these issues raise questions regarding data protection and I acknowledge the hard work done in committee to address these concerns .
I was accordingly able to support Amendment 71 and the report as a whole .
in writing . - I welcome this proposal for a regulation on population and housing censuses .
In formulating a common set of European guidelines that allow for Europe-wide comparison of statistics , we will improve the EU 's ability to formulate legislation that is consistent with the changing needs of people around Europe .
I voted in favour of the report .
in writing . - I understand the need for adequate reliable statistics to be gathered for planning purposes .
I also recognise that this report is a significant improvement on the Commission proposal .
However , I have a number of problems with the idea of the EU gathering statistics at this level of detail .
Some questions are frankly not the concern of the EU .
What possible relevance is people 's marital status to the EU ?
Also , while there are some guarantees concerning anonymity and data protection , I am concerned that they may not be strong enough , particularly in the light of recent very large-scale failures in data protection .
For these reasons I voted against the legislative resolution .
As we have experienced , cultural differences can escalate at any time .
In this respect , we in Europe , especially in the larger urban agglomerations , are sitting on a powder keg that cannot be underestimated .
In respect of the ethnically determined conflicts that flare up from time to time , it is therefore a good thing that the EU apparently wants to ask questions about ethnic background and religion at last , in an EU-wide census in 2011 .
Statistical data on the ethnic and cultural make-up of the resident population could assist the prevention of violence .
It is very important to have reliable data on population and housing in the European Union , since those data are of paramount importance for planning , administering and monitoring various policies , which frequently contain a European component .
High quality annual population estimates are needed because they have implications for two fundamental axes of the European Union : the Union 's democratic process , where the annual population estimates are used for the strict calculation of qualified majority voting in the Council , and also for the purposes of convergence of the Structural Funds , the main priority of the EU 's cohesion policy , specifically in determining which regions are eligible .
I therefore think that this proposal is of considerable political importance insofar as it helps us to meet more precisely the criteria for democracy , development and cohesion in the European Union .
It is a success for the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance that the Commission proposal for this regulation was not simply passed through Parliament as a routine matter .
With our tenacity , we Greens have managed to ensure that this regulation guarantees protection where sensitive information is collected in the area of population and living situations .
The voluntary annex , which provided for the collection of microdata and questions on extremely sensitive topics such as sexual behaviour and literacy , has been deleted entirely .
In addition , thanks to pressure from the Greens , the European Data Protection Supervisor was called in on two occasions .
From his point of view , data protection has been taken into account sufficiently in the amended draft that is now before Parliament .
For example , the regulation contains our amendment referring to the observation of data protection provisions both in the Member States and at EU level .
Furthermore , there are now clear references to data protection provisions for data transmission and processing .
With this extra support to bolster it , the regulation now delivers what it was meant to - that is , not the collection of new data , but simply the standardisation of the collection of statistical data on the most important social and economic characteristics of regions that is already taking place at national level , in order to be able to make comparisons across Europe .
The standardisation of European data will ensure that regional funding is effectively applied to those areas that are most in need of it .
in writing . - ( SV ) Explanation of vote concerning the proposal on population and housing censuses .
Today the European Parliament decided at first reading on the Commission proposal for a new regulation on population and housing censuses .
Good intentions lie behind the proposal , with a view to making it easier to compare population and housing census statistics .
However , the final result is extremely far-reaching in terms of the information that is required .
In its proposal the Commission stated that each Member State should collect information on its citizens , such as sexual orientation , dates of women 's first marriage and current marriage , ethnicity , religion and number of children born alive .
It is very startling that our Commission is presenting a proposal that includes such intrusive questions and which in practice amounts to registration of citizens .
Today Parliament weeded out some of the most far-reaching questions .
However , I chose to vote against the proposal in its entirety as it still goes too far .
in writing . - British Conservatives have consistently supported the aims and the core policies of the Lisbon Strategy .
In particular , we have highlighted the importance of a fully functioning single market in goods and services , creating a better business environment ( especially for SMEs ) , stimulating innovation and introducing labour market reforms that focus on skills , flexibility and encouragement to create new jobs .
We have voted in favour , once again , of this annual motion for a resolution on the Lisbon Strategy to show our continued support for the underlying reform agenda .
However , this does not imply that we support all of the detailed recommendations that have been included .
In particular , we are absolutely against the additional social measures ( except for pension portability ) set out in the original version of Article 41 .
We also reject the integration of transport into the Lisbon Treaty , as set out in Article 27 , and we take the opportunity of reaffirming our strong view that , in the UK , this Treaty must be subject to ratification by the electorate through a referendum .
in writing . - ( PT ) I voted in favour of the resolution on the Lisbon Strategy and the input to the Spring 2008 European Council , since I think that the renewed Lisbon Strategy enhances the ambitious objectives relating to European society as a whole , which seem essential for facing the opportunities and challenges of globalisation , demographic change , social imbalances , climate change , energy security , food security , economic growth and the integration of immigrants .
Strict implementation of the Lisbon Strategy will therefore be decisive for buttressing Europe 's competitive position in the global market through job creation , poverty reduction and social inclusion .
in writing . - ( PT ) First of all , we regret that the motion for a resolution which we presented on the Lisbon Strategy was rejected , which is all the more serious just as we are embarking upon the final cycle of the Lisbon Strategy .
Once more the majority of the European Parliament is rejecting a change of policy and expressing its full support for and involvement in the policies followed to date : deregulation of markets and labour relations , liberalisation of goods and essential services ( postal service , transport , telecommunications , energy , etc . ) and handing them over to private operators , to the detriment of taxpayers , workers and the people .
As may be seen in Portugal , this distinctly neoliberal policy is increasingly spreading to other sectors .
We are witnessing the growing commercialisation of health , education and training , exacerbating social inequalities and increasing poverty and social exclusion in the European Union .
Pressure is now also being applied to strengthen the external component of the Lisbon Strategy , that is , to impose on third countries , many of which are less developed , economic and political conditions requiring the opening up of those markets in the interests of the large European multinationals .
in writing . - ( PL ) The resolution on the Lisbon Strategy contains many important provisions for business people and consumers .
One initiative that is particularly worthy of note and support is the Small Business Act initiative , which presents the philosophy of the ' think small first ' principle .
I hope that this initiative will be implemented effectively and promptly , with the active involvement of interested parties .
There is no need for me to remind you here of the significance of the role of small and medium-sized businesses in economic life , or how important it is for the future of Europe that they are granted a special and privileged status .
I would also like to draw attention to the protection of intellectual rights .
We are all aware that , in comparison with the United States , Europe 's patent system with its exceptional lack of cohesion is a big headache for some European countries clearly holding back innovation and research on a wide front , and that is harming the whole continent .
It is therefore important to draw up joint proposals and solutions for the current situation so that all EU consumers might have the benefit of new and modern products at a price that matches the purchasing powers of the average consumer .
I abstained from the vote on the resolution on the Lisbon agenda .
I was somewhat surprised to read paragraph 3 in particular .
From it we learn that in order to guarantee the success of this agenda , we also need to strengthen economic growth in Europe .
It is about that one little word : also .
Up to now I was living in the conviction that growth was the main aim , and that the point was to catch up with certain countries and not let others catch up with us .
Careful reading of the draft resolution indicates that unfortunately this is not just a routine oversight , but a confirmation of a rule .
In this text we find statements that might successfully be placed in dozens of other resolutions .
Often these are matters that undoubtedly put the brakes on such growth .
What we have in effect is a wish list that we could draw up for ourselves on many other occasions , and not just when discussing the Lisbon agenda .
There is one exception , however : progress in the introduction of the Lisbon agenda .
This fragment of the resolution is very important , but sadly the conclusions are not optimistic .
We do not know how to measure this progress , if indeed there has been any .
There is no appropriate monitoring .
This means that our work lacks points of reference .
We have problems with evaluation .
We do not know whether we are forging ahead or standing on the spot .
I think that we as a Parliament should be working on this above all .
in writing . - ( DE ) On Monday , the European Parliament Committee on Industry , Research and Energy gave the green light to the final acceptance of the statutory foundations for the EIT .
That means that all the questions about financing and the EIT 's internal organisation have been dealt with , and it is ready for launch .
The European Institute of Innovation and Technology is a central component in achieving more for our economy , more for science and more for sustainable jobs in Europe .
Therefore , it is essential that a decision on the location of the EIT be made quickly .
I call upon the EU Heads of State or Government to agree on a defined time frame for this decision at the Spring European Council .
The decision must be made by the EU summit in June , at the latest .
The Austrian Federal Chancellor , Mr Gusenbauer , must also be involved in setting the time frame , since Austria submitted a very appropriate application .
The time frame for this decision must be determined at the spring summit and form part of the summit outcome document .
Given Vienna 's excellent application to host the EIT , Chancellor Gusenbauer has considerable responsibility to ensure that the decision is made quickly and a precise time frame is set .
in writing . - With the renewal of the Lisbon strategy I stress the need for a real update of the Integrated Policy Guidelines , along with a greater role for the European Parliament in monitoring how the strategy is followed up .
The focus should be on achieving a socially sensitive Europe that deals with the current economic problems we face without isolating those most vulnerable .
The need for enforcement of a minimum wage in all Member States is one of the key ways that we can ensure that all European citizens enjoy a decent basic standard of living .
I am satisfied with the resolution and have voted in favour of it .
in writing . - ( EL ) The centre-right and centre-left political groupings are competing with each other over which can lend more support to the interests and choices of big business . They are even surpassing the Commission in promoting the anti-worker , anti-popular Lisbon Strategy .
This disgraceful resolution does not even shed crocodile tears over poverty or social exclusion .
On the contrary , it demands that reforms be carried out in labour markets and social insurance systems ; it emphasises the Commission 's guidelines by requesting that the directives on the organization of working time and working conditions for temporary workers be adopted ; it asks Member States to place EU competitiveness at the core of their policies and to make the completion of the single market their most important economic and political priority .
According to the resolution , the most suitable tool for promoting these and other anti-worker measures and policies is class cooperation , which will succeed through a widening of social dialogue and the establishment of a climate of trust between enterprises and employees .
Employees have endured seven years of implementation of this strategy .
As a result , their living standards , employment , pension and social rights have worsened .
This is why they are rejecting the Lisbon Strategy and opposing the interests of capital . We feel the same about the EU , which is serving those interests .
Although I voted in favour of the motion for a resolution by the majority of the parliamentary groups , since I agree with the constructive approach and the essence of the recommendations , in particular with regard to the need to boost investment in research , innovation and development and policies to promote knowledge , in the opening of markets and greater flexibility , with security , in labour markets , I still cannot help thinking that some of the data presented in the alternative resolution give cause for concern .
That is precisely why I could not support the resolution of the Communist Group .
Two years away from the expiry of the Lisbon Agenda , we must acknowledge that the objectives outlined - ambitious objectives - are far from having been achieved ( and our comparative speeding up in the face of the slow-down in the American economy is not a matter for celebration ) .
I believe that it would therefore be better to finally acknowledge the need to follow the path outlined but not followed , rather than to try to make a final effort to achieve in two years what we did not manage to achieve in eight .
The causes and circumstances that justified the measures contained in the Lisbon Agenda are still with us - if not more marked - so the correct route is outlined and we need actually to follow it .
in writing . - ( SV ) A resolution on the Lisbon Strategy will inevitably be sprawling if all the matters of the heart are involved .
This can also be seen in the final result .
However , the report contains much that is important and necessary , which I was pleased to be able to support .
Above all , this is true of the more adventurous parts which show that Parliament is moving with the times , such as environmental issues and the link to growth .
The discussion on flexicurity which is now gathering speed also identifies the important - perhaps most important of all - question of how competition and security can be combined .
As the report states , we are not building the future on protectionism and bureaucracy but on openness , access and good conditions for both workers and businesses .
However , I want to make clear that my vote in favour of Amendment 12 should not be interpreted in any way as support for establishing minimum wages in the EU .
In contrast , it was a clarification that collective agreements have a place in the European model .
I also made this clear today in Amendment 32 in the report on the Integrated Guidelines for Growth and Jobs , which dealt specifically with that issue .
in writing . - The Lisbon Strategy is essential for the future success of the EU .
It is vital that all Member States fulfil their commitment to make the EU the most dynamic knowledge-based economy in the world .
in writing . - ( RO ) The resolution regarding the Lisbon Strategy expresses the European Parliament 's wish to ensure a decent living for all European citizens by creating new , better paid jobs and by increasing the investments in research , innovation and an information society .
Point 37 of the resolution emphasizes the importance of the transport policy for combating climate changes and requests that the Trans-European networks should be subject to an adequate assessment regarding their environmental impact .
I voted for amendment No. 12 , as verbally amended by the Group of European Socialists , because in this way " Member States are invited to ensure the preconditions for the social and economic participation of all of them and , especially , to adopt regulations regarding the minimum wage , for instance , and other legal and mandatory arrangements for all or by collective contracts concluded according to national traditions , which would allow full-time workers to live decently from their income " .
I voted for the resolution proposal with the conviction that the European Union is not only a common market , based on competition , but it should also be a social Europe in which every citizen is integrated into the economic and social activity and has a decent standard of living .
in writing . - ( SV ) The Lisbon Strategy has now been in operation since 2000 and the Member States have not yet seen any clear results .
The current proposal puts forward a new plan that extends to 2013 .
I believe in institutional competition .
There are aims in the Lisbon Strategy that are good and worth developing , such as the proposal for greater investment in research and development .
The parts that address the ' social Europe ' , on the other hand , do not belong at EU level and it should be for the individual Member State to decide on these .
A further problem with the resolution is that it contains many vague provisions that allow the Commission to interpret and explain measures which we did not ask for .
My basic view is that the countries themselves should formulate a growth strategy as they choose in a democratic system .
Some opt for a social democratic direction , others an extremely liberal , market-oriented approach .
We must respect both .
The main thing is that the decision must be taken at national level .
I have therefore chosen to reject the proposal in its entirety .
in writing . - ( SV ) We Swedish Social Democrats have chosen to vote in favour of report 29 / 2008 in its entirety .
However , we voted against Amendment 32 tabled by the Green Group on the subject of minimum wages as a part of the European model .
We understand that the issue of minimum wages is important in many EU Member States .
However , we consider that each Member State must decide how the issue is dealt with .
In Sweden we deal with it best through collective agreements negotiated by the social partners .
in writing . - ( PT ) Giving voice to the interests , aspirations and demands of major employers ' organisations , the majority of this European Parliament is insisting on the Lisbon Strategy being fulfilled , in line with the European Commission 's economic guidelines and with the deepening of the associated neoliberal policies .
Thus , even amid the threat of financial crisis and a halt to economic growth , they insist on wage restraint , limiting public spending and modernising public administration as the main axes to develop , together with removing obstacles to competition and to market access , in other words , the liberalisation of public services .
All this accompanied by greater job insecurity , an insistence upon flexicurity and the modernisation of pension schemes , in other words , the devaluation and dismantling of the universal public social security system in the interests of private insurers .
To ensure that the Member States achieve such objectives , they are recommending greater control and pressure on those States , as if they had no share in the responsibility for adopting those guidelines .
Whilst pretending not to realise what a profound effect such policies will have on the economic and social situation of the Member States , they continue to propound more of the same , which we roundly reject .
We voted against this report that dictates to the Member States the content of their economic and social policies for the next three years .
This is the right moment to restate the extent to which everything , absolutely everything , beyond the single currency and the diktats it imposes on the Member States , is now decided in Brussels .
It is no longer a matter simply of setting objectives for the Member States ( reducing debt or public spending deficits , combating unemployment , reviving growth , and so on ) , but of explaining to them in detail what they should be doing , how to do it , and with what instruments .
The problem is that these guidelines have been the same for the last 15 years : employment flexibility , immigration to renew the population and provide cheap labour , deregulation of public services , wage restraint , Malthusian budgetary policies , liberalisation of external trade , competition , etc .
This array is well known and so are its results : unemployment , lower spending power and increased poverty , de-industrialisation , social disintegration , etc .
It is time for us to ask : is it because the Member States are not diligent enough in obeying orders that things are going badly , or rather because they are too diligent and the orders are not the right ones ?
We believe , without a shadow of a doubt , that the second explanation is the correct one .
in writing . - ( SV ) This own-initiative report addresses several challenges faced by the future Europe , such as increased globalisation , an ageing population , and climate change .
Many of the proposed measures appear reasonable and could be a possible path for a Member State to take .
The June List is opposed to complicated tax systems , social exclusion and environmental degradation .
However , it is for each Member State itself to decide how to formulate its policy in order to meet the future challenges .
The most successful solutions emerge through institutional competition , examples that can inspire and stimulate voluntary measures in other Member States .
We have chosen to vote against this report because it deals with areas for which the Member States have political responsibility .
in writing . - My group tabled a number of amendments on important issues such as climate change , fairer wealth distribution and fair pay , which I voted for .
In the seventh year of implementation of the Lisbon Strategy , the European Parliament 's evaluation of the current situation in the European Union , takes into account the new conditions characterising the years 2007-2008 .
In the light of last year 's and this year 's experience , namely uncertainty and increased risk in financial markets , it makes sense to devote particular attention to the macro-economic stability of the Community .
Discipline in the euro area , and especially maintaining this discipline , is of major importance .
Nonetheless , under the conditions of a deregulated , global financial system , the main responsibility falls upon the nation states , in the form of taking care to keep public finances in balance .
This area leaves much to be desired , even in countries that think of themselves as the ' engines ' of integration , particularly when they can count on a lenient tariff from the European Commission .
One demand that has gone unmet for some years is genuine liberalisation of the EU market , especially the services market , which would create a more genuine competitive pressure and would finally eliminate protective barriers , which no longer consist in regulations of statutory ranking , as more concealed ways have been found of making life difficult for foreign competitors .
The unfinished business of building an EU internal market means that the potential for enterprise and creativity in a Community of 27 countries is not being fully utilised .
The costs of this shortfall are estimated at EUR 150 billion .
These are sufficient reasons for the question of liberalisation of the common market to occupy a prominent position in reports evaluating the state of and growth prospects for the European economy .
in writing . - I welcome the report on the broad economic policy guidelines for 2008-2010 .
In the current economic climate , we must give the EU the necessary tools to help us weather the storm .
In doing this , Europe must remain a social Europe that has well coordinated mechanisms for high-quality public spending , research and innovation and education .
Climate change must also feature highly in the formation of Europe 's economic priorities if we are to meet the ambitious targets that we have set ourselves .
in writing . - ( PT ) Since the point at issue in this report is , specifically , the national implementation of the Lisbon Strategy , I really must present a more detailed assessment here of my concerns , as a Portuguese MEP , about my country 's failure to achieve the Lisbon Strategy - either in terms of results or measures .
I realise that in many respects , the criticisms that could be levelled at Portugal are just the same as those that could and should be levelled at Europe as a whole .
We are , however , a long way away from achieving - and according to certain criteria , such as employment , moving even further away from achieving - the Lisbon objectives , and we are nowhere near adopting the appropriate policies for obtaining those results .
Balancing national public finances is a priority but that balance must be achieved by reducing waste and rejecting non-productive spending and by the fair distribution of income received .
It is not appropriate to achieve that by overburdening household budgets and reducing the effective obligations of the State .
Just as in the private sector , competitiveness and success are obtained by providing better services at lower costs , but without cancelling either side of the equation .
in writing . - ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I voted in favour of Mrs Starkevičiūtė 's report .
The current formulation of the guidelines constitutes a sufficiently broad and still valid framework to accommodate recent economic and political developments .
Therefore , we agree with the proposal not to change the text of the broad guidelines for the economic policies in the next three-year cycle , in line with the Council 's conclusions .
Stability is indeed important for the effectiveness of the Lisbon Strategy and the integrated guidelines .
This new cycle should therefore hinge on the implementation of reform and the achievement of concrete results .
We also support the proposals for amendments to the explanatory text that accompanies the broad guidelines for the economic policies because they give a better focus to the content of the guidelines , to meet the challenges Europe is facing ( globalisation , strengthening the bases for economic growth in the medium and long term , rapid demographic and social change , etc . ) .
in writing . - ( SV ) Today I voted in favour of a report which sets out the Integrated Guidelines for Growth and Jobs for 2008-2010 .
On the one hand , I was pleased to find amendments from the Socialist Group which noted the need to create a Europe that is favourable to business , not least to small enterprises .
On the other hand , the same group also proposed much stricter rules in the financial field , rules which are supposed to protect consumers , but which increasingly mean that earnings are reduced for them .
This attitude is more likely to hinder than help and I have therefore voted against this proposal .
If the European vision of being the leading global competitive force is ever to become reality , much more aggressive investments must also be made in modernising the labour market , in encouraging research and education , and in taking advantage of the possibilities offered by a ' greener ' economy .
I have therefore voted with the Greens , for environmental taxes at EU level , even though as usual I defended the independence of the European Central Bank against their recurrent attacks .
If there is anything that the recent financial turbulence has shown us , it is the benefit of a strong central bank that can withstand short-term solutions , not to mention the stabilising effect of participating in a large currency zone .
in writing . - The British Labour delegation supports the main thrust of this report , as it attends to promoting generally-acceptable policies for the EU economy .
However , the EPLP has severe reservations over paragraph 26 , which calls for fiscal harmonisation / coordination , which is a national competence only .
Therefore , the EPLP decided to abstain on this particular paragraph .
in writing . - On paragraph 26 , the amendment refers to a common consolidated corporate tax base .
I disagree with this point as I believe this should be decided by the Member State .
I abstained on this point .
in writing - ( RO ) The European Parliament 's Report on the Integrated Guidelines for Growth and Jobs examines the general lines proposed by the European Commission for the economic policies of the Member States and of the Community for the period of 2008-2010 .
I voted for recital 26 , as proposed by the Commission , because it emphasizes the need for a " coordinated fiscal framework , which should include a tax system favourable to companies , in particular to small and medium-sized companies , and geared to renewing economic growth and generating employment ” .
I also voted for amendment 23 , because it " requests that the income and the way in which wealth is distributed should ensure the equitable distribution of the benefits generated by economic growth . ”
The amendment states that the minimum wage in every country , according to the GDP per inhabitant , could be a way to guarantee the fact that the full-time workers can provide their subsistence from their work , which should be considered an element of the European social model .
Consequently , I voted for this report with the conviction that the economic security of all the European citizens , social inclusion , gender equality and the creation of a market economy will make the Union become an economic and social model in a global context .
I supported Mr Özdemir 's report because one of the most pressing political problems facing Europe is ensuring energy security for the EU .
Diversification of supplies of energy raw materials to the EU is one way of making ourselves independent of Russia , and the key move in this is a common EU policy with regard to Central Asia .
The lack of a common EU policy in this sphere is being aggressively exploited by Russia , with most EU Member States taking a passive stance .
Projects such as the extension of the Odessa-Brody pipeline to Gdańsk , or the Nabucco pipeline , are no longer very realistic as a result of the actions taken by Russian companies dominated by the special services .
I would like to congratulate Mr Özdemir on his own-initiative report on an EU strategy for Central Asia .
In my view , he has clarified perfectly the objectives and priorities for the European Union 's relations with each of the five Central Asian countries .
He has correctly pointed out the need for a more coherent regional approach to this strategic region , while highlighting the differences between the countries .
I approve of the opinion of the Committee on Development , particularly on the need to eradicate poverty , improve public health and primary school education , and eliminate all forms of discrimination against women and minorities .
It is also important that this report underlines the need for progress on democracy , respect for human rights , fundamental freedoms and the rule of law in the region , and this point is key , as far as I am concerned .
The report considers that cooperation on energy is of prime importance in Europe 's strategy .
Despite this , the European institutions need to be vigilant and ensure that neither human rights in the region , nor the environment , are sacrificed to energy needs and trade agreements .
I welcome the adoption by a large majority today of the report on an EU strategy for Central Asia .
It is essential for the European Union to take a closer interest in these five countries : Uzbekistan , Kyrgyzstan , Tajikistan , Turkmenistan and Kazakhstan .
The report quite rightly calls for differentiation in the EU 's policy towards each country and I cannot but approve the fact that criteria such as the human rights situation in the countries in question and their respect for OSCE commitments are highlighted .
The text is also keen to stress the importance of these countries for the EU , both now and in the future , particularly as regards trade and energy .
The geopolitical situation of Central Asia is such that cooperation with these countries must be increased , both bilaterally and at EU level .
The report calls for reforms of social sectors , health , food security and the fight against corruption to ensure long-term stability , security and prosperity in the region .
This is therefore a comprehensive text , defining the spheres of action in which the EU can be of assistance , to give it as much visibility and credibility in the region as possible .
in writing . - ( PT ) In line with what has been approved by the majority of the European Parliament on the EU 's external relations , we have yet another report consisting essentially of a collection of measures for interfering in third countries , without concealing - quite the reverse - the clear objective of obtaining , within the economies of those countries , conditions favourable to the interests of the large economic and financial groups .
Look how the report stands up for respecting international standards for foreign investment and the provision of better protection for foreign direct investment in these countries .
It is clear that such statements mean nothing more or less than to privatise state banks ( ! ) and create national financial markets that are truly competitive and open to foreign banks ( ! )
In other words , these countries are simply being put up for sale ...
Moreover , in line with the objective mentioned above , the EU 's primordial interests emerge as regards the significant energy resources of the countries in this region , and there is mention of the need to secure its energy supplies , without disturbing the transportation routes and with the maximum possible regularity .
Basically , it reflects the real significance of the much-proclaimed role of the EU in the world , in particular in the current proposed Treaty : its ambition to achieve political and economic domination .
in writing . - I wish to congratulate my colleague Mr Özdemir on his report on Central Asia , to which I gave my full backing .
Democracy and human rights are founding principles of the EU , and they should be at the heart of the EU 's policy in relation to other regions .
The nations of Central Asia have attracted attention from the world 's economic powers primarily on account of their natural resources .
The EU must rise above this and seek to invest in their human resources too , by advocating democracy and human rights .
in writing . - ( CS ) What was the legacy of the Soviet Union in the countries of Central Asia ?
Equality for women , abolition of child labour and illiteracy , monoculture farming .
In none of these countries have religious elements succeeded in establishing supremacy .
The EU 's first priority is the use of the natural resources of those countries , namely oil , natural gas and uranium .
Another priority is blocking one of the main channels of opium smuggling from Afghanistan .
This brings us to the direct responsibility of the EU and the US for supporting the establishment of authoritarian regimes in the countries in that region .
The individual countries try to limit the proliferation of terrorist groups and the spread of militant Islamic ideas , but such a situation has a negative effect on the development of civil society and participative democracy and tends to support the rule of force .
Notwithstanding all the criticism of the countries of the region in the report , we must always remember the difficult historical conditions faced by these countries in the course of their development .
The EU must help them to overcome the results of many years of negativity created by the presence of the large EU states and the US in neighbouring Afghanistan .
There is no reason to favour Turkey as the main potential mediator for a positive influence in the region .
The present situation as regards respect for the rights of minorities in Turkey certainly does not justify that approach .
In contrast , much more attention should be paid to the traditional ties to Russia .
When it comes to our fight against the spread of terrorism and drugs throughout the countries of that region , Russia is our closest ally .
In spite of the above-mentioned reservations , I support the adoption of the report .
in writing . - ( DE ) I am voting in favour of the proposal for an EU strategy for Central Asia , since the five republics there receive Official Development Assistance and the European Union has a particular responsibility to support these countries .
I would like to highlight the role of the European Union as a mediator between the countries of Central Asia , balancing out the significant differences between the five republics in terms of political , economic and social conditions .
In particular , I would like to point out the dire situation in the area of health , which is attributable to the minimal medical care system .
Providing access to clean drinking water and connecting all residents to the national grid present a problem of huge magnitude in Tajikistan , Uzbekistan and the Kyrgyz Republic .
It is important to me that my vote for an EU strategy for Central Asia is also a vote to improve living conditions for the people of Central Asia with regard to social , health and legal aspects .
in writing . - Mr Özdemir 's report on the EU 's strategy for Central Asia deals with a key issue on the EU 's foreign policy agenda .
I welcome its emphasis on attending to human rights in the Central Asian region ; an emphasis that the EU should apply to its external relations more generally .
There exists little evidence of democratic advancement in the region , notably Uzbekistan and Turkmenistan , and any EU strategy for cooperation should attempt to engage these states in a drive towards the concept of democracy .
As the report clearly outlines , Central Asia requires active EU energy cooperation in a bid to find mutually beneficial solutions to the current state of play in the energy market .
I agree with Mr Ozdemir 's recommendations and voted in favour of the report .
With the exception of the Kyrgyz Republic , developments in the Central Asia region are alarming for more than one reason .
Firstly , in terms of human rights and democracy , the abuse of many women ( forced marriages , sexual exploitation , rape , etc . ) and child labour in the region are totally unacceptable .
Next , in terms of health , the increase in infectious diseases ( particularly HIV ) remains worrying .
Finally , Central Asia will not benefit from effective integration into the world economic system until all five countries in the area have joined the WTO ( the Kyrgyz Republic has been a member since 1998 ) .
The EU 's strategy for Central Asia can make an effective contribution to the economic and human development of this region of the world .
The European Union must not neglect Central Asia , which is a strategic crossroads between Europe and Asia and a traditional partner in trade relations and energy cooperation .
I strongly support this text in its desire to see the EU 's priorities in Central Asia clarified , the European projects launched in the region strengthened and their implementation accelerated .
That is why I voted for the report .
Strategic planning for Central Asia is certainly a good idea , and is indeed necessary , especially for economic cooperation and the opening up of the markets .
It would also make sense to speed this up in order to keep abreast of developments .
However , the situation where certain standards that apply at European level become minimal in Central Asia cannot be allowed to continue .
On the other hand , applying the same yardstick there as in Europe would be to show considerable arrogance towards the people groups named in the report and their rights to self-determination .
As regards the role of women , there is sufficient need for action in other regions of the world , not least the entire Arab world , where the need is far more urgent .
However , child labour , which is widespread , especially in China , is covered by the standards I have already mentioned , which trading partners are required to observe .
Combating terrorism and the drug trade , which are linked to some extent , must be at the very top of the agenda . These must be fought relentlessly .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I support the document presented by the European Commission for a new partnership with the countries of Central Asia , but I would like to highlight the following aspects .
Firstly , the growing importance in international trade of Central Asia , which now constitutes an important alternative for the supply of energy resources .
Secondly , the fact that Europe must , as a result , keep a watchful eye on this part of the world , and encourage its integration into world trade and the international economic system by supporting the candidacy of those countries in the area that are not yet members of the WTO .
Strengthening trade relations with the whole area should therefore be seen as part of a strategy to achieve greater cooperation and integration among the countries themselves and to increase Europe 's influence , including political , in a region where progress has been made towards democracy .
Thirdly , in the overall approach towards Central Asia , account must be taken of the major political and economic differences between the countries of the region .
Particular stress has been placed on the role played by a country such as Kazakhstan , which has an advanced economy , and therefore on the potential benefits of strengthening links with that country , not least in terms of the overall development of the whole region .
in writing . - ( PT ) The European Union has tried to establish close relations and dialogue through its neighbourhood policy .
In the case of Central Asia , the drawing up of the new strategy and partnership with five new States is helping to promote greater stability , socio-economic and democratic development and security throughout that part of Asia .
We note that there is a global interest in stability in Central Asia , since serious and prolonged crises in that region could have disastrous consequences and affect the EU and its Member States .
In addition , the geopolitical situation of Central Asia has been attracting growing interest from economic powers such as Russia , the USA , China and Turkey .
I think that the future of those relations aiming at greater stability and security and increased political , economic and social cooperation , must also take into account the human rights situation in each country and the strengthening of trade relations and energy cooperation , as well as paying attention to development needs and the commitments undertaken as regards improving the living conditions of the citizens of the region .
Corrections to votes and voting intentions : see Minutes
( The sitting was suspended at 13.10 and resumed at 15.00 )

Approval of the minutes of the previous sitting : see Minutes
Monitoring the application of Community law ( debate )
The next item is the report by Mrs Frassoni , on behalf of the Committee on Legal Affairs , on the Commission 's 23rd Annual report on monitoring the application of Community law ( 2005 ) .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the application of Community law is a key part of the ' better lawmaking ' agenda launched by the Barroso Commission .
For some time it has been a kind of Cinderella , lost amidst the fashion for impact assessments and cutting costs .
Today the Commission has started to rectify this , partly due to the pressure applied by Parliament .
This is a procedure that , for years , has in many cases just been a kind of bureaucratic grind , where one infringement follows another without much ado , but it remains an absolutely essential procedure .
The numbers speak very clearly .
To date , around 2 518 infringement procedures have been initiated in the most diverse sectors , particularly the environment and the internal market .
In addition to this there are the hundreds , thousands even , of petitions that the Parliament receives each year and that often refer to specific infringements of Community law , against which citizens feel helpless and therefore turn to Parliament .
The question is : what chance do they have of receiving satisfaction ?
The infringement procedure is described by Articles 226 and 228 of the Treaty , and therefore there is not much scope for creativity .
The rules in force condemn us to slow , muddled procedures where the most effective measure - a fine - is rarely applied and only after a very long time , decades even .
However , a great deal , a very great deal , can be done and I thank the Commission for proposing in the last two years , and then last September in a specific communication , a series of measures that are analysed and evaluated in my report , and on which I would like to make a few comments .
First , however , allow me to make a point that I believe is crucial in this debate , because enforcing laws can be a very political matter and can be a wonderful tool for improving the credibility and visibility of the Community institutions .
I would like to mention two specific examples of somewhat different behaviour by the Commission : the waste crisis in Naples and the Via Baltica motorway in the Rospuda Valley in Poland .
The waste crisis in Naples was a direct consequence of infringements , occurring year after year , of practically all the Community rules on waste .
Indeed , very many infringement procedures had been initiated against Italy over the years and the Court had ruled against Italy on many occasions .
However , only now , years later , when the situation has become intolerable for everyone and impossible to hide , has the Commission decided to bang its fists on the table .
The Commission 's visits are being followed with great interest , and citizens crying out against illegal tipping are announcing on television that petitions are being sent to the European Parliament .
I wonder : could this not have been done before ?
Could we really not have taken a different attitude to prevent this situation arising ?
Yes , we could !
This is actually what Commissioner Dimas did in the case of the Rospuda Valley in Poland , which was in danger of being spoiled by infrastructure for the Via Baltica . For the first time , the Commissioner asked for a suspension order from the Court , and this was granted .
This is a very important precedent that sends an extremely clear message : the Commission can and must be firm and thorough with Member States that act as if nothing had happened , and it must use all the tools the democratic system allows : the media and public opinion .
One of the most important innovations that the Commission introduces in the communication concerns a ' new ' working method .
We have expressed many doubts about this new working method , which mostly consists of sending complaints directly back to the Member State against which the complaint is being made , in order to try to solve the problem .
We expressed these doubts and the Commission gave us a few assurances that I hope we will also hear today , but we will be keeping a very close eye on the matter and truly hope that , on the issue of infringement procedures , transparency , the ability to ' name and shame ' Member States and the joint work with Parliament , will bring progress .
Mr President , at the end of the debate , I will speak again for two minutes to finish my speaking time .
Mr President , President-in-Office of the Council , ladies and gentlemen , the Commission is grateful for the opportunity to discuss these important issues with the European Parliament today , and I am very grateful for Mrs Frassoni 's report and contribution , which contains valuable points .
I can assure you , Mrs Frassoni , that the Commission takes your points very seriously .
The European Union is a community under the rule of law and as such it is unique in the world .
Only the law can guarantee the freedoms that citizens are entitled to and only the law can shape the market economy in such a way that it works to the benefit of all .
The European Commission is the guardian of the treaties .
Its role is to ensure that Community law is being implemented everywhere and that it is correctly applied in each location .
Even the best law has no value as long as it exists only on paper .
Each committee will find , therefore , that one of its most important tasks is to ensure that our law does not consist merely of empty words .
In the treaty infringement proceedings and the European Court of Justice , we have a powerful weapon .
This weapon must be used when there is no other way to remedy violation of the law .
It is not an end in itself , however , and it could become blunt through excessive use .
The Commission does not believe that the number of treaty infringement proceedings is a measure of the seriousness and determination with which it monitors how well Community law is being observed .
Rather , the Commission believes that it is a matter of finding solutions to problems .
The real measure is how many problems relating to the application of Community law we have solved , and how quickly .
Indeed , we have critically reviewed the way we work and arrived at the following conclusions : once identified , problems must be dealt with quickly and efficiently .
Citizens and business people are entitled to speedy answers .
Therefore , Mrs Frassoni , I will go back to the Commission with what you said about rubbish in Campania and this topic will have to be discussed .
I fully agree that a rigorous , fast and determined approach is absolutely essential where Community law is being blatantly ignored .
In principle , an approach based on partnership is preferable to a confrontational one .
The Commission therefore wishes to see more dialogue and more transparency in these issues .
We also want to set clear priorities : deal with important matters first , and quickly , and do not use a sledgehammer to break a nut .
We must also make the necessary resources available .
Allow me to make one comment at this point .
If problems mount up in relation to the application of Community law to particular matters , that may be because the law itself is unclear or contradictory .
We should not assume from the outset that the Member States have a bad attitude .
As a consequence of these considerations , we took a series of steps and I would like to say from the outset that we will continue to have recourse to treaty infringement proceedings and institute them immediately when the necessary information is to hand .
However , we are suggesting a new way of working , with which we hope to obtain the necessary information more quickly .
This method is based on improving cooperation with the Member States before it gets to the stage of instituting official proceedings , except , of course - and this is very important , Mrs Frassoni - in the event that it is obvious from the start that , in all probability , a treaty is being infringed .
In such cases our first step is not to talk to the Member States , but to act .
It is not a totally new process , but a preliminary procedure in which we require additional procedures or in order to achieve a solution more quickly without instituting treaty infringement proceedings .
All enquiries and complaints are answered directly and speedily and , depending on the facts of the matter , can lead to treaty infringement proceedings .
That means that every submission is registered and processed .
If it is formulated as a complaint , or can be seen as a complaint , it is treated as a complaint and the Commission takes the appropriate steps .
We are currently testing this new method of working in a pilot phase .
Fifteen Member States are involved in the pilot project , which has been designed to ensure that we do in fact make progress . Naturally , we will inform Parliament of the results of the pilot phase and discuss any further steps with Parliament .
All the same , we are already in a position to be able to find a solution to 90 % of all problems that come to our attention without taking the matter to court .
However , we do share your opinion that this should be done more quickly .
A move to a monthly cycle of decision making , which commenced in January , should help . This ensures faster , more efficient execution of treaty infringement proceedings .
Certainly , we are striving to make the whole process as transparent as possible while preserving the appropriate measure of confidentiality , as required of us by the European Court of Justice .
The public will have online access to regularly updated summaries of all treaty infringement proceedings currently before the court .
In the interests of transparency and legal certainty , we also need to know how the Member States are applying Community law in their respective national contexts .
Therefore , we need correlation tables - as called for in the report - that clearly show implementation status in each Member State .
Ladies and gentlemen , I believe we share the same goal .
We want Community law in which EU citizens can have complete confidence .
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Petitions . - Mr President , in the minute I have on behalf of the Committee on Petitions , I would like to do three things .
First of all , I would like to thank Ms Frassoni for her cooperation on this annual report , but , most of all , I would like to make clear the importance of the Petitions Committee in this monitoring and implementation procedure .
I think that importance has , at long last , been recognised by the Commission .
I thank the Commissioner for that , because we should really have a partnership in this exercise between our two institutions , and particularly involving the Petitions Committee , which is really our eyes and ears , as legislators , through our citizens , who come to us with direct problems that they perceive .
But , in order for our citizens to be able to do that , I come to my second point .
Commissioner , you talked about our law being living law .
Well , in order for it to be living law , it needs to be understandable - comprehensible - to our citizens .
I have had a long dialogue with your colleague Ms Wallström about citizens ' summaries , so that citizens understand our law .
She has , on many occasions , promised us that these will be forthcoming with every legislative instrument .
We still await the real evidence of that happening .
Lastly , the Petitions Committee - and this I address to my own colleagues - needs much greater prominence and resources in our own House .
It is not just an interfering busybody committee .
It does a real job in connecting with our citizens in this area .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( EL ) Commissioner , you are absolutely right : the rule of law is the foundation of the EU .
You correctly point out that Community legislation is the way to achieve the goals of the EU treaties , as its byword is the interest of European citizens , who have the right to demand the implementation of this law .
The bulk , breadth and complexity of legislation are constantly on the increase .
We MEPs from the European People 's Party should like to express our satisfaction : through its 23rd annual report on monitoring the application of Community law and also through the announcement of the results in Europe , the Commission is demonstrating its desire to be the trustee of the treaties and to ensure that the legislation is implemented .
You are absolutely right in saying that we want the correlation tables , on which the Council made a decision today . The rapporteur cooperated extensively with you to draw up Mrs Frassoni 's report , on which we had an interesting hearing in Parliament .
Let us tell you that we also want Parliament to participate in the control procedure and wish to be kept informed about your activities . We want you to come to our committees , as you do to the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety .
We wish to hear your progress report .
We certainly want you to take into consideration the petitions we receive , as you point out in your report . We should also like to stress that , as far as our decisions on immunities are concerned , we should like you to intervene to ensure that the national courts uphold them .
The implementation of Community law allows European citizens to hope that democracy , law and order will be strengthened , and that the EU authorities will become closer to them .
Today , after the resolution on the new reformed Lisbon Treaty , we all wish for a better future for the EU .
Mr President , one aim of Community legislation is the implementation of various EU political strategies .
The application of this legislation should be a priority for all Member States which , while simultaneously subject to control and monitoring by the Commission , will guarantee that it has the desired positive outcomes for the citizens of Europe .
In past years the total number of proceedings dealing with violations of legal regulations instigated by the Commission was steadily rising , to reach a level of almost 2 700 in 2005 .
Despite EU enlargement by 10 new states , the years since then have not seen any overall rise in the number of violations .
There is a danger , however , that this situation may have arisen from a lack of registrations of complaints , or from administrative problems in the institutions responsible for considering violations .
The report should be praised first and foremost in respect of its inclusion of detailed studies of instances of violations linked to petitions , as well as the information provided on the readiness for broad cooperation by individual Directorates General on such matters .
We should also welcome the Commission 's comprehensive communication ' A Europe of results - Applying Community law ' .
However , the questions of funds available for consideration of instances of violation , the length of proceedings in cases of violation , the restricted application of Article 228 of the Treaty and evaluation of the application of priority criteria still need to be fleshed out in more detail by the Commission .
The proposed new working method being introduced in 2008 , as a pilot project involving several Member States and , aimed at conducting existing proceedings more efficiently , deserves acknowledgement .
One stage of the procedure , however , namely the sending of a case to an interested Member State that is , above all , the party responsible for improper application of Community law , is a cause for concern : this may lead to a weakening of the role of warden of the treaties that rests with the Commission .
The creation of Community law should come to meet citizens ' problems in such a way as to enable prompt answers to be found to their questions and complaints , which will make it easier for them to understand and make use of their rights , while at the same time effectively reducing the number of proceedings relating to violation of the law .
Finally , may I warmly congratulate Mrs Frassoni on a very well-prepared document .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Mr President , I would like to turn my attention to our three institutions and to emphasise how important it is that each one plays a part in the implementation and monitoring role .
Clearly , here , we are looking at the Commission 's report .
Of course , the Commission has the prime responsibility for implementation and enforcement , and we would not wish to tread on its toes in that respect .
However , I think the Commission can assume that , in future , we will be watching much more carefully .
We are grateful that many of the lessons that were thrown up by our report on the demise of Equitable Life have been taken on board .
But , as we move into a new period , and perhaps try out some new ideas , we have to be very careful .
First of all , if we look at the Council , we still have to get agreed - and I was pleased to hear the Commissioner mention it - the idea of correlation tables in respect of each and every piece of legislation , so that everybody can see exactly what happens at Member State level and where each piece of law fits in .
The pilot project is an excellent idea .
That is all well and good , so let us see how it works out .
But - and here is the but - I am a little sceptical that so many Member States have signed up to it .
I hope they do not perceive it as some sort of soft option and I hope the Commission will disabuse them of the idea that could , in any way , be the case .
Lastly , I come to our own Parliament .
Clearly , post-Lisbon Treaty , we must have a much more important role in terms of monitoring .
We cannot assume that , once we finish with a piece of legislation here , that is the end of it .
Our committees will have to take on a much bigger role in checking .
One or two implementation reports are already happening - that will increase - and we will have to take on our responsibilities , along with the other institutions .
Just as a postscript - but a very important postscript - we also have to turn our attention to the education of our judiciary in our national courts to make sure that they , too , know how to implement Community law .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - Mr President , I congratulate my group colleague and group Co-President Mrs Frassoni for a timely and well thought-out report .
I also echo Mrs Wallis 's comments and agree with them absolutely .
Passing laws keeps us in business , but enforcing laws actually delivers for our people , and a failure to enforce laws , frankly , makes us look like fools .
I congratulate the Commission on a number of steps that have been very positive .
But we really must bring this closer to the top of our agenda in this Parliament because , certainly in Scotland , there remains a strong perception that there is one law for one country and one law for another .
I am very aware that is not all the fault of the Commission , but we must all play our part in resolving that if we are one Europe .
So , in congratulating my group colleague , I am glad to hear that many of those points will be taken on board by the Commissioner .
I would like to make one more point , particularly in relation to environmental legislation , where many of the conflicts arise : many of the very worthy aims of individual pieces of legislation do conflict , and we must face up to that in preparing them .
There is scant guidance in terms of application for local authorities as to how they should deal with the often very worthy aims when they do conflict .
We were promised a review of that in the energy package , so if our Commissioner could give us some light on that process , which is ongoing , I would be very grateful .
( NL ) Mr President , I , too , wish to compliment Mrs Frassoni on her report .
We have now had a number of reports on implementation , and a distinct common thread can be seen in those reports .
This means more attention to implementation , including on the part of the European Parliament .
We now have recourse to implementation reports .
In July I myself shall be presenting a report on the implementation of the eighth directive concerning the supervision of accountants .
It is good that Parliament is also taking a serious look at the transposition of legislation in Member States .
I should like to focus on the issue of supervisors in this regard .
We are talking about transposition by the authorities in the Member States and about the judges who apply the law .
However , many Member States also have independent supervisors who apply and elaborate legislation .
In practice , wide divergences have arisen among the various Member States and among supervisors .
Increasingly often , businesses operating internationally in several Member States are being faced with differing requirements from different supervisors from different Member States .
This is extremely inconvenient , and inhibits the operation of the internal market .
I should like to discuss one more point .
We cannot , in addition , avoid a further examination of the legislative instruments used in Europe .
Up to now , we have mainly been working with directives where harmonisation is concerned .
Commissioner Verheugen has already said on certain occasions that in future it may make sense to make more use of the regulation instrument for internal market legislation , in order to avoid all kinds of problems such as cherry-picking and gold-plating during the transposition of directives .
I know that in the national parliaments too , particularly the Dutch Parliament , the realisation is slowly but surely sinking in that implementation involving gold-plating and cherry-picking can be detrimental to the operation of the internal market and also to the domestic economy .
That being the case , the step towards a regulation , where possible , is no longer so very great .
( ES ) Mr President , we are aware of the importance of your mission to monitor the application of Community law .
We are talking about relations between a supranational institution and national governments .
National governments are strong entities , with a great deal of power , they are public authorities .
Normally the Commission is the guardian of EU law and for citizens , in many cases , it is the only guarantee that they have that the law ( because Community law is law ) will be applied correctly .
The report by Mrs Frassoni is aimed at strengthening what I would call the backbone of the Commission , so that the Commission is aware of the importance of this task , and so that , even if we want a prior phase of negotiation with governments on the difficulties that may arise , at the moment of truth the Commission acts as the citizens expect , with strength and vigour , and applying Community law .
It is a concern that , following enlargement , we should have the impression that the Commission is applying less strict criteria to the new Member States than it applied to the old Members .
This would have a negative impact on the consolidation of the European Union and on the reputation of the European Union itself in those Member States .
Having followed many of the Commission 's infringement proceedings , I can assure the Commission that , when it intervenes , citizens , and even the public authorities , feel strengthened by the action of the Commission in this area .
In other words , I think that the European Parliament report , the proposal put forward by Mrs Frassoni and also the opinion of Mrs Wallis are aimed at strengthening the Commission , so that the Commission does not consider itself to be alone and defenceless against the governments , but rather has the European Parliament to strengthen this role of overseeing and monitoring that the Commission has in relation to the application of Community law .
( DA ) Mr President , the citizens of Europe are decisively important for the EU 's legislation .
They are not simply sacrifices for the infringements , as in Naples for example .
In many environmental issues they have often been key players .
As guard dogs , they maintain a watch to ensure that the laws are implemented correctly in all corners of Europe , and in many cases they are the only ones to do this .
Because of this , the EU should also support citizens by securing them a strong position .
When they draw attention to infringements of Community legislation , their complaints should be handled seriously and with respect .
I sincerely hope that this is not an attempt on the part of the Commission to put a stop to many of these complaints , as this would be bad practice .
I would therefore like to thank Mrs Frassoni for drawing attention to these threats .
Her excellent report will now become an important general step in the right direction .
EU citizens will gain a stronger position through the Treaty of Lisbon , but if this is to be anything other than a pointless decoration , their contribution to the EU must be taken seriously .
( PL ) Mr President , I , too , would like to congratulate Mrs Frassoni on an excellently prepared report .
I would also like to say how pleased I am that , according to the statistics presented by the European Commission concerning the number of proceedings relating to cases of violation of EU law , the accession of 10 new Member States has not had an impact on the number of violations recorded .
The statistics do not , however , tell the whole story .
One of the most important mechanisms enabling us to check how well the application of European law is really going is the system of pre-judicial references , the aim of which is to assign to national courts the potential to provide a uniform interpretation of the application of European law in all Member States .
The fundamental problem in this procedure is the time one has to wait for an answer from the Court , which is still very long ( about 20 months ) .
The main reason - the time taken for translation - accounts for about nine months .
It is a matter of concern that in many national parliaments we hear voices demanding a cap on the budget specifically for written translations .
The European Commission 's recommendations for Member States and candidate countries are based on the assumption that EU law will be effectively introduced when suitably qualified staff are employed and suitable funds are set aside .
I do not entirely support that view .
The number of staff and the amount of funds available is not the right yardstick .
Also needed are determination and involvement in the matter of introducing European law .
Proper execution of the tasks facing Member States and candidate countries requires three factors : knowledge , competence and readiness .
The first of these factors - that is , possession of knowledge - is not a problem today .
The second factor - the capacity to introduce the Community 's achievements - is linked to the provision of suitable funds and the engagement of additional employees .
The Commission is currently placing the greatest emphasis on this particular aspect .
The third factor - the readiness of those whose task it is to introduce and apply European law - is the most underestimated .
Readiness to apply Community law in practice depends on the institutions and the system of procedures , incentives and restrictions .
Success or failure in the introduction of EU law will eventually be decided by the specific institutional model .
Knowledge and funds are not everything .
A good will to act is also needed .

( DE ) Mr President , Mr Vice-President , in your introduction you pointed out that the Commission does not want to launch out blindly but sound out whether something should be done , by discussing it with the Member States .
Now , within the Commission itself - which is , after all , a collegial institution - there is not always a clear , unified position on certain issues .
In the area of transport I currently see a topic that will become more and more problematic for us in the coming years - and probably within the Commission too - and that is the concept that money should be redirected to more environmentally friendly modes of transport by way of cross-subsidies from money that is earned in a less environmentally friendly area - road tolls , parking fees , etc .
That is , in effect , a subsidy .
Has there been any discussion about this , and how does the situation look ?
( HU ) Thank you , Mr President .
As has already mentioned by several speakers before me , success in achieving the objectives set out in the Treaties and legislative acts will depend on how effective the Member States are in applying Community law , and on how they transpose it into the national setting .
If they fail to apply the legislation or enforce it properly , or are unable to comply fully with the goals it contains , then we will have a problem .
In recent years the tendency has improved in terms of compliance with the legislation , and I think compliance by the ten new Member States is good .
I hope that this is not just because the Commission is more lenient towards us , towards the new Member States , but because we are putting genuine effort into fulfilling criteria and meeting expectations .
Unfortunately , navigating the bureaucratic jungle is still far from easy ; we know how enormous the number of legislative measures is , and transposing these into national and regional law is often exceedingly time-consuming .
Enabling the simplification of bureaucratic language and more widespread use of impact assessments would be very important , as would ensuring that as little time as possible is taken up with conducting complaints procedures . Thank you .
( PL ) Mr President , the implementation of Community law by individual Member States is one of the basic principles of the European Union .
This is why monitoring and the elimination of deviations is the goal of numerous actions .
Checking of individual states and publication of the results of the checks would make it possible for citizens to play a part in the introduction of EU legislation in states .
Meanwhile , it continues to be the case that Poland , for example , still applies national imposition of value-added tax , VAT , despite the Sixth Directive and court rulings .
The same thing applies to double taxation on earned income .
There are known cases of duty being applied to vehicles purchased by Polish citizens in EU countries , despite rulings by the Court of Justice , and of delays in refunding wrongly calculated charges that have been paid .
One particular oddity is that our citizens are held on remand for years on end without any sentence having been passed .
The citizens of Poland are impatiently awaiting the European Commission 's reaction to the examples provided and a curbing of the unlawful actions perpetrated by our government .
Finally , I would like to express my sincere congratulations to Mrs Frassoni ; it is just a pity that this report concerns a rather remote past , and it would have been nice if it had been about 2007 .

( DA ) Mr President , comitology is a study of how to limit democracy without the electorate realising .
Firstly , power is transferred from the electorate and the popularly elected representatives to government officials and lobbyists behind closed doors in Brussels . Voting is then made subject to complicated rules that no-one can remember , no journalist can write about and no textbook author can explain .
The essence of this is simply that the non-elected in the Commission will decide , unless a qualified majority can be established against the Commission .
It is legislative power that is being turned into executive power ; it is transparent legislation that is being turned into secret decrees ; it is a majority democracy that is being turned into a minority government .
It is not an absolute autocracy , but it is heading in that direction with a hint of Mussolini 's corporate ideas .
With the new interinstitutional agreement , Parliament can put a matter back on the agenda , but only if the right and left wings of the House are in agreement and can produce an absolute majority of members in favour .
Scrap the mixing of autocracy , however , and govern with shrewdness and corporatism !
Introduce democracy in all legislation !
As a fundamental principle , let us see that a majority of the popularly elected representatives are behind every law , either from national parliaments or here within the European Parliament !
Legislation by government officials and lobbyists should be a thing of the past , yet it is unfortunately being cemented into place in the Treaty of Lisbon .
It is therefore another good reason to make the Treaty the subject of a referendum .
President-in-Office of the Council . - On behalf of the Presidency I would like to stress in a concluding comment that the Presidency is aware of the fact that efficient monitoring of the application of Community law is essential if the law is to be universally respected and if the general legal principles on which the running of the Community is based are to be safeguarded .
Primarily , however , it is important for ensuring legal certainty among European citizens .
It should not be forgotten that they have an important role in the implementation of Community law .
This role is also reflected in the number of complaints made by citizens about infringements of Community law .
During the debate , which I followed very closely , several people were astonished that the number of infringements , or at least perceived infringements , has not increased since the enlargement of the European Union .
Several speakers suspected that the Commission is not as strict with the so-called new Member States .
I must stress that the Presidency does not have any reason or evidence to support those doubts .
However , there is at least one possible explanation I can offer .
When it comes to the so-called new Member States , it must be taken into account that they became Members after many years of intensive transposition of Community law into their internal legal system , since when they have found it easier to continue the process on a smaller scale .
This is just by way of a comment on the suspicion that the Commission is not equally strict with all the Member States , but I think it would be appropriate for the Commissioner to comment on this matter .
To finish , I would like to stress that the Presidency attaches great importance to the common responsibilities and aims defined in the Inter-institutional Agreement on Better Lawmaking .
Finally I would like to encourage all institutions and Member States to fulfil their obligations in the transposition and application of Community law .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I have already said that today 's debate should not be without consequences , and I want to re-emphasise that .
I will brief Mr Jung on the content of this debate and Parliament 's input , and make suggestions too , as several very important suggestions have been made during this debate , which the Commission should take seriously .
Allow me to make another comment based on the philosophy of law : a community of nations under the rule of law is based on trust .
It can function only if those who participate can trust each other .
This is why , in a constitutional state , legal proceedings must take place in public and it is also the reason why I agree completely with what Mrs Wallis said .
Information is vital here , and transparency is imperative .
There can be no policy of secrecy in applying and interpreting the law .
Everything must be open and public .
That is what I take from this debate , anyway , and I have always been convinced of it .
I agree with what Mrs Wallis said about the role of the Committee on Petitions .
As her customer , in a manner of speaking , I freely admit that this sometimes requires a great deal of work and effort , but citizens are entitled to expect us to make this effort .
In addition , the petitions we receive teach us a great deal about how our citizens perceive our law and our policies .
Mrs Frassoni , Commissioner Wallström has already promised that , in future , we will create a citizens ' summary .
Since then , the Commission has also passed a formal resolution on this , so it is going to happen , and I am quite sure you will find ways and means of making very sure that we do it .
It has been decided and it will happen .
Many Members have pondered the question of the new Member States and how it can be that , despite growth in the number of Members , there has been no growth in lawsuits for infringement of treaties .

The Commission has a very clear opinion on this , and that is that there are two reasons : firstly - and here I feel rather self-conscious , for I really ought to say that this is due to the good work of the previous Enlargement Commissioner - it has to do with the fact that the new Member States prepared so exactingly for their acquis that , at the time they joined , they met the requirements more precisely than the old Member States .
I can only confirm this .
It is the absolute truth .
We would never have been able to conclude the accession treaties if the acquis had not been fulfilled .
The other reason is perhaps somewhat more practical , however : citizens of the new Member States need to learn , gradually , that they can complain , and how to do so .
I therefore assume that the number of complaints will increase .
Mr Smith mentioned that the law must also be straightforward and applicable , particularly in regard to environmental legislation .
As we know , the Commission is working on reviewing all Community law by the end of next year in order to ascertain where and how it can be simplified . Just a few days ago , as part of our presentation of progress on this ' Better Regulation ' project , we promised that this whole process would indeed be completed by the end of next year .
Mr Medina , you do not need to worry that the Commission is sweeping complaints under the carpet .
From my own experience of more than eight years as a member of the Commission , I can assure you that I have had to put the brakes on overzealous Commission departments far more often than I have needed to urge them to fire up the heavy artillery of the treaty infringement process .
Far more frequently , I have to say to them : ' Hang on , just slow down , talk to them first and see if this can be resolved peaceably ' .
The risk of Commission departments tending to brush things under the carpet is almost nonexistent .
I am certain that it does not happen .

As far as Mr Rack 's question is concerned : decisions on treaty infringements , be it the lead-up or the conclusion or any individual step in between , require a formal decision by the College of Commissioners .
That is how it is organised .
I am unable here and now to answer your question about the specific problem of cross-subsidies , but I will make sure that you receive an answer before the end of this week .
Regarding Mr Kuc 's remarks on the length of detention while awaiting trial , I admit that this would be a scandal if it occurred , but it is outside the jurisdiction of the European Union .
The European Court of Human Rights is the competent court for such cases .
Ladies and gentlemen , thank you for all your suggestions and the constructive spirit of this debate .
I am fairly sure that we will have made further progress when we discuss it again next year .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to thank my fellow Members , the Commissioner and the Presidency for their participation in this discussion which , as Commissioner Verheugen said , does not end here .
Just a few points quickly .
I would like to comment on the issue of defining priorities , which Commissioner Verheugen spoke about .
I believe this could actually be a risky exercise .
However , it has never really been done until now .
I have always been rather sceptical about the possibility of really defining priorities .
Anyway , if you really want to go along this route , take the risk of being transparent , and why not even debate these priorities ?
Otherwise the suspicion could take root that the priorities have been chosen because you want to get rid of the inconvenient infringements .
I do not think this would be a good thing .
The second comment is that despite the fact that the Commission denies that it needs more resources , particularly human resources , to deal with infringements , the reality is that in almost all the meetings I have had with your fellow Commissioners , everyone has told me that they do not have sufficient resources , sufficient people , to deal with this matter .
In the debate the question came up of the number of infringements in the new Member States , and what the Commissioner and the Presidency said is probably true .
However , we should also know that , for example , on environmental matters , there are only two or perhaps three officials dealing with all ten of the new Member States , so obviously there is certainly a human resources problem .
Lastly , the issue of Parliament 's role .
We are discussing internally various ways of making our role as co-legislators more effective , by following up the application of the directives we approve .
I believe there are two things we absolutely must do : the first is decisively , through a political decision , to strengthen the role of the Committee on Petitions , which as Mrs Wallis said , is our window on the world ; the second is that we should systematically organise application sessions , which do , however , require the open cooperation of the Commission .
Because if we organise sessions where we discuss the application of directives and the Commission official who attends remains silent or tells us things that are of little interest - perhaps because he cannot say what we really want to know - then the whole exercise becomes pointless .
Anyway , thank you and we will undoubtedly speak about this again .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Kosovo ( debate )
The next item is certainly also tremendously important and topical .
It is the Council and the Commission statements on Kosovo .
President-in-Office of the Council . - Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , if I think about it and overlook some of the detail , I must say that my generation and our younger colleagues have been quite lucky .
We have lived the greater part of our lives , perhaps the best part , at a time when the doors and windows of opportunity have been open .
That period started in 1975 with the Helsinki Final Act , and its consequences were most influential in eastern and central Europe , where the Berlin wall and the communist system collapsed in 1989 .
A new vision burst onto the scene over the collapsed wall and through the open doors and windows of the western façade of the Euroatlantic community .
We saw the broad , sunny , dynamic landscape of a united and free Europe , beautifully symbolised by this immense European Parliament building .
I could never imagine in my youth that one day I would speak in it .
In Slovenia we call the 1980s and early 1990s the Slovenian spring .
Sadly , right at the start of the democratic awakening , we were hit by the Yugoslav crisis , which attempted to halt democratic development and caused the peoples of the western Balkans to fall way behind .
Most western and central European countries , and here I mean the ten new Members of the European Union , have taken up the historic challenge , but time has stood still in the Balkans .
The General Affairs and External Relations Council ( GAERC ) , of which I am President , has , among other difficult tasks , that of putting the European perspective of the western Balkans into effect .
This means involving countries such as Croatia , the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia , Serbia , Montenegro , Bosnia and Herzegovina , Kosovo and Albania in the system of European memberships , candidatures and agreements .
The Yugoslav crisis will have to end .
Doors and windows are open .
The wall is no more .
The European Union announced in the Thessaloniki Agenda that the western Balkan countries would sooner or later become members of the European Union .
Now is the time for us to remember our commitments .
We must endeavour to start negotiations with Macedonia , that is to say the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia , on membership of the European Union .
Serbia must cast off the burdens of her past , namely the horrors and shadows of the Milošević regime .
Milošević was the one responsible for the gridlock in the western Balkans .
And we must not forget Albania , Bosnia and Herzegovina , Montenegro and Kosovo .
The EU-Western Balkans forum which is to take place in Slovenia at the end of March will be very important in this context .
In cooperation with the Slovenian Presidency , the Commission is preparing a special communication on the western Balkans .
The forum will also consider strengthening regional cooperation in various areas , such as transport , civil protection , research and development , and so on .
In accordance with the January decisions of the General Affairs and External Relations Council , the Commission is discussing visa liberalisation with all the countries of the region .
We must not underestimate the exceptional importance that the gradual abolition of visas would have for this region .
At the same time , Mr President , we would like to point out a peculiar paradox .
Before 1990 , the citizens of the former Yugoslavia travelled to most European countries without a visa .
Now , however , a whole generation of young people who grew up after that year which was a turning point for Europe need a visa to travel .
Ladies and gentlemen , at our January meeting of the Council of Foreign Ministers , we unanimously invited Serbia to sign the political agreement constituting a new step towards membership of the European Union .
After Mr Tadić , who is pro-European , won the elections , we were hopeful that , after many years of slow development and isolation , Serbia would join us as soon as possible .
The European Union has already sent a European security and defence policy mission to Kosovo .
However , establishing relationships with Kosovo is a matter for each Member State .
We will probably not differ in the fundamental assessments referred to at the December session of the European Council .
The most important aspect is to have consideration and respect for Serbia .
The European Union needs Serbia and Serbia needs the European Union .
In my opinion , intercultural dialogue is not an empty phrase .
Even if negotiations grind to a halt , the possibilities for dialogue are not exhausted .
Now is the time for practical dialogue between the Serbs and the Albanians in Kosovo , between Serbia and Kosovo , and between Serbia and the European Union .
The fate of Kosovo has burdened us for many years .
In the past , Kosovo was part of the Yugoslav federal system and in 1974 was given practically the same status as the Yugoslav republics .
Towards the end of the 1980s , Slobodan Milošević deprived Kosovo of its autonomy and in 1999 occupied it by military force , thereby causing a tragedy of global proportions .
The case of Kosovo is truly unique , because the international community had to take it under its protection for humanitarian reasons and then had to govern it for almost nine years .
Nevertheless , Monday 's decision by the General Affairs and External Relations Council was not easy .
The decision and the declaration of independence in Priština were not unexpected .
We were led to it by the following facts . Firstly , it was realised that a return to the previous position was not acceptable and nor was the present ' status quo ' .
Neither side found a new formula to resolve the status of Kosovo , and it was obvious that further negotiations would not be fruitful .
Since 1999 Kosovo has been administered by the United Nations and , during that time , in accordance with Resolution 1244 , Serbia has not been able to exercise any effective authority .
For a number of years prior to 1999 the majority of the population of Kosovo had been exposed to systematic repression , including ethnic cleansing and humanitarian disaster .
Ladies and gentlemen , all these facts , which were originally recognised by all the members of the contact group , including the Russian Federation , are evidence for the argument that Kosovo presents a really special case ' sui generis ' , which is why the validity of the principle of the sovereignty and territorial integrity is not in doubt .
For some time the Council has been convinced that the European Union must take responsibility for Kosovo .
This conviction was confirmed at the February session of GAERC in the decision we already know .
Even though everyone had predicted disunity , we nevertheless achieved unity .
After lengthy negotiation and harmonisation processes , the decisions were reached unanimously .
The European Union is an interesting and unique community .
Of course we are linked by common interests and common values . Among them are respect and tolerance for differences .
We could say that we are linked through our differences .
At the end of the February session of the General Affairs and External Relations Council we adopted a common position .
The important conclusion of the session was that , in respect of the recognition of Kosovo , we expected each Member State to act in accordance with its own national practice .
Some may have expected the European Union as a whole to recognise Kosovo , but that is not possible because the European Union is not a state .
The European Union has adopted the common position on events in Kosovo and the western Balkans .
Firstly , the European Union noted that Kosovo had adopted a resolution on independence .
Secondly , the European Union took note that the resolution committed Kosovo to democratic principles , including the protection of the Serb minority and cultural heritage .
Thirdly , the European Union reiterated its commitment to the international mission there and its readiness to play a leading role in the region .
Fourthly , the European Union reaffirmed its commitment to the European perspective for the western Balkans .
Fifthly , the European Union would prepare specific economic measures for the wider region .
And sixthly , the European Union is well aware of the principles of the international community , but considers that , due to its sui generis character , the case of Kosovo does not call these principles into question .
Of course , Kosovo also comprises Serbs and their heritage and culture , and I would like to stress that it is a particularly precious component of European culture .
Many European peoples , including the Slovenians whom I represent , have important monuments to their own culture and ethnic heritage which are now outside their own present-day state borders .
This is a fact which does not create obstacles in contemporary Europe ; on the contrary , it unites us .
The same applies to minority ethnic groups .
In our opinion , it is essential that , with its reaction to the declaration and recognition of Kosovo 's independence , Serbia does not close the door to the European Union .
I repeat that the Kosovo question is separate from the question of Serbia 's integration into Europe .
Serbia must not link these two questions .
In this sense we find it particularly difficult to understand Serbia 's opposition to the European Union , that is to say to its mission in Kosovo , because this mission is primarily in the interest of Kosovo 's Serbian population .
To conclude , the European Union is one of the most successful peacemaking organisations in the world .
The peoples and countries of Europe are united and practise solidarity for the benefit of peace and a better life .
This attitude also encompasses tolerance and generosity and , above all , understanding and compassion when others are in distress .
Ladies and gentlemen , with the decision which I have mentioned , the European Union has opened its doors and windows not only to Serbia , but also to Kosovo .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , recalling our excellent cooperation on the Western Balkans , I want to thank you for the opportunity to inform Parliament on the Commission 's standpoint on the Kosovo status process .
Kosovo 's Assembly declared independence last Sunday in a climate of dignity .
In its declaration , Kosovo committed itself to fully respecting extensive rights for Kosovo Serbs , especially with regard to local self-government in education , culture and health , in line with the comprehensive proposal presented by UN Special Envoy Martti Ahtisaari .
Celebrations in Kosovo took place in a joyful but responsible manner .
However , there have been acts of violence in Belgrade and North Kosovo .
We condemn the use of violence and call on all leaders and people of the region to remain calm and maintain peace and stability .
As Foreign Minister Rupel explained , the EU Foreign Ministers on Monday responded to developments in a united way .
European unity is indeed essential to enable the European Union to successfully steer the ongoing stabilisation in the Western Balkans and to help bring the Kosovo status process to a conclusion .
After the prolonged talks in the United Nations Security Council failed , the European Union was bound to steer the process to a conclusion .
The Union has already taken the essential decisions to send an ESDP rule of law mission to Kosovo .
On Monday , the Council also provided a platform for dealing with recognition .
It will be up to each EU Member State individually to establish relations with Kosovo in accordance with its national procedures .
Several Member States have already recognised Kosovo .
I expect most of the others to follow suit , at their own pace .
The Council rightly reiterated the EU 's adherence to the principles of the UN Charter and the CSCE Helsinki Final Act and to all UN Security Council resolutions .
It underlined that ' in view of the conflict of the 1990s and the extended period of international administration , Kosovo constitutes a sui generis case which does not call into question these principles ' .
The Commission fully shares this position .
In line with Monday 's Council conclusions , the Commission stands ready to provide its full support to the EU 's effort in Kosovo .
This must be the hour of European unity also between the institutions .
By using Community instruments , the Commission will support institution-building in Kosovo and foster its political and economic development .
On 5 March , we shall propose concrete measures for the broader region in order to advance its European aspirations .
In Kosovo , many areas are in need of development , and we must strive together to help Kosovo to help itself , to stand on its own feet as quickly as possible .
In this context the Commission is working on organising a Donors ' Conference that should help alleviate the most pressing financial challenges concerning Kosovo .
I expect the Conference to take place before the summer .
I know this is a difficult moment for Serbia .
I am very conscious of Kosovo 's historical importance for the Serbian people .
However , I find that the time has come to turn the page on the past , and to look to the future .
And Serbia 's future is in Europe .
Serbia and the whole region of the Western Balkans have a European perspective , with the ultimate goal of EU membership .
This EU perspective functions as the glue that keeps the countries of the region on a peaceful and reformist track , which is extremely important in these sensitive and difficult times .
Finally , I want to reiterate my appreciation for the unwavering support of the European Parliament for the EU perspective of the Western Balkans .
We count on your continuous support , so that the citizens of the region can fulfil their aspiration of becoming , one day , part of the European Union .
( Applause )
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , Kosovo 's independence has been declared ; Kosovo is a state .
Anyone who experienced the situation in Kosovo between 1989 and 1999 must have known that this independence was inevitable .
The long-time pacifist president and winner of our Sakharov Prize , the late Ibrahim Rugova , would be very pleased to hear of it .
Unfortunately , it was not possible to negotiate a solution .
I am sure that every one of us would have dearly loved to be part of one .
The current solution brings to mind a modified version of Churchill 's aphorism : this is the worst option , except for all the others .
On Sunday I watched - half joyful , half tearful - as events unfolded in Priština .
Half joyful because I believe this was the only way out of the stalemate ; half tearful because I am certain that we have created problems for ourselves that will not be easy to solve .
Nevertheless , the EU has been firm , even though the press has frequently painted a picture of disunity .
The EULEX mission was launched unanimously .
It is not an attack on Serbia ; rather , it is necessary , including for the Serbs in Kosovo , because it will keep a close eye on implementation of the Ahtisaari Plan , which this Parliament passed by a two-thirds majority in spring 2007 .
This plan guarantees extremely generous minority rights for the Serbs , respect for the borders and the rule of law , and therefore also the protection of other minorities .
Politicians in Kosovo must now create their state with sound judgment and determination .
The battle against unemployment can be won only by a functioning constitutional state .
Radical measures to deal with crime are an equally high priority .
The EU mission will support them in this , where possible .
Kosovo has a large number of well-educated young people who will be delighted to help establish the new state .
Kosovo is not a test case .
It is unique .
Its development into a state is the final stage in the downfall of Yugoslavia , initiated by Milošević in Kosovo in 1989 .
I therefore regret the fact that Milošević did not live to see it , but his democratic successors must take on this onerous inheritance .
We wish the Serbian politicians composure , and hope that they will now devote all their energy to taking Serbia along the path to EU membership .
( Applause from the right )
Mr President , the House will understand that our group , too , has held a detailed discussion on the situation that has now arisen with regard to Kosovo .
The most important conclusion was actually that , whilst we have to accept the reality , there is no cause for celebration , as we are now faced with an extremely complicated situation , including in view of the reactions from Serbia .
After what happened under Milošević , however , and also after years of negotiations to find a solution , what has now happened was unavoidable .
We should like to focus in particular on the role of the European Union .
The recognition of Kosovo is a matter for the Member States , as Mr Rupel and Commissioner Rehn also emphasised .
We do need to act , however . We bear joint responsibility for stability in the region and also in Kosovo , and therefore our group lends its political support to the ESDP mission for which the Union has now given the starting signal .
Of course , we also require the Kosovo authorities to implement the Ahtisaari proposals , to make genuine investment in a multiethnic state and to put in place sufficient guarantees for Serbians living in Kosovo .
Finally , on the subject of Serbia itself , everyone is , of course , very uncomfortable with the situation there .
We have just had the opportunity to listen to the Serbian Minister for Foreign Affairs in the Committee on Foreign Affairs .
He gave a hard-as-nails reaction to events , making an attack on Europe , particularly the countries that have now recognised Kosovo .
I have another question : what can we do to prevent Serbia being isolated by others and also by itself in this situation ?
I was disheartened by his reply , as everything he said focused on the issue of Kosovo .
However , I think that we must continue to make strenuous efforts to offer Serbia a European perspective , including for the sake of its people , complete with a specific offer concerning , for example , visa facilitation and further visa liberalisation .
We must also place particular focus on the younger generation , which recently demonstrated in favour of movement towards the European Union , of a European future .
I commend the Serbian Government on its repeated commitment to refrain from the use of violence .
I am also assuming that it will refrain from imposing any economic sanctions on Kosovo .
What we can do , and what the European Parliament has the responsibility to do , is to continue to invest in a European perspective for the whole region , and also apply this to Serbia .
Mr President , President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , every country created by breaking away from an existing country damages the territorial integrity of the original country and unilaterally alters the international legal order .
My country is one such example : it was created in 1830 by breaking away from the state created in 1815 by the Congress of Vienna .
Belgium 's existence was recognised very quickly by the London Conference , which was attended by the United Kingdom , Prussia , Russia , Austria and France , but the Netherlands , from whom we had broken away , waited nine years before recognising Belgium .
I should actually have liked to tell the Serbian Minister for Foreign Affairs this if he had wanted to hear it .
This was not the case , however , as he repeated the familiar Serbian position ad nauseam without even a glimmer of an appreciation that opposing points of view also existed .
The only chink of light was his clear statement that Serbia would not use any form of violence , blackmail or intimidation whatsoever .
We must all now concern ourselves with the future - the future of Serbia , of Kosovo , of the whole region .
The European Union has already spent EUR 3 billion on Kosovo to date .
A further EUR 200 million is to be added to this for the coming 16 months , but that will not suffice .
With regard to Serbia and all the other Western Balkan countries , we must attend to visa facilitation as a matter of urgency , so that relations between the citizens of those countries and the citizens of our countries can be normalised .

Mr President , in recognising Kosovo 's independence , we have taken a huge responsibility upon ourselves ; a responsibility for maintaining peace and for the construction of sound state institutions in Kosovo .
There is no scenario that would enable international forces to be promptly withdrawn .
Any solution , either leaving Kosovo in Serbia or showing support for its independence , brings with it a risk of conflict and ethnic tensions .
The Serbs must realise , however , that there is no way back to the situation as it stood prior to 1999 .
Destabilisation attempts are merely bringing them losses .
There is only one way for Serbia to gain support for its claims in the sphere of cultural and social rights , and that is through constructive cooperation in the region .
The failure of Kosovan independence will mean a return to the idea of a Greater Albania and inevitable war .
Such a war will bring political losses that will primarily affect Serbia .
This is why that state is responsible for avoiding this scenario and for stabilisation in the region .
Mr President , I am pleased that I was present in Priština last Sunday , when , in a truly dignified fashion , independence was proclaimed .
What happened there last Sunday was the inevitable consequence of what happened in 1998-99 , when more than 10 000 Kosovars were murdered and hundreds of thousands forced to flee .
Could Priština have gone back to administration by Belgrade ?
No .
Was muddling along after nine years of an increasingly illegitimate , increasingly ineffective UN administration an option ?
No .
Would a negotiated compromise between Priština and Belgrade have been better ?
Yes .
Would approval by the Security Council have been better ?
Yes .
Was it attempted ?
Yes .
Was there any chance of success ?
No , particularly as a result of Russian obstruction .
I very much hope that , following the euphoria of the last few days , the Kosovars will shoulder their responsibility quickly , as it is they who are at the helm .
When the UN has gone , and when the EU mission has arrived , it is the Kosovars who must prove that good relations with minorities do not exist on paper alone , and that they are able to save the economy .
It is true that the EU is now divided on the issue of recognition .
This will last a few more months and then it will be over and done with .
What the EU Member States agree on unanimously is that the future of Kosovo lies in the EU .
The tempo of Kosovo 's movement towards the EU will also depend on Serbia 's position , however .
We have just seen in the Committee on Foreign Affairs how angry Serbia is , how angry the Minister for Foreign Affairs is , how aggressive his attitude was .
That will be a while in changing .
To be frank , I can appreciate this , provided such opposition remains non-violent .
When the anger has subsided , I very much hope that good sense will prevail .
It is true that the secession of Kosovo was inevitable .
It is true that the future of Serbia lies just as inevitably in the European Union .
To achieve this it is sometimes necessary to surpass oneself .
I wish the Kosovars and the Serbs great courage in this .
Mr President , it is difficult not to feel very uneasy about the responsibilities taken on by the European Union and its Member States in the Kosovo affair .
Firstly , in principle the EU aims to contribute to better world governance .
Yet under its impetus , several Member States have weakened or are about to weaken dangerously the future credibility of international law through their support for the unilateral declaration of independence by a province of a sovereign state , a member of the UN .
Whatever is said about the sui generis - because that is not decreed - the EU 's major powers thus place power relations above the law , and in doing so open a Pandora 's box .
This is serious .
Next , this unilateral recognition is in serious danger of going against the EU 's stated objectives in the Balkans .
It will fuel nationalism rather than stemming its sources .
Furthermore , the EU has just deeply alienated the Serbian people , without whom any regional policy in that part of Europe is impossible .
As it happens I am not talking about those who would like to have Milošević back , but those who opposed him and are now in the majority .
As for the Kosovo Albanians themselves , will the EU be able to satisfy their expectations after fuelling them ?
It is a question worth asking , hence the third reason for the unease felt after this day of jubilation in Kosovo .
The new challenge the European Union has just given itself is quite breathtaking .
Here we are in the front line , heading towards a new protectorate , even though no satisfactory analysis has been produced of the reasons for the failure of the previous protectorate : Kosovo 's gross domestic product is equivalent to that of Rwanda , half of its active population is unemployed , there are more than 200 000 refugees and displaced people , and violence against minorities is on the increase , despite EUR 2 billion of international aid and the presence of 17 000 NATO troops .
It will not be EULEX that sorts out all these problems .
What comprehensive lasting prospect is the European Union able to offer to the Kosovars and to the other peoples of the Balkans - a prospect that can stabilise the situation here without the risk of destabilising it elsewhere ?
Membership ?
Within what timescale ?
Under what conditions ?
With what degree of probability that the necessary unanimous agreement of the 27 Member States will be secured ?
Nobody knows .
Clearly , my group cannot associate itself with the short-term self-satisfaction of the principal European leaders .
( Applause )
Mr President , the EU Special Representative in Kosovo and intended International Civilian Representative , my compatriot Pieter Feith , gave an inspiring interview in the Dutch press on the difficult task that lies ahead of him in Kosovo Polje .
I found one passage in this interview puzzling , however .
To the straightforward question of which of the external actors was in charge in Kosovo - the French ex-general Yves de Kermabon , who is to lead the European Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo , or himself - Mr Feith replied , ' In political matters , I advise the French commander . '
As the Council , in turn , is Mr Feith 's superior , I would ask Mr Rupel of that institution how exactly decision making is now taking place in Kosovo .
What is the situation with regard to international power relationships ?
This is all very important for the future .
By way of conclusion , I should like to relay a disturbing quote from a Kosovo police officer : ' Serbs and Albanians have managed to come to terms with each other at criminal level .
Serbian and Albanian mafia organisations are cooperating excellently , and have been doing so for years . '
I sincerely hope that , thanks to the European mission in Kosovo , this immoral Albanian-Serbian cooperation will have to give way to decent inter-ethnic coexistence , as that and that alone will open up the European future we are happy to wish upon Kosovo .
( BG ) Mr. Chairman , Colleagues , The Members of the European Parliament from Ataka Dimitar Stoyanov , Desislav Chukolov and myself , Slavi Binev , declare our firm disagreement with the independence of Kosovo announced on 17 February 2008 .
This unilateral secessionist act is an impermissible precedent in international relations .
In our capacity of MEPs , we believe that the Kosovo Regional Assembly has no powers to adopt an act of independence and therefore we consider the separatist government consisting of proven drug traffickers and war criminals to be illegitimate .
The recognition of the independence of Kosovo by the individual Member States or the European Union as a whole would be tantamount to amnesty for the leaders of the Albanian terrorists who have pursued ethnic cleansing against all non-Albanian communities in the region for the last few years .
We express our great disgust and indignation that the ethnic cleansing and destruction of hundreds of Medieval Orthodox churches in Metochia , Kosovo , have taken place before the eyes of the international security forces of NATO and the United Nations .
Keeping in mind the crimes committed , we firmly renounce the artificial establishment of a new Muslim state whose sole objective is to serve as a springboard for the trafficking in weapons , drugs and people towards Western Europe .
Being representatives of the Bulgarian people in the EU , we call upon its institutions to refrain from recognising Kosovo as an independent state and to abide by the existing resolutions of the UN Security Council instead .
Furthermore , we call upon the Security Council to undertake decisive action to preserve the status quo and to overcome the secessionist tendencies in the name of the political stability of the Balkan Peninsula .
( ES ) Mr President , the meeting of the Council of Ministers on 18 February will not go down in the history of the EU as a particularly glorious date .
Rather than seeking a solution between the 27 , the hot potato of the decision on recognition has been referred to the Member States .
It is always frustrating that , each time we have to make a decision about a sensitive matter at the heart of our continent that affects important principles such as the inviolability of borders , we are not able to speak with one voice .
To complicate matters , the Council conclusions refer to international legality .
It is true that Parliament , like other EU bodies , adopted the Ahtisaari plan , but not as a blank cheque , rather on the understanding that the plan would have the approval of the United Nations Security Council .
Obviously this was not the case , and various conclusions need to be drawn from this .
The first is that it has been said that this case will not set a precedent , that it is a sui generis case , as Mr Wurtz said in his speech .
We need to ask ourselves whether or not we are a Community based on law .
We cannot be so on an à la carte basis .
Obviously this case is going to set a precedent and when international law is flouted it does not come for free and unfortunately there will be consequences .
Secondly , Mr President , how long are we going to be living with a United Nations Security Council in which there is an anachronistic right of veto for the winners of the Second World War enshrined in the San Francisco Charter in 1945 ?
This is no way to construct an international order or implement fair and effective multilateralism .
Thirdly , Mr President , either the European Union learns once and for all that union is our strength and fragmentation is our weakness , or we will have to renounce our vocation of international leadership in this globalised world and confine ourselves to being what The Economist described us as : the 21st century 's most prosperous third world region .
( DE ) Mr President , President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I understand the Kosovo Albanians ' rejoicing and delight at the freedom and independence they have gained .
At the same time , however , I understand the consternation and grief of many Serbs in Kosovo , and of course also in Serbia itself .
Unfortunately , no other mutually agreed solution was found .
The Milošević regime achieved anything but the integration of the population and the promotion of respect for Kosovo 's Albanian citizens .
I therefore welcome the European Union 's decision to create EULEX .
I would like to take this opportunity to extend heartfelt thanks to Mr Rupel , Minister of Foreign Affairs , for the way in which he tried to achieve agreement in the Council in this difficult situation .
This is very positive and should be pointed out clearly .
However , even all the assistance that will now come from Europe is of no use at all unless Kosovo itself gains the commitment of the majority to create a multi-ethnic society in the European sense .
Much of what I have seen in recent days , including the behaviour of Prime Minister Hashim Thaçi , encourages me and prompts me to hope that this multi-ethnic society is firmly seated in the minds of those responsible for the country .
We will see some demonstrations in the coming days , particularly in Serbia .
We should exercise patience .
We should extend a hand to Serbia .
We ought to understand that there is a kind of collective sense of loss at work here , and most of all , we should stress what Mr Jeremić said today in the Parliamentary committee regarding the renouncing of violence and boycotts .
That is a fundamental element and also the basis of further discussions with Serbia .
We want to accompany Serbia on the road to joining the European Union .
However , that is a decision to be made in Belgrade .
It is not for us to make that decision for Serbia .
I am well aware of the situation in Kosovo .
Many people coexist there .
Perhaps they are set against each other right now but I believe that it is possible for them to stand together , to work with one another .
This mutuality must be the goal of our policies , including here in the European Union and the European Parliament .
( Applause )
( SL ) Mr President , Commissioner , Minister , the situation in Kosovo is quite peaceful , in a way even exemplary and promising , except in the north where the Serbs live .
Individual Serbs are committing acts of arson and that is not right .
The declaration of independence in the Kosovo Assembly was dignified , respectful of all the peoples who live in the region , and in the spirit which should govern the future .
The citizens of Kosovo have deserved our trust ; we must have faith in them because they are making decisions about their future .
They sincerely wish for their future soon to be a future in Europe .
As rapporteur for Serbia I welcome the considered conduct of Serbia , which did not introduce economic sanctions against Kosovo .
At this emotional time for Serbia , I have some understanding for the harsh and threatening rhetoric of some politicians .
However , their action should be reasonable and reflect European values .
This independent status should enable Kosovo to gain access to the resources of the International Monetary Fund and to foreign investment for further development .
It is important to strengthen trade links between Kosovo and Serbia in order to stimulate economic growth and contribute to European integration .
Only states may be members of the European Union and Kosovo has become a state .
Now the Serbs in Kosovo also have a European perspective .
Serbia , too , should go ahead as soon as possible and make renewed and intensified efforts regarding its European perspective .
Government working groups must now work even harder .
They should prepare the next steps for Serbia , its economy and its citizens to get closer to the European Union , which is what the citizens desire so much .
Attacking the Embassies of the Member States of the European Union in Belgrade cannot be the way into the European Union , and this was not what the majority of Serbs wanted .
Now that the Serbian ambassadors to the countries which have recognised Kosovo are temporarily returning home , their representatives should endeavour more actively to explain the steps Serbia is taking on the road to the European Union .
There is no turning back ; the only road to the future is the road to the European Union .
My concluding words are directed at Minister Samardžić .
Arson is illegal everywhere .
Too many villages have been burnt down in the Balkans in the past decade .
Serbs in Kosovo should be allowed to get involved and to participate in decision-making in the new , independent country .
I am hoping that Belgrade will issue a clear call for participation .
That is what both Serbs and Albanians have deserved .
That is what the whole of the western Balkans and the European Union need and have deserved .
( PL ) Mr President , the unilateral declaration of independence by Kosovo has confronted the international community , and particularly the European Union , with a difficult and responsible task .
This event has significantly complicated the situation both in the Member States and in states with which the Union cooperates and is strengthening ties , such as Ukraine or Georgia .
The recent ostentatious meeting between the Russian Foreign Minister , Sergey Lavrov , and the leaders of Abkhazia and South Ossetia , two rebel republics within the territory of Georgia , is a harbinger of the possible behaviour of the Russian Government .
Even before Kosovo 's declaration of independence , the Kremlin was warning that it would treat its recognition as a precedent that it would subsequently apply with regard to separatist regimes that were loyal to Russia .
There is good cause for the Balkans to be regarded as one of the most explosive points on the planet .
The proclamation of independence may therefore cause destabilisation in , say , Bosnia and Herzegovina , from which provinces settled by Serbs may wish to detach themselves .
The situation that has come about consequently requires the international community to take some particularly well thought out and responsible decisions , the outcome of which will , however , be freedom and peace .
( NL ) Mr President , last Sunday 's proclamation of independence by the Kosovo Parliament was inevitable , and was one of the last stages in the break-up of the former Yugoslavia .
Anyone familiar with the situation in the area knows that after nine years of UN supervision and 20 years of discrimination before that , Kosovo could not just return to being part of Serbia .
In this connection , the proclamation of independence is quite a normal process .
Besides , it was made calmly , serenely and unemotionally and with full respect for the Ahtisaari plan in the country 's parliament .
The Prime Minister of Kosovo assured the international community very specifically that it would fully protect and respect minority groups .
Incidentally , may I remind my fellow Members that all minority groups in Kosovo actively support independence ?
Only the Serbs , with their intransigence and hurt pride , are not on board .
In this sense , the speech by the Serbian Minister for Foreign Affairs was rather unfortunate .
None of this detracts from the fact that the future of both Serbia and Kosovo does still lie in the European Union , however .
I look forward to this with great excitement .

( EL ) Mr President , the appeals by the Council and the Commission to international law , the principles of the UN and the Helsinki Final Act are truly ironic and provocative . Today , by recognising the independence of Kosovo , the Council and the Commission are infringing them all , as well as UN Security Council Resolution 1244 of 1999 , according to which Kosovo is part of Serbian territory .
This is a flagrant redrawing of the borders , enforced and masterminded by the United States with the cooperation of the EU itself .
Stop this hypocrisy !
For two years now you have been debating about how Kosovo will become independent and how the EU will send troops to protect its interests in the region .
We believe that the situation is extremely serious .
It will trigger new points of tension and destabilisation for the Balkans in the short term , and throughout the world in the long term , because it will constitute a new precedent .
Your imperialist dogma of ' divide and rule ' is well known .
There are plans to carve up a great number of countries throughout the world so that you can control them .
We believe that the peoples of the Balkans and Kosovan residents of Albanian origin will find themselves facing a new storm resulting from the clashes between the United States , the EU and Russia .
That explains our opposition .
We believe that governments ought not to recognise this ' state ' , which will be a protectorate in the future , and we think that the peoples of the Balkans and Europe should not allow it .
( EL ) Mr President , whenever the strength of law yields to the law of the strong , the result is suffering .
It is only in Kosovo that we have seen things happening at lightning speed .
In 40 years in diplomacy , I have never seen such haste in the process not only of proclaiming independence but also of recognition by certain European states .
What they have recognised is not Kosovo , but a Pandora 's Box .
I , for one , have never come across a situation so peculiar to itself .
Kosovo itself is not sui generis , but the establishment of a military base in Kosovo is .
In any case , I believe that we have deviated .
In this chamber , in front of MEPs who today represent the democratic governments of Europe , democratic parties and democratic sentiments , I have heard people say : ' You know , we have stepped in to solve the problem where Mr Ahtisaari failed . '
What are we ?
Are we a body of appeal ?
Is this Parliament a court of appeal ?
Instead of worrying about what will happen in Kosovo tomorrow , it would be better , Mr President , for us to think about what will happen when the status of the UN is violated in this insulting , disdainful manner .

( CS ) I am convinced that the question we must ask today is no longer whether to recognise Kosovo or not : the question is how to maintain political stability and security in a region dominated by ethnic hatred and fear and 40 % unemployment .
Paradoxically , Kosovo 's independence comes at a time when European countries are moving towards political federalisation .
The situation in the Balkans , however , clearly demonstrates that EU policy offers no solution that would prevent the division of the state while providing for the peaceful coexistence of all the ethnic and religious entities within it .
In this regard , naming this year the Year of Intercultural Dialogue sounds almost like a mockery .
Ladies and gentlemen , some years ago the United States and the European Union both declared that they would not recognise the independence of Kosovo .
Now not only the United States but also many EU countries have done so .
It is quite clear , therefore , that the process of redefining national entities exists and will continue to exist , that there is no global solution to it and that it damages or destroys relations with the original country .
In such a situation we can have only one goal and that is to prevent bloodshed .
( DE ) Mr President , President-in-Office of the Council , my thoughts inevitably turn back 17 years , when Slovenia declared its independence ; the Minister of Foreign Affairs was Dimitrij Rupel .
The majority of major countries in the UN and the EU and the majority of EU Member States refused to recognise Slovenia at that time .
The Foreign Affairs Minister of one large EU Member State said that if Slovenia became independent , other countries would isolate it for 50 years .
Today , Slovenia is a recognised , respected , successful country , and a good President of the Council of the European Union .
Some of what has been said today in this House should be put into perspective by viewing it in the light of history .
I am glad that Kosovo is now independent as , after decades of oppression , the Kosovars finally have their own free , democratic state , having been oppressed for decades and more recently finding themselves the victim of genocide that was stopped only with international assistance .
I call on Serbia to realise that this is also an opportunity for the Serbian people to move forward into their European future - leaving behind the burdens of the past .
It must then renounce violence , however !
The Serbian Minister for Kosovo cannot then welcome the fact that UN guards on the border with Kosovo are attacked .
It is not appropriate then to accuse the democratically elected leaders of Kosovo of high treason instead of commencing neighbourly dialogue with these victims of genocide .
I cannot state this more clearly : it is unacceptable for Bishop Artemije of the Serbian Orthodox Church to call for war .
This is not acceptable !
This must be very clear - we as the European Union must help Serbia on the way to Europe , but Serbia must also play its part in creating a peaceful , good and neighbourly atmosphere .
Three quarters of the Members of this Parliament were and are in favour of Kosovo 's sovereignty , so it is not possible to say that the European Union is divided , and I am happy that we are now entering into a good European future for the entire region .
( Applause )
( HU ) Mr President , it had become increasingly clear that the declaration of a monitored independence for Kosovo had become inevitable .
Our prime task now is to ensure a successful resolution of the situation in Kosovo , to secure stability in the region , to establish an appropriate role for the European Union , to create an EU protectorate , but without it taking on the role of regent .
On the one hand I understand the pain of the Serbs : my country lost 60 % of its territory after World War I. Serbia is losing nearly one fifth of its territory , and it is a great tragedy for any nation to lose the cradle of its history , statehood and religion .
On the other hand it is a fact that long ago Serbia lost any moral rights it had with regard to Kosovo because the Serbian government failed to provide a proper homeland for the Albanian community living there .
We are sure that Serbia 's diplomatic response will not jeopardise the country 's integration into the European Union .
We must help Serbia to deal with its loss by speeding up convergence with the European Union .
It is important to offer gestures , to send positive messages , and so it is vital for the EU to adopt a clear plan of action for lifting the visa requirements for Serbia and the other countries of the western Balkans .
Let us speed up Serbia 's integration , but without relaxing the requirements in any way .
It is understandable that some EU Member States have reservations .
I feel that the concerns of Cyprus and Spain are legitimate , but I am baffled by the apprehensions raised by the Romanian and Slovakian political elites .
No-one is threatening these countries ' integration .
Separation and unilateral declarations of independence must not be a precedent for the EU in future .
Implementation of the Ahtisaari Plan , on the other hand , which provides a secure regime for minorities , may set a positive precedent for Europe to follow in future with regard to protection of minorities . Thank you for your attention .

( HU ) Mr President , Commissioner , Foreign Minister , Kosovo 's declaration of independence and our recognition of it is not tantamount to choosing the lesser evil ; it is the only appropriate step we can take in the present situation .
Negotiations have unfortunately failed to produce results ; continuing failure to reach a settlement on Kosovo 's status has constantly destabilised the region .
There was no other way of resolving the situation than the one that took place last week , definitive settlement of Kosovo 's status and acceptance of Kosovo 's independence .
We welcome the fact that a large majority in the Kosovo parliament voted in favour of the Ahtisaari Plan .
We expect Kosovo to translate the provisions of the Ahtisaari Plan into action , paying particular attention to the provisions concerning protection of minorities .
The Ahtisaari Plan represents Europe 's boldest regime for protecting minorities , and it may serve as a model and an example of good practice for the whole of the region , so it is very important that we hold Kosovo to account on this matter .
The future for Kosovo and Serbia lies in European integration .
This has now become easier for both these countries .
They have rid themselves of a grave and crippling problem that until now had consumed all the creative energy of both countries .
Whether they use this opportunity will depend on them .
If they do , both Kosovo and Serbia must be given all the support the European Union can provide , especially with regard to prompt lifting of visa requirements and provision of financial support .
It is wonderful that the European Union unanimously approved the mandate of the civilian mission in Kosovo .
It is all the more worrying , however , that Member States of the European Union have failed to reach unanimity regarding recognition of Kosovo .
If the European Union expects to be taken seriously in the international political arena , failure to reach a consensus on important events taking place in a neighbouring country is something that it cannot allow to happen .
It is therefore important for the European Union to speak and act in unison .
To conclude , I wish Kosovo and all its citizens every success and all the best for the future .

( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , President Pöttering , by saying that the declaration of independence expresses the will of Kosovo 's citizens to take control of their own destiny , is making a statement of historical importance .
The independence of Kosovo is a concrete application in Europe of the principle of self-determination for the people sanctioned by the UN Charter .
Of course , many of us are very concerned about the creation of the first Islamic state in Europe , welcomed by the entire jihadist media , for example the enthusiastic leader of the Islamic satellite television channel Al-Arabiya , and about the fate of the Serbian Orthodox Christian minority , about whom we are reminded by the wise words from the Vatican .
However - and I particularly stress this - it is still undeniably an important legal and political precedent .
There is no point in denying it ; it is important for the peoples of Europe , from Corsica to Flanders , Sardinia to the Basque country , Brittany to Occitania , and in our Padania , now regrettably nations without States , who aspire to the dream of self-determination and freedom .
Long live the Europe of the people !
Long live free Padania !
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , as always when someone acts outside international law , Europe is divided and undone .
Unilateral acts create very serious precedents , and we have now heard what Mr Borghezio had to say .
Tension is heightened in an atmosphere that is anything but calm and is full of geopolitical comparisons .
Europe is lacking unity , authoritativeness and transparency .
We have even read of meetings between the government currently holding the Presidency of Europe and the United States Administration , which has suggested the lines to be taken .
It is no accident that this Parliament is politically impotent today , despite the celebrations for the new Treaty .
The only way of turning the page is to go back to international law and an independent vision that sees the whole of the Balkans in Europe , recognising the right of the whole area .
I hope it is not too late .
( CS ) The European Union 's attempt to present Kosovo as a unique case is no more than an embarrassing example of wishful thinking .
Not only does Kosovo create a dangerous precedent , it also has an historical precursor .
It is a mirror image of the situation in Czechoslovakia in the 1930s and its German minority .
How ironic it is that history repeats itself !
The first four EU countries to proclaim in unison that they would recognise the separatist republic were also the four signatories to the Munich Agreement .
Back then , 80 years ago , Chamberlain , Daladier , Mussolini and Hitler carved up Czechoslovakia ; today it is again Britain , France , Italy and Germany who recognise the carving-up of Serbia .
They are tearing from Serbia the historical territory of the Kosovo Field , where in 1389 the Serbian nobility fought an heroic battle to stop the advance of the Ottoman Turks into Europe .
That is where Serbian identity was born .
Now we , the European Union , are transplanting this historic heart of Serbia elsewhere .
Shame on us , Munichites !
( PL ) Mr President , in today 's debate on the Serbian Province of Kosovo , I would like first of all to protest against the illegal actions of the Albanian authorities , which have been inspired by the United States .
In the face of the dismantling of the Serbian State , the reaction of the European Union and certain Member States is outrageous .
The European Union is supporting the Albanian separatists and is deciding at the same time to set up a mission in Kosovo that is dubious in the light of international law , and in conflict with the UN position .
I am outraged that the EU authorities wish to be a party in this Balkan conflict without having the right or any mandate to do so .
By what right is Brussels once again interfering in the affairs of a sovereign state , and violating international arrangements to boot ?
What happened on Monday in Brussels reminds me of the Munich Conference in 1938 .
Here , once again , international society is remaining silent and allowing Berlin and Washington to see their interests put into effect .
For the first time since 1945 , in breach of international law , borders in Europe are being changed for ethnic reasons .
A domino effect and subsequent conflicts linked to actions by Albanian separatists are inevitable .
Not much imagination is required to see how independence for this Serbian province could impact on ethnic feuds in other parts of Europe and the world .
( RO ) Mr. President , ladies and gentlemen , after 20 years of political and military confrontations , after 20 years of major errors in the Balkans , we ask ourselves whether the Kosovo solution , namely the unilateral declaration of independence of the Kosovo province , is legal and opportune .
The Kosovo solution is neither legal , nor opportune .
It is not legal because no international law principle justifies the unilateral declaration of independence of the Kosovo province .
Moreover , recently , the Secretary General of the United Nations Organization has found no answer to the question of whether the solution is legal or illegal , leaving a press conference organized at the United Nations headquarters .
It is also not opportune because it creates a dangerous precedent .
Not for the European Union Member States , not for Slovakia or Romania , countries that have an emancipated and modern legislation regarding minorities , but it creates a dangerous precedent for Abkhazia , for South Ossetia and , especially , for Transnistria , where there are frozen conflicts since the time of the Kosovo conflict .
Nevertheless , it equally creates a dangerous precedent for the Balkans - the Republic of Srpska , for instance- for other regions inhabited by minorities in the Balkans .
Nevertheless , it also creates a dangerous precedent for the European Union .
It is often said that the Balkans produce more history than they can consume .
It seems that , this time , the Balkans have produced more history than the European Union itself can consume .
The proof is the fact that we stand here divided from the point of view of recognizing the independence of the Kosovo province .
I can tell you that Romania will not recognize the independence of the Kosovo province and the national action is supported by the Romanian delegation in the European People 's Party .
We know very well , ladies and gentlemen , we have seen in this room , here , what we should do about Serbia .
Its future is , obviously , European .
Yet , we do not know what we should do about Kosovo .
And I have to confess to you , with all the indulgence you can give me , that the visa system alone , the liberalization of the visa system , will not be enough in order to grow this region of our Europe .


( BG ) Dear Mr. Chairman , Dear Mr. Rupel , Dear Mr. Rehn , Perhaps now is the time to once more express our regret that no agreement was reached on the status of Kosovo between Serbia and Kosovo but there was no way for the negotiations to continue forever since both sides remained at their mutually exclusive positions .
We could also voice our regret that , today , Serbia and the Serbian people have to foot the bill of Great Serbian nationalism , to which the country is bidding farewell , although with some difficulties .
However , we have to be realistic and emphasize that the independence of Kosovo , though not independence in the full sense of the word , is a fact , a real fact that , of course , attributes new quality to the ongoing processes .
We have to take into consideration this fact and the disputes whether to recognise it or not do now change its existence .
We cannot but think of the possible consequences that this act will produce on the stability in South-Eastern Europe , hopefully , of a short-term nature only .
Still , it is necessary for the European Union to make several important steps : first , to assist the establishment of an adequate administrative and governmental structure in Kosovo , then to speed up the integration of Serbia by rapidly signing a stabilisation and association agreement , and to pay special attention to Macedonia , Bosnia and Herzegovina and Montenegro because there is the risk of missing the forest in South-Eastern Europe for the tree .
Mr President , I agree with those who say that there really was no other option but the independence of Kosovo .
The EU is taking on its largest civilian mission ever and it will be very important that it is successful .
It is quite an extraordinary situation .
It is rather difficult to explain to outsiders that , although not all Member States can agree on recognising Kosovo , they all support the EULEX mission .
Indeed , a country like Spain is supplying personnel to the mission - this is very EU , very Brussels .
But it must succeed .
I agree with Commissioner Rehn that the message to Serbia must be that the time has come to turn the page and , as others have commented , in that context it was somewhat disappointing to listen to Mr Jeremić , the Serbian Foreign Minister , this afternoon .
I understand the rawness and the sense of grievance , but things must move on rapidly .
I hope that Prime Minister Thaci will make it absolutely clear to his compatriots that the protection of the Serb minority and other minorities in Kosovo is an absolute priority , because violence will not be tolerated .
In that context , I was disappointed that the Serb Foreign Minister did not condemn the violence that has been perpetrated by Serbs in the last few years .
He said Serbia did not encourage or instigate it , but he did not actually use the word ' condemn ' , which was disappointing .
Finally , the important thing , as others have said , is going to be economic development .
There is 40 % unemployment in Kosovo , and there is massive unemployment in Serbia as well .
Let us move on towards rapid integration in the EU , moving via visa liberalisation , which I hope will come very soon .
( GA ) Mr President , I heartily welcome the announcement of Kosovo 's independence last Sunday .
Nine years have passed since the terrible bombing of Kosovo on the orders of Milošević 's regime .
The people of Kosovo have a right to independence and in a way the events of the last nine years have contributed to the advent of this independence .
It is extremely important that the civil and political rights of the Serbian minority still residing in Kosovo are fully respected .
The European Union will have to support the Government of Kosovo in order to promote the economy of the country , because the rate of unemployment in Kosovo is at 40 % and that must be rectified .
I hope this is a new beginning for Kosovo and that the European Union will be happy to support the rebuilding of this new state in the years to come .
I also hope that it will become an example of the wishes of the European Union that people and communities can live in harmony .
( EL ) Mr President , the EU does not build states ; it incorporates them .
The diverging European views on the problem of Kosovo constitute an admission of the CFSP 's failure .
The EU has sacrificed its internal consultation to the political strength of its Member States .
Article 11 of the Treaty on European Union stipulates as a precondition that that the Union shall act in conformity with the principles of the United Nations Charter , the Helsinki Final Act and the objectives of the Paris Charter , including those on external borders .
Since the EU is a union of law , as Mr Salafranca has said , what is the basis of European legal liability ?
Specifically , on what legal basis have certain Member States pressed for recognition on the basis of international law ?
Security Council Resolution 1244 of 1999 does not provide sufficient justification or legitimacy for this . The point of the conclusions of the General Affairs and External Relations Council on the sui generis nature of the Kosovo situation is that the case in question has no precedent .
I hope that it does not constitute a precedent . It is unique ; there is a special reference to adherence to the fundamental principles of the sovereignty and territorial integrity of states , which , as is explicitly stated , are not in doubt .
Finally , I should like to remind you that these principles constitute the hard core of international law on vested interests .
( ES ) Mr President , the debate is already at an advanced stage ; I do not think that I can contribute a great deal to it , not even in terms of passion , but I do think we have to focus on the importance of international law and international commitments .
On 16 December 1991 , EU Ministers adopted guidelines on the recognition of new States in Eastern Europe and in the Soviet Union and affirmed respect for the inviolability of all borders and that borders could be changed only by peaceful means and by common agreement .
Secondly , the resolution under which there is currently a European presence in Kosovo - UN Security Council Resolution 1244 - specifically lays down that the principles of sovereignty and territorial integrity of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia and the other countries of the region must be respected .
A breach of international law , of the commitments of the European countries and of the UN resolutions has been committed .
The consequences will be costly for all of us .
( PL ) Mr President , recognition of Kosovo 's independence is equivalent to opening Pandora 's box in Europe .
This is a dangerous precedent , in breach of international law - especially of UN resolutions - which has stated unambiguously that Kosovo is an integral part of Serbia .
Today , with international approval , steps are being taken to dismantle one of Europe 's states .
I am saying this as an MEP from a state that has already experienced such dismantling in its history .
There can be no consent to this .
This is a dangerous precedent , since Kosovo 's footsteps have been followed by South Ossetia and Abkhazia , among others , who have already announced a desire to break away and a desire to declare independence .
What shall we say about Cyprus , which is striving for unity at all costs ?
With such an example , and by setting this example for the Cypriots , we are putting them in an unclear and ambiguous situation in which they will be unable to fight for the unity of their island .
Above all , ladies and gentlemen , recognition of Kosovan independence is a gift for the progressive Islamisation of Europe , and I do not think that any of us meant that to happen .
( ES ) Mr President , I regret Kosovo 's unilateral declaration of independence .
It is not good news for Europe .
It is the last link in a chain of failures : a failure to coexist , which resulted in the crisis in 1999 , a failure by the parties and the international community itself to reach an agreed solution and a failure by the Security Council .
There is a fear that the entity that some hastened to recognise is another failure .
It should provide a framework for democratic , secure coexistence , in which citizens prosper and the rights of minorities are respected ; it should also avoid being a problem for the stability of the region .
Ladies and gentlemen , the European Union has also failed , as it has not found a solution in its neighbourhood that is in line with international law .
Europe should mean union , not separation ; agreement , not multilateralism ; de jure , not de facto ; integration , not ethnic division .
As Europeans we have a significant responsibility in this area : we were in the majority in the Contact Group , the UN Special Envoy and his team were Europeans , and it was the European Council which , in December , hastily decided to send a mission to Kosovo without legal basis .
I would like to point out that paragraph 15 of Parliament 's Resolution in March said the following : ' Considers that the adoption of a new UN Security Council resolution is also crucial for the future engagement of the EU in Kosovo , and that no enhanced EU involvement should be envisaged in the absence of such a resolution . '
The circumstances in the case of Kosovo are exceptional .
However , there are irresponsible people who want to change the borders of European countries and are using it as a precedent .
This is why the inviolability of the borders of EU Member States needs to be reiterated .
Mr President , I am persuaded that the fact Kosovo was already a UN protectorate , that the solution is supported by the UN Secretary-General , and that negotiations had failed , all mean that Kosovo is a unique case in our world .
I refute those who argue that this is an illegal act .
Paragraph 11a of UN Resolution 1244 makes clear that this is ' pending a final settlement ' .
Paragraph 7 specifically authorises security by ' relevant international organisations ... with all necessary means ' .
I accept that this is a test of credibility for the European Union , that any failure to respect the Serb population 's rights in the new Kosovo would be a victory for ethnic cleansing in reverse , and that we should emphasise that Serbia , as well as Kosovo , will be equal partners as future members of our European Union .
But let not the ghost of Slobodan Milošević stalk this decision or this Chamber .
The entrenchment of peace , the precursor of reconciliation , the platform for a whole region - as the fall of the Berlin Wall was for Eastern Europe , so let independence for Kosovo be for former Yugoslavia .
( SL ) After the changes that have taken place , our task is not to explain history or to spread alarm by talking about the domino effect , but to support the development which will ultimately stabilise the region and bring it closer to European standards and a European perspective .
It is an important fact in this extremely complicated story that the European Union has taken on a big responsibility .
It was united in its decision on the EULEX mission to help in the building-up of institutions and in political and economic development .
The European Commission has also set out measures to support the development of the wider region .
All this is aimed at defusing this dangerous situation that offers no prospects , and removing the unusual paradox that part of Europe , surrounded by the Member States , is a protectorate of the United Nations .
It is not only my wish , but also the wish of others , that the reconciliation , peace and cooperation which now characterise the European Union may become a key principle or a foundation for coexistence within Kosovo , as well as in the relationship between Serbia and Kosovo .
In these demanding days for both Serbia and Kosovo , and in the spirit of what I said earlier , I would like to welcome the words and actions of all those who have expressed their commitment to peace , moderation , openness and the future .
( EL ) Mr President , we are faced with a state of affairs that may have far-reaching consequences , not only for the Balkan region but also internationally .
The claim that it is a sui generis case does not indemnify us .
The circumvention of international law and its rules is highly dangerous .
For the first time , borders have been changed with neither the agreement of the parties involved , nor the approval of the Security Council .
Once again , Europe has appeared divided on such a vital issue and has repeated the mistakes of the past .
The extent to which the 2 000-strong force can guarantee safety and stability in the region is also in doubt .
The declaration of Kosovo 's independence is now a fact .
We support a peaceful , multi-ethnic Kosovo integrated in the bosom of the EU .
The solution to the crisis can only be to secure the path to rapid unification of the Western Balkans with the EU .
The immediate signing of the Stability and Growth Pact is necessary , especially for Serbia , as the only way of providing real support for its democratic forces .
Finally , the way the situation is handled will be a crucial test for European foreign policy .
Mr President , I fail to see the rush to resolve the Kosovo issue , circumventing the UN and ignoring current international law .
I believe that Kosovo 's new nationhood will be difficult , with no obvious exit strategy for the EU , whose presence will be long term , given a hostile Serbia next door and the prevalence of organised crime .
Independent Kosovo 's acceptance by Russia and China , who are on the UN Security Council , is very unlikely in the foreseeable future .
We have now managed successfully to injure a Serbia trying to forget Milošević and build a democratic future .
Its loss may fan nationalist sentiments and drive Serbia towards Russia , which , in turn , may apply the precedence of the Kosovo situation in frozen conflicts ranging from Transnistria to Abkhazia .
Russia will , interestingly , now claim the moral high ground in international law - perhaps for the first time in recent history .
I have considerable sympathy with Cyprus , which has refused to join the majority of EU Member States in recognising Kosovo .
Already , Mr Talat , the leader of the so-called ' breakaway republic of Northern Cyprus ' claims Kosovo as a precedent for his territory .
As an aside to Mr Howitt - UN talks also failed over the unification of Cyprus , so that issue is not unique to this case .
Not surprisingly , Spain is concerned about the Basque Country and Catalonia , and Slovakia about its Hungarian minority .
Curiously , although the Organisation of the Islamic Conference ( OIC ) has welcomed an independent Kosovo as a potential new member , Azerbaijan , although in the OIC , is wary over Nagorno-Karabakh claiming independence and refuses to recognise Kosovo .
Therefore , whatever the EU and the US are saying about this issue being sui generis , clearly not all the countries of the world agree .
Mr President , I would like to make two points .
Firstly , the most important thing is that the independence of Kosovo was proclaimed after supervision of the situation there by the international community for a number of years , and the international community , after long deliberations , could not find a better solution to the problem than the independence of Kosovo .
Therefore , following Russian attempts to relate the situation of Kosovo to some other regions of Europe , like Transnistria , South Ossetia or Abkhazia , it is not difficult to make this counter-argument dangerous or not suitable for Moscow itself .
Would Russia agree to withdraw from those territories and leave control of the ' frozen conflicts ' areas of Europe to the international community ?
If so , then we , the EU , would get a real chance to reach a long-awaited solution , and we should be interested in this .
Secondly , it is well known that some countries try to warm their hands above the embers of each fireplace of international instability .
This time , Russia , pretending to defend the interests of Serbia , decided to play its own geopolitical game , pretending that , without its assent , no problem in the world would be solved .
This position is not new or unexpected .
But Russia is not the most important player this time , as it does not have real power to angle events in a way which would not be acceptable for the West .
For instance , in the future , Kosovo 's attempts to join the United Nations might not be easy , but Russia cannot achieve any significant isolation of the state on the international stage because , when Kosovo is recognised by a majority of EU Member States , the United States and some other countries , the isolation will become meaningless .
I salute the independence of Kosovo and wish the Kosovar people the best of luck in building their state .
Mr President , the difference between the external actions of the EU and other international actors is respect for international legality and UN decisions .
I am afraid that , by encouraging and recognising the independence of Kosovo outside the current body of international legality and the UN , that defining characteristic of EU external actions becomes questionable , if not even untenable .
I only hope that we will not live to regret the decision we have taken with respect to Kosovo .
( SK ) Kosovo has declared independence .
This is no surprise ; it was to be expected .
The international community must take note of it .
If this region is supposed to be peaceful and stable then the EU Member States must act as one and give their full support to this country 's development , in accordance with Mr Martti Ahtisaari 's plan .
Those Member States and politicians , from Slovakia too , who spread unsubstantiated rumours that this act will be a dangerous precedent for other countries are mistaken .
Kosovo is a unique case .
We should look back at the root of those bloody events nine years ago when Serbian military forces committed genocide against the Albanians .
It is quite understandable that members of the Albanian community do not want to live within the Republic of Serbia .
Making them to do so by force would result in a war .
The EU has a very important role to play in creating a society in which all citizens are equal and where minority communities have extensive rights to maintain and develop their identity , as well as a right to run their own public administration : this means extensive autonomy for the Serbian community .
( DE ) Mr President , I would like to make three comments .
Firstly , the fact that we are in this situation shows that we as the European Union were once again not in a position to hold our own between the two poles of Russia and the United States .
My second point is this : we must now do everything we can to establish minority and cultural rights in Kosovo .
The Kosovar Government would therefore be well advised to do a great deal in far-reaching , practical ways .
I would like to thank you , President-in-Office of the Council , for making an important contribution through EULEX .
Thirdly , for historical and cultural reasons , I have a lot of sympathy for the sentiments in Serbia right now and I believe that , for this reason , we need to be patient as we allow Serbia to find its way to the European Union , and that we must support that process .
We must also make it clear , however , that violence will not be tolerated .
We should continue to pay our funds - EUR 187 million in 2007 - but on condition that things proceed peacefully , in order to pave the way for a stable region .
Mr President , the Serbia of Milošević - and even after him - followed the advice of its big brother , losing every time rather than taking a realistic stance and trying to find ways towards more amicable divorces , with the prospect of meeting again in Europe .
Maybe it will happen now .
One special remark to those worried about one-sided interpretations of international law , the integrity of states or the sovereignty of territories and peoples : we should understand and take into account the fact that a state which seeks to exterminate or expel all citizens belonging to a different ethnic population is killing not only them but , first of all , its own claim to sovereignty - sovereignty over mass graves .
Integrity of cemeteries is not a case to accept .
And no parallels with the Basque country , Quebec or Abkhazia should be accepted .
Neither Madrid nor Ottawa nor Tbilisi is going to bomb and kill those people .
Russia is different .
Russia has also been denied by its own actions of repeated genocide and has no more right to sovereignty over survivors in Chechnya but merely the medieval law of the fist .
Mr President , some claim that we should leave aside the issue of recognition of the state , when speaking about Kosovo , and instead deal with recognition of the reality .
The reality is that , after its statement of self-determination , Kosovo is neither independent nor able , for long , to be an independent , sustainable state .
It was a protectorate and it will remain a protectorate .
The reality is that the European Union is divided between the so-called realists and the so-called legalists .
The reality is that , by calling Kosovo a sui generis case , we are admitting that international law is either insufficient or inadequate and we are therefore finding a solution outside the law .
This would lead us to replace the power of right with the power of might .
I think this is neither the goal nor the basic value of this Union .
( PT ) Following Kosovo 's unilateral declaration of independence , the worst thing that could happen now would be for the political impasse to place us in the unwelcome situation of looking on as tensions mount .
We must therefore establish the lowest common denominator in defining our future decisions and actions ; from that point of view , what the President-in-Office of the Council said left me not exactly satisfied , but hopeful .
We must remind Kosovo that the path it now takes will inevitably influence its future relations with the European Union and that , therefore , we are willing to help them and we have an obligation - in our own interest , too - to hold out not one hand but both hands to Serbia and to say that we retain the firm conviction that Serbia 's future is in Europe .
Twenty years after the collapse of the Soviet empire , let us not provoke what the communists of those days did not manage to do : to put Serbia in the exclusive sphere of Moscow .
We must not make that mistake .

( CS ) Ladies and gentlemen , the time has come at last : yes , those who want the independence of Texas to be recognised by the United States , those who want to see the west of Romania separated from it as a purely Hungarian territory , those who want an independent Scotland , Catalonia , Basque Country , and all the other states that will no doubt come into existence in Latin America and Africa .
It is said that Kosovo does not set a precedent .
That is a mistake : it is a territory that has been ethnically cleansed of eight nationalities with the help and acquiescence of the occupational forces , a territory that is riddled with drugs , human trafficking , 50 % unemployment and constant pressure on the remaining Serbs .
Now it is declaring independence of a second Albanian state and that sets a bad example .
It will now continue to haunt all of you who have literally massacred international law here .
Shame on you : this is a second Munich and no true democrat should ever support it .
President-in-Office of the Council . - First of all , I would like extend my heartfelt thanks to Parliament and the Members who supported the Council 's position .
I accept that there are different opinions ; that is normal for parliaments .
However , it seems to me that the European Union has been given support at today 's session .
I would like to answer some questions .
The first question is on the system we are envisaging for command , that is to say for future responsibilities , and here I am thinking , of course , of institutions in Kosovo .
The European Union has obviously sent a special representative to Kosovo .
In its declaration of independence , the Kosovo Parliament agreed , from the outset , to the provisions of the Ahtisaari Plan .
The provision of the entire plan will be built into the Kosovo constitution and into its legislation .
Accordingly , the task of the European Union 's special envoy will be to monitor the local authorities and to safeguard the obligations which the new status demands .
After the International Civilian Office has been established , the European Union 's Special Representative will become the High Representative for civilian affairs for the international community .
He will also give political guidance to EULEX .
I would like to add that the European Union has done much in recent days , primarily to calm the situation and secure adequate support for Kosovo .
In addition to the mission about which the Council made a decision a few days ago , I would like to mention yesterday 's visit to Priština by the Secretary-General and the High Representative , Javier Solana .
I would like to quote just one sentence from his address .
Mr Solana said :
' I would like to transmit that the sentiment , the joy , that you spread so respectfully on the streets over the last days now has to be converted into positive and constructive energy in order to move society forward . '
' I would like to transmit that the sentiment , the joy , that you spread so respectfully on the streets over the last days now has to be converted into positive and constructive energy in order to move society forward . '
That means , I think , that all of us also wish our friends in Kosovo to be prepared to convert the energy they have displayed in the last few days into rational action that will secure a respectable European future not only for Kosovo , but also of course for Serbia .
I think much has been said in the speeches and Members ' contributions today about Serbia deserving to continue on its path towards integration with the European Union , and as I was listening to the speeches by various representatives of this Parliament , I could not help envisaging that in the future Serbian will be spoken here too .
And , I hope , Albanian as well .
I trust we will hear the languages of countries which so badly wish to become members of this Parliament and the European Union .
However , in view of the remarks we heard from some of our Spanish friends , I would not say that harmonisation of the text of the decisions was not difficult for the General Affairs and External Relations Council , but in the end , we managed to agree with our Spanish and Cypriot colleagues on a text which reflects unanimity , joint decision-making and collective thinking .
Finally , I would like to say , Mr President , that naturally I have to agree with the speech by my colleague from Slovenia , Mr Kacin , when he spoke of the need for Serbs in Kosovo to accept Kosovo as their homeland too and take part in its government .
Of course , Kosovo is their country too and every delay by Kosovan Serbs in cooperating in the government of Kosovo may be detrimental .
May I say that these debates have given me encouragement and I would like to thank you , Mr President , and the ladies and gentlemen of the European Parliament for all these constructive comments .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , I want to thank the House for a most responsible debate .
It was widely recognised today that the European Union has indeed left no stone unturned in seeking a negotiated solution , but this has unfortunately been in vain .
Consequently , we are now bound to steer the process to its conclusion .
Many of you also underlined the importance of not isolating Serbia , and especially of reaching out to the younger generation in Serbia .
I fully agree , and am happy to inform you that we already have a visa facilitation agreement in force with the countries of the Western Balkans , including Serbia .
This means easier procedures when applying for visas , and exemptions for certain groups like students and business people .
I am also happy to inform you that we have already started a special dialogue on visa-free travel , which is very important for ordinary Serbian citizens and other peoples of the region .
We did this with Serbia in January , and my colleague Commission Vice-President Frattini is in fact in Skopje today , and in Podgorica tomorrow , to launch dialogues with the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia and with Montenegro .
But in order for that to succeed we need determination and unity throughout the institutions , including the Council , in terms of ministers of the interior who have strong powers in this area .
I count on your support in this regard , so that we can make real progress , united on this matter .
( FR ) As far as European unity is concerned , the fact that the EU has been able to maintain its unity on such a tricky and controversial subject is truly of major significance .
I would even say that the common foreign policy has responsibly passed one of its most serious tests since its creation .
I would like to congratulate the Slovenian Presidency on this outcome , which reflects your profound commitment to the future of the Western Balkans in Europe .
I also note , with much satisfaction , the desire of the future French Presidency to support fully the European perspective of the Western Balkans .
Therefore 2008 will be a particularly important year in the journey of the Western Balkans towards Europe .
The debate is closed .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
in writing . - ( HU ) In central , eastern and south-eastern Europe those of us who were born in this less fortunate region of Europe have learned from experience that spoken words and paper promises have little credence .
The important thing is how these are complied with in reality .
In Kosovo the Ahtisaari Plan has succeeded in becoming an idea that can be realised beyond the promises , bringing calm to the region .
Some say it cannot set a precedent ; but why not , one may ask , if it creates a functioning regime for protecting minorities ?
If it is adhered to in reality , then it should indeed serve as a precedent .
Those of us who grew up as part of a minority and were not masters of our own destiny can only welcome any innovation that promises a long-term solution for ethnic communities that live side by side .
If the Ahtisaari Plan is adhered to and implemented , the story of Kosovo that is now beginning may be just such a long-term solution .
We are concerned for the minorities living in other areas of Serbia who are anxiously following these events .
Will there be a solution that provides reassurance for these minorities , or for ethnic Hungarians in Vojvodina ?
I ask the Council and the Commission to ensure that the general unrest does not lead to irreversible actions , to resettlement measures in Vojvodina .
Let us not allow ethnic tensions to be vented on the minorities still living there .
The events currently taking place must not be allowed to result in more instances of people being deprived of their rights , but in a strengthening of rights .
Let us ensure that good precedents are finally set in the Balkans , giving the ethnic communities living there hope and prospects for the future at last .
in writing . - ( PT ) The unilateral declaration of independence of the Serbian province of Kosovo is not inevitable .
It is certainly an extremely serious development and a dangerous precedent in international law , with unforeseeable consequences for the stability of borders , in particular on the continent of Europe .
It is certainly a flagrant violation of the Charter of the United Nations and the Helsinki Final Act .
It is certainly an illegal decision in the light of the most basic principles of international law .
It is certainly the artificial creation of a pseudo-State under supervised sovereignty - and whatever that might be it will certainly have less sovereignty - or , rather , of a protectorate created and imposed by aggression and military occupation , by the USA , NATO and the EU .
It is certainly an attempt to perpetuate by means of a fait accompli policy , the political , economic and military domination of that most important region of Europe by the USA and the EU 's major powers .
That illegality must not be recognised , either formally or in practice , in particular through sending and taking part in the ' EU mission to Kosovo ' .
That EU mission does not actually have any UN mandate .
It is an EU mission which , in addition to being illegal in itself , is making an agreement with an illegal entity , therefore rendering it doubly illegal .
in writing . - ( FI ) Mr President , Finnish Councillor of State Harri Holkeri , who was acting as a negotiator in the Kosovo crisis a while ago , thought that the Albanians ' quest for independence could not be ignored forever , as that would be a return not to a zero score but a lot less .
As many Members have said , Kosovo 's independence was an inevitability .
It has likewise been pointed out that Kosovo is a sui generis case , and so independence poses no threat to the international principles of law for resolving conflict .
Europe therefore got a new country based on sustainable criteria .
Of course it is regrettable that no reconciliation , not even any minimal level of tolerance , has been achieved between the parties .
The international community can hardly be accused of not trying , as negotiations were headed by the distinguished peacemaker Martti Ahtisaari .
Now we need to remain adamant that Ahtisaari 's plan continues to be the guiding star whilst the new country is being built .
Its requirements offer a chance for the Western model of rule of law and internal and external stability in the region .
The security of Kosovo and the west Balkans is above all a European issue .
Whilst , therefore , it is once again evident that the UN Security Council is incapable of taking responsibility for the situation , the EU has to prepare to make an effort .
The integration of the west Balkans with the general European framework of stability is probably our greatest challenge since the Union began .
Regional tensions are now threatening to increase , the nation is frustrated by unemployment , and corruption and crime have taken hold .
The declaration of independence in Kosovo was eagerly awaited , and it led to real joy among the populace , which , as a European , I can easily relate to .
Now that exhilaration should be tapped to build what is the hardest thing : lasting peace and stability .
It succeeded 50 years ago elsewhere in Europe - why not in the Balkans at long last ?
in writing . - ( NL ) My group and the national delegation of my party in the European Parliament have decided recently to reject the present path towards Kosovo 's independence .
I can understand this , as the EU is currently behaving like a superpower , unilaterally imposing its will on Serbia , which has already been humiliated many times , and treating Kosovo as its protectorate .
This does not mean that I take back what I have said on the subject in past years .
Under the Yugoslav Constitution of 1974 , which gave Kosovo almost as much autonomy as the six federal republics of the time , it might have remained possible for Serbs and Albanians to coexist peacefully within a single federal state .
The unilateral abolition of that autonomy in the 1980s made the Serbian State a pointless and even harmful entity in the eyes of most inhabitants of Kosovo .
Kosovo has been behaving like an independent state since as long ago as September 1991 , with its own president , parliament and educational system .
If , back then , the outside world had acted in a timely fashion and recognised that state , along with the other successor states of Yugoslavia , no violent UÇK would have arisen , the inhabitants of Kosovo would not have been condemned to resort to crime as a source of income , and there would have been no cause for the war of 1999 .
in writing . - ( EL ) Eight years after NATO 's war in Yugoslavia , the Kosovo problem not only remains unsolved , but also has become more intractable .
The ' standards before status ' criterion ( i.e. democracy , return of refugees , conditions of multicultural coexistence , etc . , before the final regime is decided upon ) established by UN Resolution 1244 has not been fulfilled in basic terms .
Nevertheless , the Bush Administration pushed the leadership of the Albanian Kosovars towards a unilateral declaration of independence , with all that this entails for peace and stability in the Balkans , as well as for other international issues .
By approving a new mission in the region , the EU is supporting this policy and is contributing to the violation of UN Resolution 1244 of 1999 .
The unilateral declaration of Kosovo 's independence will cause a chain reaction of destabilisation in the Western Balkans and a negative precedent for many international issues .
We must base a solution on international law , in a way favouring neither the politics of divide and rule , nor local nationalist and expansionist ideas , nor changes to borders .
We believe that it is still possible to find a mutually acceptable solution within the framework of the UN , based on international law .
We are therefore in favour of continued negotiations .
in writing . - It is unfortunate that the European Union stands divided on the issue of Kosovo .
The European Union has taken a longstanding commitment to secure stability in the Western Balkans and , as the most influential supranational organisation of the continent , we need to convey a clear message and speak with one voice .
Peace and security in Kosovo ought to be a priority for the Union , since it neighbours the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia , a candidate country to the EU , and we should play a leading role as a mediator between Serbia and Kosovo .
It will not be an easy task , when there is no agreement in the Union , whether to recognise the independence of Kosovo in corpore or not .
Current indecisive behaviour of the Union creates only more confusion in Kosovo .
The Member States need to find a way through their differences in order to start carrying out our commitment to the region .
in writing . - ( HU ) I was in Priština myself on Sunday .
It is a rare thing for us to be present when a country declares its independence .
I intended my presence to be a message : even if this decision is painful for many , it was announced in circumstances where we were not afraid .
Independence was announced in the hotel where , years ago , guests were welcomed by the following sign above the door : ' Entry prohibited to dogs and Albanians ' .
The process leading up to Kosovo 's independence was not instigated by the EU .
Serbia started it by not guaranteeing fundamental human rights , individual and community rights to its citizens living in that territory .
The Democratic Alliance of Hungarians in Romania ( DAHR ) takes the view that Romania should recognise Kosovo 's independence as soon as possible .
Those who are reluctant to acknowledge the situation perhaps have unfinished business with the minorities in their own country .
Since its inception , the DAHR has wanted and still wants to fight for the rights of Transylvanian Hungarians using only political and parliamentary means , and rejecting violent means .
It may now become clear to everyone that the question of the individual and collective rights of traditional national minorities cannot merely be an internal issue for a country .
It is time to draw up a standardised agreement in the European Union ( EU ) that applies compulsorily to everyone and reassures minorities .
The main duty of the European Union is to offer help to stabilise the region in the areas of economy and social development , not only to Kosovo and Serbia but to the whole western Balkan region .
in writing . - ( FI ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to bid Kosovo a heartfelt welcome as one of the countries of Europe .
The declaration of independence was a brave act on Kosovo 's part .
Now the country and its people need to show the same courage and self-assurance as they start to build their own multicultural society .
It has been obvious for a long time now that the struggle for Kosovo 's independence was a one-way street .
It was only a question of time .
The deadline for independence would have been Serbia 's accession to the European Union .
Fortunately , they did not need to wait that long .
Kosovo has been under UN administration now for 10 years .
The situation is completely different from what it has been in other separatist regions .
The years to come will require far-sightedness and wisdom on the part of Kosovo 's leaders .
I believe they will show those qualities .
War , ethnic hatred and an administration run by the international community are experiences from which lessons have to be learnt .
The most important thing now is to focus on building a stable civil society .
Independence also removes the uncertainty which has kept both domestic and foreign investments away .
Mr Ahtisaari 's plan provides an excellent framework for the initial stages in the country 's independence .
Success will only be possible if the leaders and the people perceive the building of their country as their very own project , and not as a set of rules and regulations dictated to them from abroad .
The international community also needs to be able to keep a distance and let the country 's Kosovan and Serb populations build their own model of coexistence .
There are almost as many examples of multicultural countries as there are European states .
Kosovo is no exception where this is concerned .
Once again I offer my congratulations to the Kosovans and welcome them as a newly independent country .
in writing . - ( HU ) Kosovo 's declaration of independence is making big waves in our region .
The Romanian parties that are currently preparing for elections are using the occasion to create anti-Hungarian hysteria .
They are all lining up against Hungarians in Transylvania , which is similar in size to Kosovo and has a similar population to the Albanian province .
The ' deep concern ' of the Romanian parliament is completely unfounded and unjustified .
Romania must not be afraid of the Hungarians .
Our national community in Transylvania does respect the Romanian constitution and territorial integrity .
At the same time , however , we have reason to expect that , based on the principle of ' territorial rights ' , Romania will deal with the situation of our national community in a European way , and ensure the personal autonomy of Hungarians ( 1 ) and the regional autonomy of Transylvania and other regions ( 2 ) on the basis of the principle of self-governance that applies in the European Union .
In line with Council of Europe Recommendation 1609 / 2003 , based on the Gross report , we admit that autonomous regions largely promote conflict resolution and reinforce the stability of Europe .
At the same time , we would like to draw your attention to the fact that Romania itself may also benefit from the new situation since the autonomy model of the Kosovan Serbs may also provide a solution for the Romanian communities living across the border in Serbia and Ukraine .
Taking all this into account , it would be advisable for Romania not to subordinate its amicable settlement to ethno-political prejudice , but to recognise the independent Kosovo as soon as possible , like most other Member States of the Union .
in writing . - ( HU ) I welcome the European Union 's active participation and assumption of responsibility in looking for a solution for Kosovo .
I acknowledge my satisfaction that the Kosovan parliament has assumed the responsibility for Kosovo to respect the principles of democracy , equality of citizens and protection of minorities .
I hope that solidarity will develop among the Member States of the Union , in the interests of assuming an effective role in Kosovo .
Solidarity among the Member States of the EU in connection with Kosovo must manifest itself in the Member States recognising the independence of Kosovo as soon as possible .
The European Union must support Kosovo in its endeavours to become a European democratic state .
I welcome the fact that the Union will continue to guarantee its emphatic presence , since in this way the Union can contribute directly to stability in the Western Balkan region .
I am sure that the Serbian minority in Kosovo will fully guarantee the individual and collective rights necessary for them to stay in the land of their birth .
The European Union 's assumption of responsibility in Kosovo is exemplary .
We know that the situation of every European minority is unique , so there are no general solutions , but the Union must play a part in ensuring the individual and collective rights of minority communities , using its influence to reinforce the effectiveness of democratic dialogue and political agreement between the majority and the minority .
It is crucial for the minority communities living in the Member States that legal regulation of the protection of minorities in the Union be established .
Seventh Human Rights Council of the United Nations ( debate )
The next item is the Council and Commission statements on the Seventh Human Rights Council of the United Nations .
President-in-Office of the Council . - I am pleased to have been given an opportunity to talk to you about the Human Rights Council .
By placing this item on the agenda for the plenary , the European Parliament has confirmed the importance that Europe as a whole gives to the Human Rights Council .
It is a central , global body for the protection of human rights .
The European Union is a firm advocate of an effective Human Rights Council .
We have worked very hard to ensure that , in its final form , it offers a firm basis for a fast and efficient response to the most serious human rights violations .
As we know , in December last year the final institutional package for the Human Rights Council was adopted and now is the time for the Council to be fully operational .
The sixth session of the Council which took place in September and December last year produced many important results , which I am not going to list here .
It is our ambition to continue this work at the seventh and eighth working sessions .
The seventh session will take place next month and it will be very busy .
Together with the eighth session , to take place in the first two weeks of June , it is to debate the extension of 25 special rapporteurs ' mandates , regular reports by special rapporteurs and several disturbing human rights situations in some countries with regard to certain topics .
From the point of view of the European Union , the extension of mandates for the special rapporteurs for Burma / Myanmar , the Democratic Republic of Congo , the Democratic Peoples ' Republic of Korea , and Somalia is of crucial importance for the seventh session of the Human Rights Council .
In addition , the European Union will use every opportunity offered by the Council to draw attention to the worrying state of human rights in other places around the world .
To that effect it will get involved in interactive dialogues with individual special rapporteurs and with the High Commissioner for Human Rights .
Interactive dialogues are a significant new instrument of the Council , and the European Union will continue striving to consolidate it as one of the key means offered by regular Council sessions to address individual issues .
Ladies and gentlemen , as you know , for the period of its Presidency of the Council of the European Union , Slovenia has listed intercultural dialogue as one of its priorities .
Therefore , we are pleased that this issue will also be given due attention at the seventh session of the Human Rights Council .
The invitation sent to the High Representative of the Alliance of Civilisations , Mr Sampaio , to attend the session indicates an enhanced awareness that the activities of the Alliance of Civilisations help to strengthen religious tolerance , which is also one of the European Union 's priorities in the human rights area .
Allow me to present another very important development within the framework of the Human Rights Council , namely the introduction of a universal periodic review , to which the European Union attaches great importance .
This instrument should offer a means of reviewing the human rights situation in all the Member States under the same conditions .
Members of the European Union which will already be subject to this mechanism by the spring ( April and May ) are currently making thorough preparations for this review .
We will strive for maximum transparency and efficiency in that process .
The method by which this periodic review is going to be conducted will have a significant effect on the credibility of the Human Rights Council as a whole .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , I welcome this opportunity to address Parliament on the subject of the Seventh Session of the Human Rights Council .
Let me start by putting the Human Rights Council in what I believe to be the appropriate context .
I have said this before , but it is important to keep it in mind : the Council is a work in progress .
This becomes clear when one looks at the past year and a half of its activities .
Despite a rocky start , with deep divisions over the Lebanon crisis and a negotiating environment which continues to be difficult for the European Union , important results have been achieved .
I am thinking here , particularly , of the innovation of human rights pledges submitted by candidates for election ; the ability to hold special sessions on urgent human rights situations , a far cry from the annual ritual of its predecessor , the Commission on Human Rights ; the development of ' interactive dialogues ' with UN special procedures , a very public means of focusing attention on human rights violations ; and , finally , the adoption of the all-important institution-building package by consensus .
The President of the Council , Ambasador Costea , was in Brussels last week to brief the Council and Parliament on preparations for the Seventh Session .
He described the Council as being ' better than expected and worse than hoped for ' .
This may sound cynical , perhaps reflecting the reality of day-to-day UN work , but I think it also sets the tone accurately .
There is both good and bad in the Council , but it is making progress and is , therefore , on the right path .
Priorities for the Seventh Session fall between addressing urgent human rights situations effectively - increasingly , the standard by which the Council should be judged - and continuing to implement the institution-building reforms .
On the human rights situation , effective follow-up to the special session on Burma / Myanmar is paramount .
Amongst other priorities , the human rights violations in Sri Lanka and Kenya should also be addressed in this session .
Implementing the institutional reforms is , arguably , just as important , given their impact on the future success of the Council .
Here , agreeing criteria for the election of members of the Advisory Committee and the transparent appointment of suitably qualified candidates for the special procedure mandates to be renewed are key concerns of the Seventh Session .
Finally , let me make a couple of comments on the universal periodic review , or the UPR , as it is known .
The President reported this week that the states under review in the April and May sessions are taking their responsibilities seriously .
I hope so .
The early sessions of the UPR are likely to set the tone for the remainder .
It is , therefore , vital that the EU Member States being reviewed lead the way with frank critiques of their human rights records .
This should be no beauty pageant .
Furthermore , I see an important role for the European Union in the ' outcome sessions ' of the UPR .
The UPR is , more than anything else , about the international community cooperating with states under review to achieve concrete human rights improvements after a genuine self-analysis of failings and needs .
The European Commission and the Member States should not be slow in offering technical assistance where it is merited in these outcome sessions .
To do so would show our genuine commitment to the promotion of human rights in an important public setting .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - Mr President , Parliament is sending a delegation to the Seventh Session of the United Nations Human Rights Council .
The delegation will be mandated to voice Parliament 's concerns on the HRC 's work and will report to the Subcommittee on Human Rights during its visit .
We see the Seventh Session of the HRC as a crucial one , because it will be the first to examine a large range of substantial issues under the new working methods stemming from the institution-building reforms package adopted in 2006 and 2007 .
The credibility of the HRC rests on the implementation of these reforms and mechanisms , and our goal is to strengthen the Council 's ability to address human rights violations around the world , especially the most urgent ones .
We pay tribute to the positive results of the HRC , in particular the developments in the implementation of the universal periodic review , and the review of special procedures , as well as to the positive achievements of the Human Rights Council Presidency .
We welcome the participation of civil society and human rights defenders , as well as the special procedures , which are at the core of the UN human rights machinery , and play a critical role , especially in the Human Rights Council .
At the same time , we condemn certain decisions of the Human Rights Council , such as that not to renew the mandates of the special rapporteurs on Belarus and Cuba .
Taking into account the lessons of the past , we stress the importance of competitive elections being held in all regions , in order to provide real choice among UN members .
The reason is that , to our regret , some countries with problematic human rights records have so far been elected .
Once again , I call on the Council , Commission and Member States to continue to press for the establishment of membership criteria for election to the United Nations Human Rights Council , including the issuing of permanent invitations for special procedures .
Speaking about EU involvement , we recognise the active role of the EU and its Member States in the first year of work of the HRC .
It is very important for the EU to speak with one voice when addressing human rights issues , and we call on the Commission and Council to adopt a common position so as to ensure EU Member States automatically sign and ratify all international human rights instruments .
Last but not least , the EU should make more effective use of aid and political support to the countries in question so as to give them incentives to cooperate with the Human Rights Council .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - Mr President , the United Nations Human Rights Council is one of the most interesting areas in the field of human rights for the European Parliament .
We closely monitor the activities of that Council , and the European Parliament sends its missions to Geneva twice a year .
I would like to make three remarks .
First , I would like to pay tribute to the positive achievements of the Council Presidency and , at the same time , I would like to stress the importance of support from the European Union and , equally , of candidates with high standards of integrity for the elections of the new President of the Council , to be held on 23 June 2008 .
Second , I would like to stress that special procedures are at the core of the United Nations human rights machinery , playing a critical role , especially in the Human Rights Council , civil society and democratic states .
In particular , the EU States need to monitor and pressure Council members to fulfil their responsibilities to promote human rights .
The European Parliament has to condemn the Council decisions not to renew the mandate of the Special Rapporteurs on Belarus and Cuba .
We should welcome the renewal of the country mandates of the Special Rapporteur on Sudan and of the independent experts on Liberia , Haiti and Burundi .
Third , much legitimate criticism of the Council centres on its disappointing treatment of specific country situations .
Particularly one-sided international sympathy for the Palestinian cause and the agonised efforts of Islamic states led the Council to address the Middle East conflict , but there was repeated criticism of only one state - Israel - ignoring violations by Hezbollah and some Palestinian factions .
The challenge is to build the political will for the Council members to effectively address such a situation in a just manner .
, on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( FR ) Mr President , on the eve of the Seventh Human Rights Council , Parliament wishes to send a message of support , vigilance and mobilisation .
The Council is the only international body that actually fights human rights violations , and particularly that responds to emergencies , to human rights crises , but also that works long term with the special rapporteurs and in an interactive dialogue with NGOs .
The Council is unique and is at a difficult turning point in its history .
One year will not be enough to establish its effectiveness .
On the other hand , it may be enough to discredit it , and there have been many attempts to weaken and divert it , as we know .
I would first like to mention the situation of Mrs Sigma Huda , Special Rapporteur on trafficking in persons .
She is in prison in deplorable conditions in Bangladesh .
Next , concerning these same special rapporteurs , the Advisory Committee 's proposals will finally be decided by the President as a last resort .
That gives you an idea of just how important his role is , and I would like to salute the excellence of the work done by President Costea , and at the same time draw your attention to the fact that he will be replaced in June .
That is why the EU has to remain attentive and proactive .
Its action is decisive .
We saw it in Gaza .
The EU 's abstention waters down the message considerably , and weakens the Council itself .
However , when the EU takes the initiative of a special session and throws its whole weight behind it , the Council grows and achieves results .
To do this , our Member States need to strengthen their transregional alliances to convince others and prevent any block reaction that would send the Council back into the throes of political contingencies .
We therefore call upon our governments to step up their efforts and set an example .
Set an example by appointing an independent expert when they participate in the assessment of another government as part of the UPR and by themselves being open to criticism and self-criticism , and set an example for the election of new members .
A standing invitation to the special procedures should be a criterion of prime importance for EU Member States .
Mr President , I commend this resolution to you .
Indeed , I commend the work of the Parliament 's delegation to Geneva where , as well as holding our own EU representatives to account , we work with them to engage in dialogue with countries in other regions of the world , demonstrating Europe 's strength and solidarity in upholding human rights and international humanitarian law .
I am grateful for the inclusion of my amendments in the text supporting the call for a special session on violence against women and for the signature and ratification by all our countries of all international human rights instruments .
I call for Europe 's support , in particular , for the renewal of the mandate of the Special Representative on Business and Human Rights .
But having just returned from Gaza , I would like to commend to you paragraph 34 in particular .
This is a state of siege , with mediaeval conditions being imposed on the people of Gaza .
Today we will identify it as a clear breach of human rights .
If even Tony Blair cannot get Israel to allow the import of equipment to stop 40 000 litres of untreated human waste poisoning the water supply , it is time for Europe to act .
European troops under a new mandate could help supervise the reopening of the borders and , as I now ask for your support , European countries can achieve agreement on all sides in the UN Human Rights Council to seek enforcement of international humanitarian law .
We , as Europe , can take the initiative , as was suggested by the Slovenian Presidency at our Human Rights Subcommittee in Brussels only last week .
We can propose a balanced text that recognises that both terrorist rocket attacks as well as the collective punishment of the blockade both break the fourth Geneva Convention .
In doing so , we can achieve a consensus in Geneva which can make a real difference to the humanitarian crisis suffered by the people of Gaza .
( FI ) Mr President , a critical examination of the old mechanisms and ways of working and the establishment of new practices have inspired much hope in the ability of the Human Rights Council to act as an effective body which focuses on how human rights violations are dealt with and allows political situations to fall clearly within the competence of the UN bodies .
The credibility of the Human Rights Council also depends on the new special procedure mandate holders who are to be appointed in March .
It is hugely important that expertise , impartiality , independence and objectivity are the crucial factors .
Like many others here , in the current situation I too would like the decision of the Human Rights Council not to extend the mandates of the special rapporteurs on Belarus and Cuba to be reconsidered .
The EU Member States should also try to guarantee that the mandate of the independent expert on the Democratic Republic of Congo is extended .
President-in-Office of the Council . - I would like to thank the Members who took part in this debate and offered their opinions , which will undoubtedly help the Presidency of the Council in its preparations for the seventh session of the Human Rights Council .
I would like to stress in particular that I strongly agree with the statement by Mrs Andrikienregarding the need for the European Union to appear unified , speaking with one voice , at the Human Rights Council .
I would also like to draw attention to the fact that the Presidency is also hoping for good cooperation with the European Parliament delegation .
The importance of the European Union 's role in the promotion and protection of human rights is indisputable , which is why we would like to have the best possible cooperation of this revered assembly .
I would like to end by saying that the seventh session of the Human Rights Council will start with the meeting of ministers , which will be addressed , on behalf of the Presidency of the Council of the European Union , by the President of the General Affairs and External Relations Council , Minister Dimitrij Rupel .
A number of other high representatives , perhaps even the Secretary-General of the United Nations , will be taking part .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , the European Union is a very important body that has to go in the right direction and lead the Human Rights Council in that direction .
The Council has yet to prove itself as an effective human rights organ within the United Nations ; that much is clear .
However , as I said before , it is too early to pass a final judgment .
Indeed , to do that at this stage might even hinder its future progress .
That is why it is important that the human rights community continues to support the Human Rights Council , albeit with a critical eye .
In that vein , I am pleased that a delegation of the European Parliament will be attending part of the Seventh Session to assess its work at first hand .
Like Ms Andrikienė , I think that the European Union will have to strive to speak with one voice on this issue .
Voting patterns of EU members on the Council are very harmonised , and the more harmonised they are , the more important our voice will be .
Concerning the criteria for membership , so far it has proved impossible to draw up such criteria .
However , the pledges on human rights commitments will be important steps towards more responsibility for the candidate countries and , as I have said before , this is an important step .
Concerning the special procedures , the EU is fighting actively to extend existing mandates and establish the new ones we deem necessary .
Finally , let me say a word on Belarus and Cuba .
The Council can be criticised for not continuing the mandates for those countries , but this was a compromise made necessary to save many of the other country and thematic mandates that are currently being reviewed .
Similarly , for instance on Sudan .
It is regrettable to lose the mandate of the Expert Group on Darfur , but this was unfortunately unavoidable in order to save that of the Special Representative on Sudan .
Therefore , in order to achieve consensus , the European Union sometimes has to be prepared to make difficult compromises .
But , again , on the whole , we are a very strong motor and body in this area , and we have to go on working to ensure that the Human Rights Council really works and goes in the right direction .
The European Parliament is a very , very strong tool to help us on that path .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Thursday 21 February 2008 .
Question Time ( Council )
The next item is Question Time ( B6-0010 / 2008 ) .
The following questions are addressed to the Council .
Subject : Immigration in the wake of the EU-Africa summit
Can the Council provide information on the measures proposed for adoption in order to implement the agreements reached at the recent summit held in Lisbon between the EU and the countries of Africa on the subject of immigration ?

President-in-Office of the Council . - It was agreed at the EU-Africa summit held on 9 December last year in Lisbon to establish a strategic partnership which would encompass all areas and issues of mutual interest .
I would especially like to draw your attention to three important documents which were adopted at that summit : the Lisbon Declaration , the EU-Africa Joint Strategy and its First Action Plan .
This First Action Plan of the Joint Strategy establishes a partnership between Africa and the European Union in the supplementary fields of migration , mobility and employment .
The partnership between Africa and the European Union in the areas of migration , mobility and employment should ensure comprehensive responses to these issues with the specific aim of creating more and better jobs for Africans and better control of migration .
At the moment , the competent bodies of the Council are studying further measures that will need to be undertaken on the basis of the decisions of the Lisbon summit and on the basis of the EU-Africa Joint Strategy and its First Action Plan , including the partnership in the area of migration .
( ES ) Madam President , the question is : what type of measures can be taken effectively , because the migratory pressure on Europe is still very high , as a result of the distressing social and economic situation in many African countries .
The specific question that I wanted to ask was whether , in fact , the Council currently has any concrete plan , because time is marching on , the situation in Africa is not improving and , in particular , many European countries are complaining of uncontrolled immigration and of the inability of the European institutions to control it .
What are we actually doing at the moment ? What can we expect in the short term ?

President-in-Office of the Council . - Mr Medina Ortega , the problems you were mentioning will not be resolved in a short period of time .
The situation in Africa in the fields of economic development , security and peoples ' welfare are of such dimensions that the time span for their resolution can only be long-term .
A long-term easing of migratory pressures can only achieved with improved living conditions on the African continent .
The summit could not offer answers to all the issues ; in particular , it could not offer quick solutions .
As I have mentioned , the summit took place in December and debates on the measures to be adopted for implementation of the agreements reached at the summit are only just starting now .
I can say that the EU-Africa summit established a framework for all the talks on migration management which have been conducted at several conferences between Africa and the European Union .
The EU-Africa summit now integrates the Tripoli process , the Rabat process and all the other processes .
This is the first achievement , the consolidation of our efforts .
I would like to mention the essential feature of the European Union 's policy on migration in relation to Africa .
We are primarily striving for a global approach .
This is an approach which includes the fight against illegal migration , efforts to improve the management of legal migration , prevention of human trafficking , better border controls and , above all , development of the countries from which such migration originates .
Only this development will provide a long-term solution to the migratory pressures facing the European Union .
The other measures I have already listed are at best short-term solutions that will not eradicate the essential problem which you yourself mentioned , the problem of the conditions prevailing in the countries of origin .
That is the essential driving force behind migration .
( DE ) I salute the way you are looking at the big picture here and distinguishing between medium- and long-term strategies .
You referred to a summit coming up soon .
Are you , as President-in-Office of the Council , prepared to call for an agreement by the relevant states in Africa on the readmission of illegal immigrants as a condition for positive cooperation , for more economic assistance and more assistance of other types ?
President-in-Office of the Council . - The Council 's policy on the return of illegal immigrants is well-known .
It is one of the constituent parts of the European Union 's migration policy that is being implemented with our African partners .
Development aid is also an aspect of migration policy , that is to say it must be taken into account , and immigration policy should be viewed from that perspective too because it addresses the long-term problem of creating better conditions in the countries from which the migration originates .
Frankly , I do not wish to speak about the direct application of conditions on development aid in relation to these aspects .
It is a fact , however , that they are elements of the whole migration policy , which are still to be linked together and strengthened in the future .
( DE ) President-in-Office , if there is one area in which people in Europe want the European Union to shoulder responsibility , it is the area of illegal immigration and immigration policy as a whole .
Although , in my opinion , Parliament and the Commission are very active in this area , I am not so sure about the Council .
You said that everyone knows what the Council is doing on this matter .
I know what it is doing - and that is to do all it can to prevent the creation of vitally important European competences .
That is what it has been doing for years .
I would be interested to know what makes you so optimistic that anything will change and what concrete measures you are putting in place to bring about change .

President-in-Office of the Council . - I should say in response to Mr Moraes ' question that the inter-institutional agreement between the European Parliament , the Council and the Commission on budgetary discipline and sound financial management has defined the financial framework for the European Union and the 27 Member States for the period between 2007 and 2013 .
This interinstitutional agreement was adopted in May .
In July 2007 the legislative package on cohesion policy was adopted on the basis of that agreement .
In short , after the enlargement in January 2007 , there was no need for a reallocation of resources .
You spoke about the wider analysis of structural funding , but you may be aware that , last week , Eurostat published figures which showed which were the richest areas in the European Union and the richest cities .
These included my own constituency of London , yet I live in a part of London which ranks among some of the poorest areas in Western Europe in terms of child poverty and so on .
Really , my question to you was : will you continue to take into account the fact that even in the richest areas , like London and Frankfurt , there are still pockets of poverty , which have been left behind , and should not be left behind just because we are quite rightly helping the poorest parts of Europe ?
President-in-Office of the Council . - Thank you for this additional question .
I think I now have a better understanding of the original question about the effect of enlargement on regional financing , to which my answer was that there was no effect because the resources had been appropriately allocated before enlargement .
However , the supplementary question is also a reasonable one .
The question is whether such phenomena should be handled within the framework of regional policies .
Affluent regions should perhaps be allowed or obliged to do more to eliminate pockets of poverty .
This is probably done more easily by affluent regions than by those less well-off .
In short , we must take into consideration the concept of regional politics and regional resources within the framework of the European Union .
This does not alter the reality of the problem you have pointed out .
( LT ) Mr President , Minister , I would like to ask if you have any information , any figures , to show how the growth of GDP has been influenced by structural funding given to new accession countries and maybe even older Member States .
Research carried out in my country , Lithuania , has shown that it was not structural aid , but development of the single market and the internal market that had a major impact on economic growth .
Are you able to supply such figures ?
Thank you .
President-in-Office of the Council . - No , honourable Member , I have not got those figures with me .
However , I can say two things .
Firstly , the common market benefits all the Member States , both old and new , and everyone else associated with this common market .
There is no doubt about that and it can be seen in the 2006 European Commission report entitled ' Enlargement , two years after ' , which mentions and evaluates the beneficial effects of the enlarged common market and other aspects .
As regards the Structural Funds , the situation is as follows : What is important is not only the level of resources for a particular purpose within the Structural Funds , but also the quality of application of those resources .
That is how I can maintain that , when applied well , these resources contribute to a higher per capita income in the country in question .

The Minister has had a very long day , so I am just going to suggest that , from the point of view of the Structural Funds and the Cohesion Fund , he look at the example of Ireland , where the Structural Funds and the Cohesion Fund played a major part in transforming a third world economy into what is the Celtic Tiger .
It shows what can be done .
Three out of the four legs under the Celtic Tiger were provided as a result of the Structural Funds , the Cohesion Fund and other funding from the European Union .
We wish the new Member States well , and we wish you well in your presidency .
President-in-Office of the Council . - In December 2007 , on the basis of comprehensive studies carried out by European institutions as well as social partners , the Committee adopted decisions on eight common principles relating to ' flexicurity ' .
Those principles were also confirmed by the European Council .
The Council noted in these decisions that the common principles should contribute to the implementation of the new cycle of the Lisbon Strategy .
Recently , the Commission presented a proposal on integrated guidelines for 2008-2010 .
We can expect the Council to devote particular attention to flexicurity in the debates on this proposal , which have already started .
Responsibility for implementing the integrated guidelines will rest with the Member States .
It is expected that , when reporting to the Council and the Commission on the implementation of those guidelines , they will refer to their regulations on flexicurity .
The Council is of the opinion that it is necessary to raise citizens ' awareness of flexicurity policies and of the importance of those policies for reforming European economic and social models .
Therefore , in its decision , the Council called on the Commission to instigate a public initiative to enable the relevant interest groups in the labour market to adopt the common principles more easily .
The Council also asked the Commission to keep it regularly informed about the measures in question .
As regards the two important legislative proposals in the field of working conditions - I am talking about the Working Time Directive and the Temporary Employment Directive - the Slovenian Presidency is prepared to continue working on this matter .
In view of the difficulties in reaching unanimity among the Member States , we are still assessing further possible procedures relating to that legislation .
It should be mentioned in this respect that Europe has many and varied traditions in the regulation of working conditions .
The Member States nevertheless managed to agree relatively quickly on the common principles of flexicurity , although they warned that these principles would have to be adapted to the specific conditions in each Member State .
All this indicates that the agreement will be more difficult to reach when looking for a solution in the form of binding legislation applicable to all the labour markets in the Union .
( EL ) Madam President , the citizens of every Member State - employers and employees - are subject to pressure with regard to working relations .
In many cases this is certainly due to globalisation , but it is also caused by the open method of coordination that the European Union has been implementing for years .
Thus we are raising objections to the proposals for the reform of insurance systems and to other measures based on this open method of coordination .
Does the Council intend to propose structural measures to improve working relations at European level in order to remove the strong opposition and protests that we see on television in all the Member States ?
President-in-Office of the Council . - Of course the Council intends to continue and develop its efforts to improve conditions in the labour market .
It is often said that improved flexibility in the labour market means reduced social security , but this is not so .
The essence of the concept of flexicurity or secure flexibility is precisely that .
The Council is convinced that this is the only correct course in the context of globalisation , which includes many issues .
What matters is not merely increased flexibility in the labour market , which should never be to the detriment of social security ; there are a whole number of other measures such as life-long learning , better development of human resources , and other aspects of flexicurity .
In short , the Council intends to continue its activities in this field , and that will be one of the important issues to be debated at the March session of the European Council as par of the impetus for the new phase of the Lisbon Strategy .
( DE ) As the word flexicurity suggests , the ideal is a combination of flexibility and security .
This morning there was a debate about this and a suggestion came from Parliament that a minimum wage should be introduced in Member States according to their minimum standards .
What will the Presidency do to guarantee that the minimum wage will in fact be realised in individual Member States within the foreseeable future ?

Could I ask you to comment a little more on the point you made when you said that you would want to raise awareness and have a public initiative on this whole flexicurity issue .
My feeling is that workers probably know the ' flexi ' part very well , but are less clear on that of security in this new world of work .
And , on the issue of the minimum wage : coming from a country which has a minimum wage , I believe the issue is to make sure everyone is getting a minimum wage .
President-in-Office of the Council . - The process of shaping the forces for the European mission to Chad , which did not go so smoothly , was completed by 11 January this year to the extent that the commander was able to recommend commencement of the operation .
On 28 January the Council confirmed the operation plan , the so-called ' o-plan ' , and adopted a decision on its commencement .
As we know , the Irish General Patrick Nash is commanding the operation .
The force consists of 3 700 soldiers from 14 Member States .
These forces are composed , equipped and trained to fulfil their mission satisfactorily in a difficult environment .
Their rules on the use of force are strict and in line with the mandate laid down in Chapter VII of the United Nations Charter .
As we know , that mandate was given in Resolution 1778 of the United Nations Security Council .
The European Union 's operation , known as the EUFOR Chad-Central African Republic operation , will be conducted for one year from the date of declaration of the initial operational capability and will be neutral and impartial .
Planning was executed from the outset in close cooperation with the United Nations .
To ensure transparency , efficiency and the possibility of modifying the measures , appropriate coordination mechanisms have been established at all levels , in New York and Brussels , at operation headquarters in Paris and on the ground .
After recent clashes between government forces and Chadian rebel groups , the security situation in Chad is now more stable .
The deployment of the EU mission is continuing and we expect EUFOR to reach its initial operational capability by mid-March .
Let me mention some decisions adopted by the Council at the last session on Monday , the day before yesterday .
The Council expressed its deep concern regarding the regional ramifications of the conflict in Darfur and attempts of overthrowing the Chadian government .
It backed the African Union and the United Nations ' call for the respect of the sovereignty , national unity and territorial integrity of Chad .
The Council stated that recent events underscored the need for the deployment of the mission to Eastern Chad , where their task should be to increase security .
The Council has also stressed that , in the observance of its mandate , the mission will be impartial , neutral and independent .
I will finish by adding that the Council will closely follow the security situation in Chad and Western Darfur at all levels and also assess the consequences of this situation for the EUFOR mission .

President-in-Office , you did not answer my question , which was , specifically , if you could give an assurance that the necessary equipment for this difficult mission is available .
Would you please answer that question and give an assurance ?
As you said , it is under the command of an Irish Army officer , Lieutenant General Nash , and this evening 50 members of the elite Irish Army Rangers will be leaving Dublin , and will be followed by many more Irish troops in the near future .
Will there be sufficient logistical back-up ?
Do they have the medical services they need , and will you give an assurance , as I asked in my question , that all the necessary equipment for this difficult mission is available ?
I wish God 's speed and protection for the Irish Rangers and all the soldiers who are there , in their difficult task .
President-in-Office of the Council . - I should emphasise that in principle the equipping of units is the responsibility of each individual Member State that is sending units to a mission .
Honourable Member , you are asking about assurances that the Council cannot give , because they are the responsibilities of each individual Member State .
I can only repeat what I said in the introduction , namely that the process of forming of the forces was completed successfully .
It was difficult , but in the end it was successful to the extent that the mission commander recommended that the mission could commence .
( DE ) I believe that this mission is a good idea in principle - as long as it is carried out professionally - because it achieves precisely what was addressed in the migration debate we heard earlier , namely creating security where immigrants come from .
Therefore , I simply cannot understand that some hypocritical Austrian right-wing populists are against this mission .
However , what I am concerned about already is that it is a constant topic of discussion whether , in particular , the French army will conduct itself in this mission with neutrality towards the parties in dispute .
I would be interested to know what information you have about this and how you will ensure that the mission remains neutral overall towards all disputing parties .
I would also like to take the opportunity to wish the soldiers there all the best .
I have a question in relation to contact with groups which are opposed to the government .
I am not talking about rebel groups , but other groups which are opposed to the government .
Has any effort been made to bring them on board , so that we have a more unified approach to the UN mission that is going into Chad , or the European Union mission that is going into Chad ?
All contact so far seems to be with the government itself .
I wonder if the way forward might not be to get people on board who may be opposed to the government , but who are not involved in rebel groups .

President-in-Office of the Council . - I should mention from the outset that on 6 November last year , the European Union High Representative for the Common Foreign and Security Policy , Javier Solana , appointed a Special Envoy for Burma / Myanmar to highlight the importance which the European Union attaches to democratic change , reconciliation , improvement of human rights and development of the country .

Under this mandate , the Special Envoy , Mr Fassino , has asked for a meeting with the United Nations Special Adviser , Mr Gambari , and has also consulted the key partners of the European Union .
In November last year , in the margins of the EU-ASEAN Summit in Singapore , the Special Envoy met the representative of the ASEAN countries .
In December he also went on his first mission to China .
He met the representatives of Burma and its neighbours in Rome and during visits to the United Nations in Geneva and New York , and he will also be meeting their representatives in Brussels .
These consultations and political and diplomatic contacts made by our Special Representative will continue in the coming months .
Particular attention will be paid to mediation by the United Nations and the United Nations ' Group of Friends ' .
At the session on Monday , the General Affairs and External Relations Council welcomed the work of the Special Envoy , Mr Fassino , in coordinating the diplomatic efforts of the European Union and its Asian partners and reaffirmed his role in supporting and promoting the United Nations mission .
I should point out that , some time ago , the European Union adopted an overall common position which includes an arms embargo on Burma and travel restrictions and the freezing of assets for a large number of Burmese citizens connected with the military and the government .
In November 2007 the Council adopted stricter sanctions to reinforce the existing measures and to set up new ones , especially measures aimed at extractive activities .
As anticipated , the Council will study the effect , efficiency , political suitability and practical feasibility of possible further restrictions .
The Council receives and studies information from its partners and many representatives in governmental organisations about their experience with the stricter sanctions .
The Council has noted that some Member States of the European Union and the Commission have recently increased aid to Burma and Burmese refugees in neighbouring countries .
The European Union would be prepared to guarantee additional aid to Burma / Myanmar .
For that reason it is calling for the Burmese authorities to adopt further measures to democratise the country and reach national reconciliation .
The official announcement of a referendum on the constitution , which should take place in May of this year , and in particular of multi-party elections in 2010 , is , in the opinion of the Council , a step in the right direction .

This is just a follow-up to your response to this very complicated matter , which I much appreciate .
I would just like to raise two related issues .
Firstly , the General-Secretary of the KNU was assassinated in his home in Thailand on 14 February .
I understand that Christian Solidarity Worldwide had visited him two days earlier .
What pressure have we placed on Thailand to investigate that murder ?
I understand that the assassination was ordered by the regime in Burma .
Secondly , my understanding is that refugees coming into Malaysia have been quite badly treated .
In fact , some refugees gave birth while in custody or in prison .
What pressure we have put on both Thailand and Malaysia in relation to dealing with these issues ?

President-in-Office of the Council . - As I mentioned in the previous answer , the Council is following the situation in Burma / Myanmar closely and is receiving reports from various sources .
The EU , together with other countries , responded to the demonstrations of last August and September and to the violent suppression of those peaceful demonstrations , with the clear aim of displaying its solidarity with the Burmese population .
Also , it adopted stronger restrictive measures targeting those responsible for violence and the general political deadlock and conditions in the country .
As mentioned before , because of the difficult living conditions of the population and because of the numbers of refugees , some Member States and the Commission have increased aid to Burma as well as to Burmese refugees in neighbouring countries .
In addition , the European Union was among the instigators of the United Nations Human Rights Council meeting in Geneva in October 2007 , which authorised the United Nations Special Rapporteur on Human Rights , Sérgio Pinheiro , to visit Burma / Myanmar and investigate the violent suppression of the September demonstrations and the alleged killings and disappearances following the events .
The European Union fully supports Professor Pinheiro 's recommendations in his December report and regularly calls on the authorities in Burma to implement them .
The EU has approached the Burmese authorities on many occasions .
It is also attempting to utilise meetings with Burma / Myanmar at multilateral forums to call on the authorities to begin an inclusive and overall process of reconciliation and political reforms , to eliminate the limitations imposed on Aung San Suu Kyi , to release political prisoners and to improve access for international organisations , especially the International Committee of the Red Cross .
The EU has presented these opinions to Burma 's neighbours and stressed the urgent need to improve the situation in that country .
As I have mentioned , the announcement of a referendum on the constitution and multi-party elections in 2010 has given some hope .
( GA ) Mr President , I welcome the response of the President-in-Office of the Council .
He said in answer to my colleague , Colm de Búrca 's question that he wanted Burma to be more democratic .
As regards that , I would like to ask a question about the new Constitution : is it not true that this document was drafted without the involvement of the leader of the main democratic opposition party , Aung San Suu Kyi ?
That is in no way satisfactory .
And is it not evident , that the army and the armed forces will keep a tight hold on or control power ?
Another important question : Will there be any independent monitoring on the part of the EU or the United Nations as regards the referendum and the Constitution ?
President-in-Office of the Council . - Mrs McGuinness probably already knows that on 11 December last year the Council and the European Parliament adopted a directive to amend the Television without Frontiers Directive and rename it the Audiovisual Media Services Directive .
The first recital of the new , amended directive explains that it is necessary to amend the directive because of the development of new technologies and their impact on business models , especially the financing of commercial broadcasting .
The aim of the new directive is to find answers to these technological changes by introducing some new , technically neutral , terminology-based definitions that will enable them to be used not only for the current services , but also for those forms of service yet to be developed , such as audiovisual media services and services on demand .
To satisfy this future capability , we think that the directive regulating the audiovisual sector should be valid for a few years to come .
Pursuant to this directive , and not later than 19 December 2011 and every three years thereafter , the Commission must prepare a report of the application of the directive and , if necessary , make further proposals for its adaptation , especially in respect of new technological developments .
As regards junk food advertising for children , the European Parliament and the Council agree that this issue could be dealt with most effectively if the providers of audiovisual media services were to develop codes of conduct .
For this purpose , the second paragraph of Article 3 ( e ) of the amended directive includes a requirement that all Member States and the Commission encourage media service providers to develop such codes .

You have answered the first part of my question very fulsomely , and I thank you for that .
On the second part , perhaps what we need is a code of conduct that is effective , because we have many codes of conduct on paper , and they are not effective .
I would ask perhaps that you make a statement in relation to when we review codes of conduct and see that they are not having an effect , will we take tougher action ?
I think we may need to .
President-in-Office of the Council . - The essence of a code of conduct is precisely that it is developed by the providers themselves .
However , it is clear that if the codes are inadequate and do not meet the needs , neither the Council nor the Commission will be satisfied .
That is why my answer to your question is basically that the Council and the Commission must persist at least until the providers have developed effective codes of conduct .
President-in-Office , could I direct you to another matter in terms of the protection of children in the context of media , in particular against the background of rising and alarming suicide rates in Europe , not least in my own constituency ?
This is , what can the Council do in respect of the gross misuse , in particular via internet services , of readily available advice on how to commit suicide ?
I today downloaded information from one such site , which gave multiple advice on how to commit suicide .
It is quite appalling .
Even if one goes onto Wikipedia one can find information on how to commit suicide .
Will the Council address that in the context of child protection , in particular in the context of media ?
( DE ) My question relates to the telecommunications package presented by the Commission , where new opportunities for television arise as a result of the digital dividends , i.e. through the use of the digital spectrum of frequency allocation .
Do you see a need to modify the Television Directive based on the new technical regulations ?

President-in-Office of the Council . - In view of the problem pointed out by Mr Allister and the cases which should be condemned and require action , I should mention that , even prior to being amended , the directive contained a ban on advertising anything harmful to health .
It also banned communications that may cause physical or moral detriment to minors .
I think those definitions also cover the cases mentioned .
I should also say that the amendment to the directive was published last December and the Member States have two years to incorporate it into their internal law .
As regards the ' telecom ' package , I find it difficult to answer the question , which requires a more detailed analysis of the need for changes .
However , this question has been discussed .
The legislative package relating to telecommunications is being debated at the moment .
Your question will be forwarded to the Council .
I am in no doubt that if a change has to be introduced , it will be .
Questions which have not been answered for lack of time will be answered in writing ( see Annex ) .
That concludes Question Time .
Madam President , I would just like to thank the services for very promptly acting upon the information that I sent them to accurately record my actual voting intention .
That has now been done , so I would like , through you , to forward my thanks to them for acting as efficiently as they have done .
The public record now shows my actual voting intention .
I am obliged to you .
( The sitting was suspended at 19.05 and resumed at 21.00 )

The demographic future of Europe ( debate )
The next item is the report by Mrs Castex , on behalf of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs , on the demographic future of Europe .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the debate we are continuing this evening began within these walls several years ago .
It will not end with the adoption of this report , which still leaves some questions unanswered , and which we will undoubtedly have to come back to in the near future .
In any case , I would like to thank the Commission for the quality of its communication , which has enriched the debate , and we have benefited from it in the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs .
In my report , I develop the consequences of demographic change , i.e. the shrinking of the active population , the growing number of elderly people , and the demographic imbalances between different regions of Europe .
Is this to say it is impossible to act on the causes ?
I would first like to remind you that the 20th century saw two vast changes .
Firstly , women gained access to education and training on the same footing as men .
Secondly , women gained control over their reproductive lives through contraception .
These are two factors of women 's emancipation .
They mark great , and I hope irreversible , progress for humanity .
However , to have all the information for analysis at hand , two other things need to be added as well .
All the studies show that European citizens would like more children than they actually have , and secondly , in Member States where the employment rate among women is high , the birth rate is also high .
An active working life therefore does not prevent people from having children , provided that there is reconciliation of work life and family life for everyone , men and women alike .
There is still a lot of progress to be made in this area , in all Member States .
Another point arose during our discussions , one that nobody essentially disputes .
Economic insecurity and fear of the future are important factors behind the drop in the birth rate .
When it is difficult to plan for the future , people hesitate to have children .
This is a key point , and I think that the drop in birth rate recorded in the European Union is a serious warning from this point of view .
To regain confidence in the future , our citizens need their job security and dignified living conditions restored .
Enough of the causes , what about the consequences ?
The main consequence is a reduction in the active population , falling from 331 million in 2010 to around 268 million by 2050 .
How can we maintain Europe 's growth and competitiveness with a tiny active population ?
This is where the title of the communication takes on real meaning , Commissioner , and real force : turning a challenge into an opportunity .
Europe still has some very high unemployment rates today , and the margin for progress in the employment of women , young people and older people , for whom the employment rate drops dramatically from the age of 52-55 years , remains great .
Is not the real opportunity of this demographic challenge , the objective of full employment , which is finally realistic , finally achievable and finally necessary ?
To achieve it we must implement a genuine human resources management policy and a real lifelong training policy .
I say lifelong with reason , for that also means for employees over 50 who , along with other types of discrimination , also have to face discrimination on training and on promotion at work .
In my report , I put forward the concept of the active life-cycle to stress the need to consider a period of active life of around forty years - though it is up to the Member States to decide - of continuous employment , training , requalification , potential promotion , from the beginning to the end of a person 's active life .
Before considering raising the retirement age , it is necessary to make sure that everyone below that age is able to work , to exploit their skills and professional experience .
It is because there is a legal retirement age that people can think of going beyond it , depending on the arrangements defined by each Member State in line with its traditions of dialogue and consultation .
On this point , the debate remains open .
The last point I would like to mention quickly is of course the use of immigration .
There is much discussion of it making up for the drop in the active population , but immigration also stirs up a great deal of tension , as you know .
For this reason I recommend a clear and reasoned approach to this issue .
Immigration is not a new phenomenon in the European Union and , with a positive balance of two million immigrants per year - a figure that has been stable for several years - legal immigration contributes to the composition of the active population of the European Union , just as it contributes to the composition of European society .
We need to maintain this flow of immigrants and guarantee a legal status in our Member States for those we welcome , in particular fighting illegal immigration and the exploitation of illegal workers .
The human dimension of immigration must govern our policies on the subject and family integration should not disappear from our guidelines .
In a provisional conclusion to this presentation , I would like to recall that , behind the average birth rates , the age pyramids and the ratios lie the issues of birth , motherhood , the place of women in society , the care we give to our elderly and the way we ourselves wish to end our lives .
That is the reason why this debate is as interesting as it is impassioned , and I would also like to thank all the shadow rapporteurs for taking as much interest in this as I have .
Member of the Commission . - ( CS ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to thank all the Members of the European Parliament and above all the rapporteur , Mrs Castex , for her informative report on the Commission communication on the demographic future of Europe .
I am particularly pleased by the fact that besides the Committee on Employment there were four other parliamentary committees dealing with this report : the Committee on Women 's Rights and Gender Equality , the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs , the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , and the Committee on Regional Development .
This clearly gives the Member States a stronger political signal and indicates the importance of demographic issues in Europe today .
The European Parliament 's analysis of the main demographic issues is to a great extent in line with the conclusions of the Commission 's 2007 report .
Both agree that ageing and declining birth rates are the result of social and economic development .
Moreover , both Parliament and the Commission share the view that it is possible to respond to these phenomena constructively and successfully .
Demographic changes present not only serious challenges but also new opportunities .
The report points out , however , that it is important to respond both to the challenges and the opportunities now .
It is encouraging to see that the political response and measures outlined in the report more or less correspond to the Commission 's proposals .
Family policy is the sole responsibility of individual Member States .
However , as the report rightly states , the European Union also a role has a role to play .
The revised Lisbon Strategy provides a framework for modernising family policy through support for equal opportunities and above all support for initiatives aimed at attaining a better work / life balance .
In this regard , we are happy to see the new European Alliance for Families , which was established at the European Council meeting in spring 2007 .
This Alliance represents another platform at EU level for the exchange of experience among Member States .
The report also rightly emphasises the changing relationship between the working and non-working sectors , stressing that the Member States will have to take all possible measures to deal with future shortages of workers in the labour market .
They must first and foremost increase the participation in the labour market of young people , women and older people .
There are a number of specific steps , which can and must be taken .
Ladies and gentlemen , let me mention migration briefly once again as it is such an important and sensitive area .
It is quite clear that inward and outward migration are part and parcel of European history and the European way of life .
It is vital to support integration from the start , rather than seeing migration solely as a security or policing issue .
Migration is part of our European way of life and for the most part has positive and necessary effects for us all .
In conclusion , I would like to mention the issue of infertility .
The European Parliament report draws attention to the increasing occurrence of infertility in couples : we know that there are some purely medical phenomena or causes of this problem , but it is also clearly connected to social conditions , in particular to couples postponing starting a family .
I just want to reiterate that we must approach this issue in a coherent and comprehensive manner , not just from a medical standpoint .
Ladies and gentlemen , there is a long list of people waiting to join in the debate , so I will conclude my contribution and look forward to the discussion that will follow .
( Rapporteur on the Commission 's Opinion for the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs ) - ( BG ) Dear Mr. Commissioner , Dear Mr. Chairman , The overall demographic picture in Europe is very alarming .
According to the Eurostat forecasts , the population in the 15 to 64 age bracket will be reduced by one million persons per year after 2010 .
This trend is due to two factors .
Life expectancy continues to grow in all EU Member States , which is a very positive development resulting from the good quality of life in the Community .
However , it is an alarming fact that , at the same time , birth rates are very low , which leads to growing share of the ageing population .
It is this situation that brings about reduction of the share of people in the active age bracket and drop in labour productivity .
The demographic problem threatens the stability of the European economy , the European social model , as well as the solidarity between generations .
In this context , I commend the European Commission 's initiative to develop a common European demographic strategy as the only adequate way to meet this global challenge .
The Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs of the European Parliament lays the emphasis on the economic tools that give opportunities to improve the demographic situation in the European Union .
The proposed texts point to several major lines of action , including : development of sustainable and balanced public finance ; promotion of diverse financial instruments with guaranteed transparency and security ; use of tax concessions for companies hiring aged employees ; acceleration of the labouyr market liberalization process , or internal migration , to quote Commissioner Spidla in the enlarged EU even before 2014 ; encouragement of employment among young people and those with family responsibilities through innovative work schemes such as shift work , part-time work , and lifelong learning .
The emphasis is laid on the need for the Member States to fulfill their commitments under the Stability and Growth Pact as a way to overcome demographic challenges .
The text includes also some more flexible mechanisms for voluntary retention of people above the minimumk retirement age according to the " salary and pension ” formula .
The main idea is that if we wish to live up to the demographic challenges , we have to support the establishment of mechanisms enabling flexible employment forms and to encourage the voluntary continuation of active life even after the minimum retirement age .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the effects of demographic change are very varied .
While the outskirts of Paris are shaken time and time again by social unrest owing to the high rate of migration , in Brandenburg , where I come from , the regions are dwindling , people are moving away and the population is aging much more rapidly .
The ageing society places a burden on public budgets , with social benefits to be paid , and the Lisbon Strategy has undertaken to reduce these .
However , in light of the real causes of demographic change , I wonder whether this reduction might not be counterproductive for the Lisbon Strategy .
The Commission is making it fairly easy to blame women for the ageing of society , because they are not having enough children , but the real reasons are current and past political errors .
I would like to address just three of the points that have brought this imbalance in society into being .
The first point is that analyses show that people do in fact want to have children , but parents - not just women - do not have children because the framework conditions are not right , because they do not have any social security , because - as has already been said - it is more difficult for parents to find employment and because career and family cannot be combined .
The solution to this would be a totally new paradigm in relation to work-life balance .
The key would be to divide time for family and career equally between the sexes ; the Dublin Foundation has carried out some excellent research on this .
It is also vital that children are not seen as little tickets to poverty , as is the case in many Member States .
For policies of the Member States , what this means is sustainability in the social security system and , although this is an unpopular cost factor , it would put demographic change back on an even keel .
An interesting study carried out in the region that I come from illustrates the second aspect .
In this study , it was established that young women were moving out of the area not because of the problems of combining work and family , but because of massive discrimination that started as soon as they left school .
They are top people , the best in the class , the top graduates , yet they are still offered places on the lower-quality training courses and poorer opportunities to advance their careers .
This means , then , that the European Commission can really be effective in the area where it really has competence , that is , in matters of gender mainstreaming - equal opportunities for men and women - to combat discrimination by introducing improvements to legislation and particularly by exerting pressure on Member States to implement legislation so that things finally get moving .
Thirdly , as draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Regional Development , I would like to come back to the topic of the declining regions .
In our opinion , we are critical of the way in which the state administrations are still erecting huge barriers to effective involvement by citizens and to the development of innovation and creativity . By doing this , they are hindering plans for successful regional development .
At the same time , there is a tendency for political leaders to simply write off regions , to withdraw from them claiming that the state has a responsibility to provide basic needs , to simply give up on them .
This is no solution for Europe because over the long term , over generations - as history shows - it will become incredibly expensive .
In reality , it is the task of the state administrations to pick up on the impetus provided by civil society and cooperate with it to pull the regions out of this dilemma .
In this connection , I call on the European Commission to pick up on input from civil society especially , to promote civil society by coordinating the exchange of experience between regions where things are going well and highlighting good examples of tried and tested practice .
These are concrete solutions in which the European Commission can be active without always holding women responsible for demographic change .
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs . - ( HU ) Thank you , Mr President .
For decades , we have been learning that climate change and pollution of the environment threaten our future . The Hampton Court summit drew our attention to another process that is becoming risky : Europe is growing old .
Based on the responsibility it feels in this area , the LIBE Committee made three recommendations to the rapporteur and the EMPLOI Committee on matters relating to civil rights .
I would like to thank them for studying our recommendations and taking them into account .
The first area is support for families and children .
Legislating on family support systems falls under national jurisdiction , and yet the assumption of obligations in respect of families with children is also a moral question , and an important part of European values .
Equal opportunities for families with and without children are an extremely important Community interest .
The basis for ensuring the rights of children , however , is that future generations should also feel responsible for the world outside the family .
After analysing the legal and illegal forms of migration , LIBE has drawn attention to the fact that the requirements of an ageing society and of the labour market require a consistent , complex migration policy .
We are delighted that the report goes into this in detail .
In the year of cultural diversity , I might add that , according to experts and science , there may be a direct relationship between migration and the rate of population growth , since the large number of children in second-generation immigrant families is falling , while the presence of immigrants may change the desire of the host population to have children .
Ultimately , discrimination against the elderly and older workers may prevent people who are not young from staying in the labour market .
I would like to emphasise that they cannot be forced to work longer , they must have a real opportunity to choose , and lifelong learning is necessary for this .
Familiarisation with modern communications technology improves their chances of finding work and opens windows to the global world of elderly people .
In its opinion , LIBE asked the Commission repeatedly to make a recommendation on a general anti-discrimination directive , and we hope that this report will speed up the process . Thank you , Mr President .
Mr President , indeed , why are we women having fewer children ?
The multitude of reasons and proposed political solutions are contained in the opinion of the Committee on Women 's Rights and Gender Equality . My fellow Member Mrs Castex has already successfully incorporated almost all of it in her report .
Thank you , Mrs Castex .
How , then , can we help women to fulfil their desire to have children ?
Firstly , equal pay for equal work !
That is the only way both parents will have an equal say when they decide who takes parental leave after the birth of a child .
Secondly , both parents are equally responsible for bringing up their children .
We need fathers ' help .
Without the support of the father of my four children , it would be impossible for me to work here .
Thirdly , employers must facilitate parental leave for their employees , with support from the state if necessary .
A country that wants children must put children at the centre of its policymaking .
Fourthly , we need high-quality childcare and a child-friendly environment , no matter what the parents ' income .
Anyone who does not agree does not deserve to hear the laughter of children .
Thank you very much .
May I also thank you on behalf of all fathers for that speech .
We shall continue the discussion , and in this section the discussion will be opened on behalf of the political groups by Mr Fatuzzo , on behalf of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats .
Three minutes , if you would be so kind .

Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I am delighted to speak on this occasion , first to compliment the chairman of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs , Jan Andersson , for presenting this own-initiative report by the committee , so brilliantly and vehemently written by Mrs Castex in a series of consultations , with the participation of all the members of the committee - some in a particular way - and after nine years as an MEP , I would also like to say : at last we have a report in Parliament that talks about pensioners and the elderly !
Indeed , it mentions them a great deal .
Tomorrow morning , in my explanation of vote , I will tell you how many times the words pensioner and elderly appear in this report .
It also talks about other things , of course , about the birth rate , about children and about skills training , but I want to highlight this , Mr President : why are we finally talking about the elderly ?
I am convinced that this is because all the governments are very concerned because having so many elderly compared with so few workers means paying much more for pensions , paying much more for healthcare than in the past .
Just look back 20 years , 10 years , 30 years , 50 years , nobody bothered to think that the elderly needed assistance , that the elderly needed support , that people with elderly parents needed more time off work than in the past .
We are beginning to talk about pension schemes , and we are beginning to say there should be more children , and that mothers should be given more help .
Did we need this cataclysm to happen , which was compared with climate change by someone who spoke before me ?
From bad things , Mr President , I believe good things come , because what I see in this report I approve of wholeheartedly .
Finally Europe , in the person of the European Parliament , is showing us how really to be a State .
I hope Member States follow this example .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( SV ) Mr President , Commissioner , I want to begin by thanking the rapporteur who has done tremendously good groundwork but also has managed the negotiations between the different political groups excellently .
As someone said earlier , this is a big challenge .
Not a threat , but a challenge for the European Union .
I will try to keep to the three main areas that form the structure of the rapporteur 's report .
First of all , birth rate .
We have too low birth rates in Europe and I share the view that this is due , to a large extent , to inadequate political decision-making .
It relates to men and women today wanting to be , and being needed , on the labour market but , at the same time , wanting to become parents and have children .
We must encourage this combination in the Member States so that parents , both men and women - and this is important to stress - can combine their working life and parenthood .
It relates to compensation for parenthood based on the principle of loss of income , linked to working life , at a high level so that people can stay at home and not need to suffer financially .
Secondly , we need to expand high-quality childcare .
We have a long way to go .
We have targets , but few Member States meet the targets for the expansion of childcare at present .
Then it concerns older people on the labour market .
It is a paradox that we enter working life later and leave it sooner .
We must create conditions with various measures in relation to health and safety at work , the possibility of further training , and flexible solutions in the grey area between working life and retirement , in order to enable parents to remain in work .
Lastly , migration .
We need people who come from other parts of the world in our society in order to develop and maintain our welfare society .
We must therefore create an integration policy where they are integrated into our society and are not excluded .
We must assist that policy , as there is no conflict with our welfare society .
On the contrary , it is a prerequisite for developing it .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Mr President , this has been a difficult report .
There has unfortunately been very little time to reach compromises or for real debate on some of the issues - hence the large number of amendments .
However , I am pleased with many elements of what we do have , such as the need to tackle the issue of elder abuse .
More needs to be done , urgently , to end the physical , financial , emotional and other forms of abuse regularly suffered by older people .
The latest estimate puts the number of older people that have suffered abuse at over 10 % , which is a staggering figure .
That is why I welcome the Commission 's intention to bring forward a communication on that issue .
But we must do more .
Member States must also work towards ensuring independence , free personal care , lifelong learning and freedom from discrimination at the workplace for all older people .
That means , of course , fully implementing the 2000 Employment Directive and then building on it .
We must work to put an end to employees being thrown onto the employment scrapheap , whether at 50 , 55 or 65 .
An arbitrary age of statutory retirement must be abolished , whilst ensuring a statutory pension age , set at Member State level .
There is a very clear difference between the two .
Individuals then have a choice to stop work and take their pensions , or to continue working and either take their pension or defer it until they choose to stop working .
Unfortunately , I was unable to achieve consensus on this , and therefore it is not in the report , but I believe Member States must be encouraged to look at this for the future .
I have tabled a number of amendments on behalf of my group , which I hope other Members will see fit to support , but most of the issues covered by this report should remain within the competence of the Member States .
There is , of course , still a great deal we can do in terms of exchange of best practice .
Mr President , as the rapporteur correctly observes , the demographic situation depends on natural population growth , average life span and migration flows .
I would add a fourth consolidating element to this dynamic , in the form of interpersonal relations and the political will that influences them .
Man is a particularly demanding and difficult animal , who does not just reproduce when the time is right , but must additionally have suitable and proper conditions for doing so .
The 20th century , and especially the years following World War II , did not fill mankind with particular optimism and a desire for procreation .
It was as if the world did not appear sufficiently interesting to man to prompt him to bring children into existence .
Today the time has come , now that we have understood the causes of the pessimistic demographic picture of Europe 's future , to begin putting the situation to rights .
Immigration , as it appears from the report , is not an adequate solution to the problem .
Above all , we need to create appealing conditions for Europeans that offer an incentive to quicken natural growth .
I support all the solutions proposed in the report , and I would place an emphasis on two .
Care such as we have never before provided should be lavished on the family , and especially on women , who not only devote their time to motherhood , but also look after ill and elderly family members .
This work demands to be covered by a special occupational status linked to remuneration .
Furthermore , each child must have a guaranteed place at a crèche and at pre-school following the mother 's return to work .
Finally , demography is a problem that is , among other things , political , and we are politicians ; we are in a position to rectify this poor state of affairs .
It is true that there are demographic changes in the population of EU Member States which it is important to take into account but , in the analysis made , it is not sufficient to say that there is a falling birth rate and the population is ageing .
The analysis needs to be taken further , seeking the causes and indicating measures which do not jeopardise mankind 's progress and all that civilization has achieved to date .
Thus we must not compromise the advances attained through applying scientific progress in order to improve people 's living conditions in terms of preventive medicine , better healthcare , nutrition and housing , reduced working hours , and support for mothers , fathers and children , which has resulted in constant and regular increases in life expectancy .
The existence of public policies in fundamental social areas , in particular universally accessible public services , especially in the areas of health and education , has made a decisive contribution .
The fact that workers ' achievements as regards organisation and working time , improved health and safety conditions in the workplace and progress on work breaks and holidays , proper wages and secure jobs have been enshrined in law has also been very important .
However , increasingly neoliberal policies , whose essential instruments are the Lisbon Strategy , the Stability Pact and the guidelines of the European Central Bank , have led to the liberalisation and privatisation of public services and an increase in precarious employment , which particularly affects women .
The rise in the retirement age is making it even more difficult for young people to find employment with rights , and universal access to public services and proper housing has also become more difficult .
These factors all tend to reduce the birth rate .
That is why we need to change policy as a matter of urgency .
That is why we need to replace the Lisbon Strategy with a European strategy for solidarity and sustainable development that opens new horizons for Europe , of decent jobs with rights , in particular for women and young people , reduced working hours with no reduction in pay , better salaries , an end to discrimination , particularly wage discrimination against women , greater economic and social cohesion , adequate protection , and public and universal social security , guaranteeing a better quality of life and greater social justice .
Hence the urgency of creating more , better and affordable facilities for childcare and for the care of dependent persons and of making public pre-school education generally available free of charge , so as to promote good working conditions which make it possible to reconcile work and family life .
This in turn requires stable employment and working hours , and respect for the social role of mothers and fathers .
That is also why it is necessary to allocate greater budgetary resources to less developed countries and why all Member States urgently need to ratify and apply the UN Convention on family reunification for migrant workers .
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - Mr President , this is a report on preparing for demographic change .
Does this mean we are giving up and accepting the dire prediction in the 2005 Green Paper ?
When that paper came out we saw it as a challenge to change .
Among other things , we wanted to find a way to enable women to have the number of children that women said they wanted .
Are we now throwing in the towel ?
Our desire to raise birth rates is undermined by our policies .
Our competitive strategy is based on increasing consumerism .
Yet consumerism can be a deterrent to having children .
In consumerism we are taught to be selfish .
Look at the advertisements . Pamper yourself ; have it all ; buy .
For most people , having children and a family is the opposite .
It demand selflessness , sharing and putting others first .
As we become consumers we increasingly ask , can we afford a child ?
And we weigh up the cost of a child against the cost of getting ahead or a social life or a car or a house or a vacation .
The child often loses with the potential parents saying either ' no , thank you , ' or ' not yet ' .
And of course we must tackle infertility .
But with over four million abortions a year in Europe , we cannot really say that our falling birth rate is primarily about infertility .
I asked my intern to read this report and she made an interesting comment . Where are the men ?
If we want to talk about gender equality and demography , we need to talk about both genders being equally and fully responsible for rearing children .
For many valid reasons , we have had to emphasise the cause of women .
But have we reached a point where we have sidelined men ?
Raising a child is an enormous task .
Although we must give all the help we can to single mothers and their babies , the state is at best a poor substitute for a caring , supportive and , dare I say it , protective father .
Many women do not want to undertake motherhood without an involved father .
Security is important in motherhood but financial security is not the whole story .
We must encourage an emotional environment that is conducive to having children .
Our culture needs to encourage men to step up to the plate .
More than anything , having children is about our closest relationships which is why more and more childcare - though useful in getting women into the workplace - will not help increase the birth rate .
To rectify our demographic crisis we must restore the basic integrity of human relationships .
We must foster trust , patience , fidelity and love .
Only in this atmosphere can men and women feel happy and secure enough to start a family and with real support for this family and family life , we will see an increase in births , plus the revitalisation of Europe .
( DE ) Mr President , the European Union is facing demographic change as never before .
By 2030 we will be lacking more than 20 million people of employable age .
Two employed people will have to pay for one pensioner .
The good news is that people will live longer , and today 's elderly people are healthier than previous generations .
The bad news is that the younger generation is too few in number and this will have dramatic consequences for urban planning , the construction of dwellings , the education system and the way work is organised .
We need a more family-friendly environment in our Member States , more childcare choices , more workplace daycare centres , better opportunities for combining family and work , greater participation by women in the working world , more part-time work for parents and a secure return to work after child raising .
Above all , we need stable career development paths and sufficient income , because these make it easier for people to want to have children .
We also need significantly greater investment in people , to improve general education and specialist training levels .
Lifelong learning programmes should benefit not only young people but also older people , who will want to work for much longer and who can manage a solid workload and are highly skilled and highly motivated .
We should not expect too much of Mrs Castex 's own-initiative report .
The legal status of social services of general interest remains controversial .
We are against an EU-wide framework directive or binding regulations .
Furthermore , company pensions that have been established on a voluntary basis should not be burdened with additional obligations , such as , for example , criteria relating to family policy .
This is a question of social security , a question of taxes , and therefore a classic matter for the Member States .
With these considerations and the amendments proposed by the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats , the report has become more substantial .
With this report , we can hold a discussion of the necessary breadth about the consequences of the dramatic demographic changes .
( ES ) Mr President , Commissioner , thank you very much for attending this very interesting debate .
I would also like to thank Mrs Castex for producing this report and for enabling us to go deeper in a discussion that is helping us a great deal .
In a country such as mine - Spain - which is going through a demographic crisis that , if possible , is more serious than the average in the European Union , this type of communication from the Commission and this type of debate are very helpful , because this is a deep-rooted , structural problem rather than a short-term situation , and these things take the problem out of the national political debate and make it much broader , with greater capacity for analysis and response .
Indeed , as the Commissioner said , we are facing a problem , but we also have an opportunity .
The opportunity should materialise through tackling this problem , not only in its effects - that there are more elderly people in Europe , that Europe is ageing - but also in its causes .
We need to prevent Europe from ageing , because we are not going to avoid having more elderly people : science and medicine have brought us to this point and progress will continue to be made .
The problem , as other Members have said , is that we need birth policies , demographic policies and we need children in Europe , that is what we need .
We need to work in all areas , but with the understanding that it is a serious and fine problem that we are going to pass on to future generations if we do not lay the foundations for solving it now .
I am among those who believe that Europe 's social model is not the problem , but on the contrary it could be the solution .
The ageing of Europe and the low birth rate in Europe would be even more serious without our social system .
Other societies such as , for example , China , where they are going to experience something very similar , are going to pay even more dearly than us for the lack of efficient , intelligent and rational social models .
Because , in short , the problem is going to be that change is inevitable and we are going to have to change .
Our social system can change its techniques without changing its values .
I think that the fundamental issues are solidarity , reconciling family and work life ( to give fresh opportunities for families to produce new generations ) welcoming immigrants , not as a burden , not as something that is negative for our societies , but as a phenomenon which , if we are able to integrate it , is once again going to help us to tackle this problem .
Finally , there needs to be a major discussion about the role of women in our society , a discussion that needs to be conducted , as always , in the light of solidarity .
( Applause )
( ET ) Commissioner , Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the average birth-rate in Europe today is 1.5 , but this means that there is no population growth .
The Member States have studied the situation and their inquiries show that on average people would like to have two or three children .
It is clear that there is a mismatch between people 's wishes and the reality .
This is the 21st century and women long ago stopped being satisfied with the role of housewife and child-carer .
They are educated , they want to work and have careers ; the income they receive from work provides a better standard of living for their families .
However , we must be able to influence the birth rate , and to establish a situation in which the number of children a family wants to have becomes a reality .
Our families need a sense of security that the birth of a child will not shatter a career , in other words there needs to be a better balance between work and family life , for both mothers and fathers .
Parents want to enjoy a sense of certainty that they can provide their children with a good education and with the skills to pursue their interests , with the material support of the State where necessary .
Without this sense of security people will not have children .
Immigration as a means of increasing population is a naive route to take .
It is only a partial , short-term approach .
We should pay more attention to innovation , not immigration .
Time will not permit me to talk about all the factors but I should like to emphasise that the demographic situation depends greatly on a gamut of decisions and legal rules in fields ranging from labour and family law to environmental law and national security .
In conclusion I would like to thank Mrs Castex for her important report which contains a great deal of female empathy .
( PL ) Mr President , the draft resolution once more draws attention to the demographic threat facing Europe .
Responsibility for the future of our continent , and for its social and economic development , demands that special attention be given to this issue .
A birth rate of about 1.5 on average is too low .
In order to guarantee a simple replacement of generations , this figure must exceed 2.15 .
Promotion of model families with a small number of children or none , conditions of family life that do not guarantee a decent and stable economic situation ( as a result of the impact of unemployment and lowered employment standards , particularly as regards the duration of employment ) and punishment of women for motherhood through pension systems have undoubtedly contributed to the threats that have arisen .
The ageing of society , which stems to a significant extent from the otherwise positive phenomenon of longer human life , but also from the deteriorating ratio between the number of people who are gainfully employed and the number of pensioners , is causing major financial problems for pension systems .
In this situation , action must be taken to bring about change .
I am , however , going to dissent from the conviction to be found in the report that this problem will be resolved for us by migration movements .
Studies carried out in Poland by the Institute for Market Economics indicate that the boost to population numbers achieved by this method will be barely 2-3 % , in other words far too small .
This method also gives rise to social problems , as can currently be seen in Denmark , France and Germany .
Integration processes take a long time .
I would like to draw your attention at this point to the report 's suggestions regarding rights for the families of economic migrants .
The amendments that I have proposed result from a lack of precision regarding whether this means family in the sense of the law of the emigrant 's country of birth , or of the country that is accepting the emigrant .
I am particularly concerned about potential polygamy and the legal and economic consequences arising therefrom in the case of social services being made available to these families .
I would also like ...
( The President cut off the speaker . )
Mr President , the word ' integration ' has been used 24 times in this report .
The proposed integration of immigrants out of the national taxpayers ' pocket has not taken into consideration one important aspect , namely religion and civilisation .
Militant secularists of socialist origin avoid this subject , although the Muslim population is shooting up .
By 2025 , one in three people living in Western Europe may , or will , be Muslim .
The Archbishop of Canterbury has recently suggested that Europe should adopt Sharia law , which the President and the establishment of this Parliament would probably call ' multiculturalism ' .
This brings a confused debate to the fore that has been developing over the ways and possibility of integrating and assimilating the new immigrants flooding into the continent .
Does assimilation mean that immigrants should absorb and be absorbed into European civilisation , or does it mean that they should join the descendants of old European nations to create some sort of new European man ?
Or is the creation of a common civilisation either undesirable or impossible ?
Although Europe has always had its full share of varying cultures , it has also had a mainstream Christian culture or civilisation , so to speak , in which most of its people , whatever their identities , have shared .
For almost 20 centuries , this civilisation has been the central and the lasting component of the European legacy .
One has to ask : would Europe would be the Europe it is today if , in the seventh and eighth centuries , the ashes of ancient Rome had been conquered and settled not by Christian societies but by Muslim and any other ?
The simple answer is no .
It would not be Europe .
It would be Egypt or Libya .
Fortunately , there are people who will not accept cultural rights as a cover for Sharia .
Religion should be protected from the State - the European State , in particular .
It is only Christianity that can integrate other religions into a shared European project , by acknowledging what secular ideologies cannot .
I believe that Europe can do that and Europeans should recommit themselves to Christian culture and the traditions and values of liberty , equality , law and individual rights that , for over 20 centuries , have been embraced by Europeans of all nations and that have been the source of prosperity and moral leadership in the world .
This report can integrate nobody and nothing .
It is a symbol of dead men walking .
It might create a continent of zombies , unaware of their national identities .
( PT ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , increased life expectancy and a constantly falling birth rate will mean that the current European demographic dependency index will rise from the current 49 % to 59 % by 2025 and 77 % by 2050 .
Thus the European Union is facing an unprecedented problem , since in the future European cities will have a very high proportion of old people and society will therefore be very different from what we have today .
That trend will mean there will have to be profound changes in important aspects of public policies .
In addition to social security , there will need to be changes in health and care services , tax policy , spatial planning , immigration , security , culture , tourism , leisure , and so on .
Financing of pension schemes will also have to be rethought , so that it is no longer predominantly State-based , and even if it is , contributions will not come almost exclusively from wages .
Given the far-reaching consequences of demographic change , it needs to be considered from the point of view of the public administration and the social fabric , requiring the mobilisation of all economic , cultural and social operators in a structured analysis and debate on the various options as regards the measures to be taken .
Hence the value of this report .
Once again we are facing an area where it is essential and urgent to step up social dialogue ; indeed there is no other way to tackle this issue .
I agree with the Commission 's statement that boosting the birth rate , in view of the urgency and scale of the matter , will entail the setting of a long-term strategy .
That is the only way we shall be able to take preventive action and , at the same time , help the European Union to seize the opportunities which fall within a policy to boost the birth rate .
( DE ) Mr President , today , at this late hour , we are discussing a report that deals with Europe 's demographic future , with the public virtually excluded .
The rapporteur deserves the highest praise for this report because in it she has dealt with our existential societal , political and social questions .
The result should make compulsory reading for all MEPs who hide behind the day-to-day pragmatics of politics and ignorance of reality .
The report reveals how and where the chill of the economy and the rat race can be combated with social warmth .
Predictions of the way things will develop are there too , to open our eyes and develop a political philosophy of an inclusive society .
That relates to the ever-changing question of what constitutes a family , which needs to be revised , and the fact that in today 's well-off society , having children is connected with the fear of poverty .
In industrial firms - and this is par for the course - parental leave is denied by macho managers who have never had a social life .
In addition , it is impossible to count the number of employment relationships and workplaces that make people wonder whether children are ' affordable ' .
The additional measures listed in the report are necessary in order to turn a demographic development into a ' win-win ' situation .
One thing is certain : the society of tomorrow will look different .
Whether generational conflict will become a socio-political apocalypse and potentiate the possibility of conflict between rich and poor depends on the here and now , and whether politicians are prepared to think politically and work sociopolitically .
This report is more than a bad weather forecast that we can put up with today because things might improve tomorrow .
This report is a clear call to change and develop our society , and most particularly it is an opportunity to improve our personal understanding of society .
My thanks to the rapporteur once again .
( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , as Mr Ettl said , we are facing a great challenge .
All our fellow citizens have now realised that the climate is a challenge .
Few have realised that democracy is a challenge .
However , having said that , where is the demographic problem in Europe located ?
In the towns , of course , since 80 % of the population is concentrated in towns .
What is the issue for citizens today living in towns , and for mayors , since I know other fellow Members , MEPs like me , are also the mayors or deputy mayors of their towns ?
Let me take two sets of examples .
A set of economic examples on the one hand .
Where towns either have to accommodate a large population or , as in certain towns in East Germany , watch many of their inhabitants leave , in the second instance this means unoccupied housing , unused roads , districts heated for no reason , empty schools and , in the first it means building a school for EUR 5 million , as I have just done in my town , or a new neighbourhood centre for EUR 7 million .
These represent economic expenditure that has to be borne by the towns and by the towns ' taxpayers .
However , this is not just an economic challenge , it is also a human one because , in these neighbourhoods , when you see people who are isolated , when the whole neighbourhood is ageing , when you cannot hear the happy shouts of children playing in the street any more , that is a human relations problem .
There are jobs that nobody wants , as you know .
You cannot find a plumber in some small towns .
We do not have enough nurses any more in my town .
We do not have enough home helps any more , so people have to wait .
Instead of having two hours ' help per day , we only get one .
This is a serious human problem .
Commissioner , going beyond the report by my fellow Member , Mrs Castex , which I will be delighted to vote for tomorrow , I would ask you , in my capacity as chairman of the Urban Housing Intergroup , to put forward a proposal on towns for us , so a chart can be set up in the near future for each town that enables us better to understand and control the demographic situation in our towns in the medium and long term , so decisions can be taken on housing , transport , schools , etc .
( PL ) Mr President , the report under discussion is proof of the EU 's powerlessness even to evaluate the situation .
We are on board a demographic Titanic , and no-one has even asked the orchestra to start playing , yet here we are , holding debates of such crucial importance in the evening , when the audience is at a minimum .
We have a demographic crisis in the EU .
While the report talks of changes , the argument of Recital F clearly contradicts that of paragraph 1 .
There is talk of women 's infertility , but what about that of men ?
There is talk about the infertility of couples , as if homosexual couples could be fertile .
There is talk of infertility , but nothing is said about abortion being the main cause of falling population numbers in Europe .
In the last 50 years , about 75 million abortions have been carried out in the 27 Member States .
Were it not for that , the population of the European Union would be 15 % greater , and we would not have a crisis .
In the EU we are always talking about rights , and never about duties , or about duties with regard to the future .
This can only be described as adults entering a second childhood .
That is why we have a crisis : children cannot have offspring , and neither can old people , but without offspring there is no future .
( HU ) Thank you , Mr President .
The report on the demographic future of Europe is an important report , since it deals with solving crucial problems such as stopping the ageing of society , increasing the desire to have children , improving the balance of work and family life , employment opportunities for women , care of the elderly , provision for the needy alongside work , and not least the matter of the long-term sustainability and financial viability of the great social welfare systems .
At the centre of these questions are the family , the question of the division of labour within the family , a husband and wife working at the same time , provision for and educating more and more children , and continuing to provide and care for elderly dependants .
How can adult members be encouraged to work and have children at the same time ?
And we must also see that we would like to encourage active old age at the level of Union policy at the same time , that is to say , by making employment alongside a pension attractive , pushing the age limit a little further within the scope of what is possible and reducing early-retirement pensions through indirect incentives .
We can only achieve these objectives , which depend on one another , if we pay particular attention to two considerations : supporting families and improving people 's state of health .
It is clear that we can only count on increasing the desire of the elderly to work if they are suitably healthy and are capable of continuous employment without any obvious problems .
It is unfortunate that many Member States are withholding and reducing health grants for budgetary reasons , and that more and more burdens are being placed on workers , including the elderly and needy .
This is the wrong direction .
It does not help to implement the Lisbon Strategy , and it does not help to solve demographic problems either .
The situation is similar with regard to family support systems , and here too we need to increase them , rather than withhold and reduce them . Thank you very much , Mr President .
( RO ) Mr. President , Mr. Commissioner , dear colleagues , the Castex report is very important for the future of Europe and I would like to congratulate Madam Rapporteur for its content .
A correct demographic policy involves a basic matter : we should not establish for the future generations tasks that are almost impossible to solve , taking into consideration the conditions predicted for the next decades .
Briefly , we have to find solutions adapted to the present , but especially to the future .
The European demographics are a problem all over the Union , and I would like to draw attention to the fact that the region I have the honour of representing has acute problems in this field .
Indeed , the social-cultural reality resulting from the long communist experience has directly influenced the demographic processes of the Eastern European countries , Romania being a specific case .
The answer to the demographic challenge is simple at first glance : the Member States need to rapidly revise their demographic policies in order to eliminate the negative consequences of the decrease in population and demographic aging .
Although the solutions are not always as simple as the questions , I would like to emphasize the importance of item 10 in the report , which requests the Member States to adopt measures in order to create quality and affordable child care services , in compliance with the Barcelona objectives , so that , by 2010 , the Member States should create services that will allow taking care of at least 90 % of the children aged between 3 and the school-age and at least 33 % of the children younger than 3 years of age .
It is a generous and necessary objective at the same time .
I consider that providing direct financial support in the form of cash is a solution , but only for the moment , this is why emphasis should be laid on providing support to the parent in a relationship with the employer and on quality and affordable services for child care and education , for the purpose of ensuring balance of the family and professional life .
The European institutions and the Member States have started to become aware of the importance of demographic policies , but this is not enough .
We need a first step , an exact record of the demographic situation in the European Union .
( The President interrupts the orator )
Mr President , first of all , I would like to say ' well done ' to the rapporteur .
This is a very comprehensive report on a major issue for the EU : dealing with the demographic challenge .
I would like to mention just two areas covered in this report : the situation of carers , in particular family carers , and the issue of pensions .
In the context of carers , the report reminds Member States of the multiple disadvantages faced by carers and also asks that greater support be offered to carers , in particular the right of access to flexible or part-time work .
This will facilitate carers in making choices and having a reasonable work-life balance .
Indeed , the recent preliminary ruling by the Court of Justice supporting the case for constructive dismissal brought by a carer in the UK would indicate that the Court of Justice may be thinking along the same lines .
This report also stresses that access to adequate services for those who need care plays an important role in ensuring the full and equal participation of men and women in the labour force .
This will help us in achieving the Lisbon objectives .
However , adequate services should , of course , be provided in any case .
The report also highlights the massive disparity in average occupational pension between men and women .
This is often due to career breaks taken to care for children or elderly relatives .
And the report calls on Member States to take action to ensure that work breaks for maternity , paternity and parental leave do not constitute a penalty when pension rights are being calculated .
It is crucial that today 's carers , many of whom operate on a 24 / 7 basis , are not the next generation of older , poor people .
In order to ensure this does not happen , Member States must take action to deal with the issue of pensions for carers .
It would be totally unacceptable if those who carry the burden of caring were to be denied an adequate pension .
( PL ) Mr President , when I was at primary school , 100 million Europeans were aged 14 or under , like me .
When I am an ancient 87-year-old , there will be just 66 million children of that age in Europe .
At present , one in four European citizens is over 65 , and in 40 years ' time one in two Europeans will be in that pensionable age group .
Let us remember that these numbers are not just dry statistics .
This alone will cause a massive rise in public spending and benefits .
In Europe , including in my country , we have a demographic crisis .
If we look back 100 years , one in six or seven citizens of the world was European , but in 40 years ' time one in 20 people will live on our continent .
What , then , should we do ?
Promote motherhood , create economic incentives for having children , including tax breaks , support large families - but one thing we clearly must do is treat infertility .
Today we complain and end up talking about the problem of immigrants , but the source of these difficulties lies in the demographic decline of the European peoples .
( SK ) Mr President , Commissioner , I find it worrying that the birth rate has been falling for several years now and that the indications are that by 2050 there will be a change in the population structure of the European Union .
Not only will the overall population of the European Union grow old ; there will also be a shortage of people of a productive age .
As a result , the Union will face a loss of competitiveness compared with regions recording significant demographic growth .
The demographic imbalance could then affect the financing of social welfare and pension systems .
However , this situation is nothing new and the present adverse demographic changes force us to ask important questions ; when looking for solutions to the changes we have to analyse their causes and consequences .
In my view , one of the main causes for this demographic winter are the adverse conditions and trends that are trying to weaken the traditional family unit of a man and a woman , the role of motherhood in women 's life , the role of men as children 's fathers , the economic and social benefits for families with several children , etc .
As a father and as a doctor of medicine I welcome those sections of the report that talk about protecting motherhood and providing socio-economic support for families and activities that will enable men and women to better reconcile their family and working lives .
I also agree with the pragmatic and rational approach to immigration policy .
I just want to mention that , as far as I am concerned , a rational immigration policy means manning those posts that have long been unmanned in the EU Member States .
It is precisely in this area that we need a well-considered and well-prepared European policy .
When applying the so-called Blue Card system , Europe should choose , as part of the immigration process , only people who are qualified and who can work in those professions in which our market is lacking manpower .
Another positive aspect is , in my opinion , the possibility of adoption for unfertile couples , and creating good conditions for foster families .
( I am about to finish . )
However , I do not agree with the promotion of assisted reproduction as an option for infertility treatment since ...
( PT ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the question of Europe 's demographic future has merited significant attention from this Parliament .
In Lisbon , I advocated , together with my colleague , Edite Estrela , a public hearing on demography and solidarity between generations during the debate on the Bushill-Matthews report .
The report by Mrs Castex , for which I congratulate her , falls within a broader perspective - that of the demographic future of Europe .
The challenges of solidarity are not just between generations , but also between regions , and cover the integration of migrants , human resource policies and , of course , the challenge of demographic renewal .
Such demographic renewal , ladies and gentlemen , involves considering the importance of childcare facilities , which make it easier for parents to enter the labour market and help to combat poverty , particularly for one-parent families .
It is also important , however , to take into account that some of the objectives aptly laid down in Barcelona in this and other fields , have not yet been achieved in various countries ; I would stress greater participation by women in working life and support for employment for the over 55s .
From the tax point of view , too , it is important for Member States to reflect upon the possibility of promoting effective measures to boost the birth rate , in order to reduce the financial constraints on choosing to have more children .
Let us be clear , it is still important that workers should be able , if they so wish , to prolong their working life within the existing legal framework of each Member State , but the right to a pension at the legal age must be safeguarded .
It is , of course , essential to work towards greater sustainability of social security systems .
The future of Europe in population terms has much to do with immigration from the south , and therefore the education systems need to take into account the needs of immigrants and their families , so that they can feel happy and fulfilled in the various EU Member States .
In conclusion : the demographic future of Europe depends also upon us , the European Parliament .
I am sure we shall measure up to our responsibilities .
( PL ) The demographic future of Europe is a long-term problem .
Europe is ageing rapidly .
We are threatened by a diminution in the working-age population , a fall in economic competitiveness and a decrease in funding for social care and keeping pension systems in equilibrium .
The great expansion of the European Union and the migration of people from the new Member States to the old Member States in search of earnings have relieved this problem in Western Europe , but have not solved it .
Europe 's ageing process continues and decisive action is needed in the following areas , among others : protection of human rights and employment rights , promotion of a pro-family policy , medical care and social aid , and improvements in human resources management , and immigrants must be included in this .
These steps will produce the desired result only as long as globalisation processes do not destroy mankind and the family , and as long as the highest value is actually man and not capital .
( SK ) Europe is facing a significantly negative demographic trend indicating that within 50 years vast demographic changes will take place in the Union .
A falling birth rate , gradual ageing and dying out of population are the most serious problems today .
Under certain circumstances there is even a threat of the end of European civilisation .
We need to be truthful when discussing the reasons for this situation .
During the last 50 years or so , tens of millions of inhabitants of Europe have not been born because pregnancies ended in artificial abortions .
Young people have not been brought up to behave responsibly in sexual matters ; sexual freedom is a typical feature of today 's society .
There has also been a rise in marital breakdowns during the last 50 years , divorce , incomplete families , and more and more children born outside marriage .
Add to this enormous devaluation of the value of a child : for example , what percentage of the cost of one or two cars can an entrepreneur write off as tax annually and how much of the cost of a child can a parent write off ?
Our social policy rewards those who have few children or none at all and concentrate primarily on their working careers .
We have a social policy that forces families with several children into poverty and dependency on State benefits .
The State is the main , decisive body involved in judging and redistributing , and in pursuing intergenerational solidarity through tax and social legislation .
The media and society put women under enormous pressure , making them believe that only the work they carry out as part of their jobs has any value and purpose .
Childbirth and bringing up a child are still seen as a necessary evil .
Motherhood has practically no value .
In monetary terms its value is not even expressed by a minimum wage .
There are certainly other causes but those mentioned above are those that have destroyed Europe 's demography .
Only by eliminating them can we again make Europe the continent of the future and hope , because a continent without children is a continent without a future .
( PT ) Mr President , Commissioner , I should like to begin by thanking Mrs Castex for her excellent work .
Demographic change is a great challenge for Europe .
A hundred years ago the population of Europe represented 15 % of the world 's population .
In 2050 it is likely to account for only 5 % .
Each woman in the European Union has , on average , 1.5 children , which is below the figure of 2.1 children required to sustain the population .
The situation is serious and is going to have negative consequences for the economy , social security systems and the very composition of society .
It is therefore necessary to take measures such as the ones recently adopted in Portugal with an investment of more than EUR 100 million to provide crèches and nursery schools throughout the country , going beyond the goals of the Lisbon Strategy .
The granting of a pre-natal allowance to the most needy pregnant women , family allowances for immigrants ' children , extension of maternity leave , a 20 % increase in family allowance for one-parent families , tax benefits for businesses which install or subsidise crèches for their employees , the setting up of a maternity benefit , public support for medically assisted procreation - are good examples for other countries to follow .
( EL ) Commissioner , no doubt everything my fellow Members are repeating to you will induce you to include the demographic problem among the most fundamental issues in the new social agenda - and we expect to receive it as your proposal for 2008 .
With the planned life-cycle approach , demographic development is linked to the necessity of monitoring and forecasting needs for future skills to create dynamic human capital in the employment market .
This is needed to boost hopes of maintaining the comparative advantage of the EU 's developmental capabilities .
I congratulate Mrs Castex on her patience in carrying out such a difficult assessment . We can see in her report an unbroken chain of problems set out in summary form .
Horizontal actions will provide the solution .
In the spirit of the Commission communication , a presentation has been given of the problems that demand good practice at national , regional and local level in a range of sectors .
The first necessity here , as we have already heard so many times , is to reinforce intergenerational solidarity through multi-faceted material and moral support of the family .
This should be the case wherever the family may be - in a city or a remote village ; its members , whatever their age or origin , and whether they are locals or immigrants , should all benefit .
The fact that families live in a Member State must permit them to develop their capacities as sources of wealth production .
Families are at the heart of development : they provide labour , consume goods and produce new dynamic members .
What is needed for the creation of new families is a guarantee of legal security , the safeguarding of policy continuity and , above all , honest dialogue in the public and private sectors .
( RO ) Dear colleagues , first of all I would like to specify the quality of Mrs. Castex 's report , a report on a decisive theme for the future of the European social model , as well as for the economic growth in the European Union area .
I would also like to welcome the presence of Commissioner Spidla and his inclination towards social matters .
I thank Mrs. Castex , especially for the attention given to the woman 's status and her dignity , compliance with her civic rights and freedoms .
I don 't need to remember here the dramas lived by the women in Romania during the communist period , when abortion was illegal , the human tragedies generated by the abortions the Romanian women initiated for themselves with primitive means .
The film that won the 2007 Cannes Palme d 'Or Award , directed by a Romanian , Cristian Mungiu , offered a real image of this veritable national trauma Romanian dealt with , a situation that seems difficult to understand , I know , in a normal world .
Eastern European countries experienced a true demographic shock after the fall of the communism .
For more than one and a half decades , the demographic increase was negative and we timidly witness a slow change of this situation .
Nevertheless , in general , there are many things to be done in order to change this situation in the European Union countries , and the measures proposed in the report seem adequate to me and they should be adopted by the national governments and supported by the Commission .
Another aspect I would like to mention refers to the pension system .
All over Europe , the young people 's age for entering the labour market has upsettingly increased , at the same time with the decrease in the retirement age .
Several countries complain about the fact that they have a labour force deficit on the one hand and , on the other hand , people around 50 years of age retire or can no longer find a job .
I appreciate the measures proposed in the report in relation to this problem as well .
( BG ) Mr. Chairman , Colleagues , Europe is the first region in the world to feel the effect of demographic challenges .
The demographic development is the result of three factors : birth rate , life expectancy , and migration flows .
Birth rates have declined in the European Union for the last three decades and no reversal of the trend is observed .
In some Member States it is going downward , while in my country , Bulgaria , it can be called " domgraphic collapse ” with the lowest birth rate and the highest mortality rate in Europe .
At the same time , life expectancy is on the growth .
This is a stable trend that will have its impact on all aspects of the economic and social development of European citizens in future .
Let us take , for example , the old-age dependence ratio .
Currently , it is 1 to 4 , as it has been pointed out here .
It is expected to become 1 to 2 by 2050 .
But even today , this delicate ratio is already a fact .
Once again I am going to quote the example of Bulgaria , where the ratio between pensioners and people at work is already 1 to 1.2 .
As to migration flows , our approach should focus on their effective management rather than their excessive control .
What we need is a more flexible policy of the Community and the Member States to immigrants , especially those comong from third countries .
Immigration could be a positive element but it is not the panacea to resolve any aspect of the existing demographic problems .
All these examples come to show that demographic challenges are a fact and we have to face them now .
We have to change the perspective from challenges to oppoortunities .
There seems to be too much talk and too little action with regard to demographic changes .
Therefore I firmly support the understanding that the demographic development should be a horizontal policy issue to be mainstreamed in the various policies of the Community , and of the national , regional and local authorities .
( RO ) We have here a very good report , which seems to have said everything .
We thank those who worked on it .
Nevertheless , allow me a reformulation that is not a figure of speech .
Our general goal , as politicians , is to arrange relationships between people in the society , so that we can all live as long as possible keeping harmony between us and nature .
If we accept this goal , we have no demographic problem .
In fact , we are subject to a demographic study only by an unjustified simplification and ignorance of what we are .
There are other indicators measuring the situation of people , as population , and we know them .
They are called human development indexes .
From this point of view , the European Union countries are ranked at the top of the most advanced countries , which is good .
The challenge is not to change the demographic behaviours , but to accept that we need to change our economic and social model .
It is superior to other models , but inadequate .
It lagged behind our own development as people .
There is a gap between our general goal and the organization of the social environment and the economic relations , between declaration and facts .
We say it is necessary to have more children born .
In the meantime , 30 % of Europe 's children live below the poverty threshold .
We ask women to give birth to children , but single mothers experience the biggest risk of exclusion .
The employment rate has to increase , but social services should not be financed .
We export problems and we want to import solutions , but citizens are not a market .
We have to humanize the economic and social relations if we want to solve this problem .
This is the big challenge .
( HU ) Mr President , I am addressing you now on behalf of a region in demographic crisis and one of the sickest nations in that region .
As a Member responsible for public health , I cannot emphasise strongly enough how closely our demographic problems are linked to public health problems .
In my homeland , Hungary , more people die from cancer than anywhere else in Europe , and this too is contributing to the fact that each year 50 % more people die than are born .
The Castex report on the demographic future of Europe rightly points out that a new policy must be drawn up in the interests of renewal .
Allow me to give just one example : whilst the population of Islamic countries will grow to 1 300 million by 2050 , Europe will fall from 495 to 400 million .
This new demographic policy must be built on two bases : the family , as the most important basic unit of society , and healthy people .
Families must be guaranteed a system that encourages them effectively , and protection .
Today , in many Member States , having children is equal to having poverty .
But there are many good examples too .
There are some countries where the state takes the additional burden from the shoulders of large families .
This good example must be implemented everywhere .
Health is a condition for quality of life .
Citizens must be made interested in preserving their own state of health .
They will obtain the state support necessary for this in every material area , such as compulsory screening tests and free sports opportunities , and all along intellectual lines , that is , with education in health and demographic knowledge .
It is in the fundamental interests of every Member State to improve its demographic and health situation .
This is particularly important in Hungary , where the population might fall below 10 million in future , and where the average life expectancy is ten years lower than the European average .
The future of Europe depends on the demographic performance of the generations living now .
What a government fails to do today with a bad policy will be difficult to rectify later .
( SK ) Ladies and gentlemen , people in the European Union are living longer and longer .
That is a positive phenomenon .
On the other hand , there is a steady decrease in the number of young people .
The number of people in the productive age group will start to fall within no more than three or four years .
Today the ratio is three people of working age to one person of pension age ; it will be just one and a half people of working age in 2050 .
How do we solve the economic effects of the ageing of the population ?
Firstly : we must find jobs for more people .
The traditional policy of men working and women carrying out family duties is not creditable any more .
Most women wish both to become mothers and to have a professional career .
Public policies must back both wishes .
The Scandinavian countries are a good example .
Their active labour market policies combined with better care for women with children offer the best quality of life .
Secondly , we must reform the social welfare systems designed to care for older people and for people who have reached pension age .
If we do not do this on the grounds of social equality and solidarity , the losers will be mostly older people .
In order to achieve a long-term improvement , we need reforms of pension systems and medical care systems , and investment in good health .
Older people have accumulated a lot of knowledge and experience and we need to motivate them to continue to work for longer in their lives .
Ladies and gentlemen , the Lisbon Strategy is beginning a new cycle , giving us an opportunity to introduce reforms that will increase productivity at work and help to create jobs , thus helping to reduce the economic impact of population ageing .
( RO ) Ladies and gentlemen , at present , Europe is dealing with substantial demographic challenges that will have a long-term impact on its future .
Therefore , today 's debate is not only welcomed , but also necessary for ensuring a good future and sustainable development .
Of all the report 's recommendations , I consider that 3 ideas should constitute the core of the European demographic policy .
In the context of the population aging trend , the European Union should first of all pay particular attention to children and young people .
Child protection and providing a solid opportunity for personal and professional evolution for young people are strategically important for the future , and the development of these objectives should be integrated into a comprehensive policy of family protection and women 's promotion .
The second element , education , is in close correlation with the above-mentioned principle .
A competitive Europe involves human resources able to face the new challenges , as well as scientific progress , public health and an adequate living standard .
The achievement of these objectives unquestionably depends on the level of education and lifelong training of all the generations .
Finally , migration inflows represent the third decisive factor since immigration is an important premise for ensuring demographic equilibrium and economic growth .
Therefore , I welcome the Rapporteur 's call to consider immigration a positive element of the European population , but , especially , to consolidate the European policies in the field of social integration of immigrants , and the fight against discrimination and xenophobia .
In conclusion , I would like to emphasize the need to mobilize public policies at all the necessary levels in order to successfully implement the mentioned objectives .
Local and regional authorities have a decisive role in this direction and they should be constantly involved .
( LT ) Congratulations to the rapporteur on having prepared such an excellent document .
I would like to point out that both our success and our failure in implementing it will be of huge importance for the future of the European Union .
There is a possibility that several smaller EU nations could find themselves on the brink of extinction in 100 years ' time .
The aging population reflects an increase in quality of life and social solidarity as well as the devaluation of the family .
It could hinder the progress of Europe but , with the relevant precautions in place , new possibilities may arise .
The countries that joined the EU in the new millennium in particular are feeling the burden of these problems very acutely .
Their citizens are plagued by pitiful pensions , birth rates lower than the EU average , alcohol and drug abuse ...
This area benefited from a sufficient number of crèches and infant schools before the transition to the market economy , when most of them were closed down .
There is mass emigration from the new accession countries , especially the Baltic countries , Poland , Bulgaria and Romania , to the richer Member States .
This represents an immense loss of hard-working hands and educated minds , people who were educated in their countries at great cost .
I support the proposal to allocate structural funds to compensate for this damage , but it is not enough .
There should be additional financial support for new accession countries , which are most unfortunately suffering from ' brain drain ' , as they have lost their best scientists , doctors , engineers and artists to the richer Member States .
I support the proposal to enable older people to work part-time , as they would then be able to pass on their experience to the younger generation .
Mr President , can I suggest that this is a very depressing debate , although it is based on a very factual and thorough report , for which I congratulate the rapporteur .
Maybe it is on too late at night because one could get nightmares based on the demographic trends that are contained in it .
Certainly if we do nothing , the forebodings contained in the report may yet come to pass , although some Member States are reacting and putting in place measures to support men , women and children and that is positive .
Ironically , I grew up in an era where they told us we had too many children , and being one of a family of eight was probably large in the European context , although I am happy to say that my mother , at 85 , is still alive and well .
The simple truth is that women cannot do it all .
We cannot have children , hold onto a job outside the home , mind elderly parents and participate in wider society .
Something has to give .
I think the problem is that the birth rate is the issue that has given , if you like , in all of this .
But , ironically , I have great faith in humanity , realising the reality of where we are at and adjusting to a more balanced look at what is needed for a vibrant society and again placing a greater value on children .
Perhaps this debate tonight will add to that .
( BG ) Mr. Chairman , Mr. Commissioner , The most important feature of this report is its link to realities in life .
Demographic problems do exist in Europe and in some countries they acquire the dimensions of a crisis .
They have their root causes and national specificities but they also share some elements in common .
The consequences ahead of us are very important indeed : the inability to resolve major social and economic issues of Member States with our own human resources , which will evolve in the near future ; the deeply changing structure of migration flows which , in its turn , generates new challenges .
A policy oriented to young generations , maternity , social protection and economic support to young women and men and their families , and responsible parenthood are essential for overcoming demographic problems .
Maternity should be recognised for the purposes of calculating the length of service .
Demographic problems should also be incorporated in the education and training of each generation to come . Otherwise , the problem witll be postponed from one generation to another and mount to bring about new crises .
Let us not forget the sexual education , the education in good parenthood , and the solidarity between generations .
Governments should be more committed to the raising and education of children and their accommodation at creches and kindergartens .
Mr President , I would like to thank the rapporteur for an excellent report .
Improving life expectancy in a static or declining working-age population will imply an increasing dependency across Europe , with serious implications for our competitiveness with other economic regions , for pensions , health and indeed long-term care expenditure .
Interestingly , the age structure of the Irish population is different to most other countries in the EU , and in fact our demographic situation is quite favourable over the medium term .
Our peak population age group is now about 10 to 15 years younger than in the EU-25 in general .
But by 2050 our population structure will be quite similar to the rest of Europe , with the old-age dependency ratio projected to rise to 45 % in 2050 , compared to an EU average at that point of 53 % .
Interestingly , in 1845 the Irish population was over 8 million .
Twenty years ago it was 3.5 million .
Today it is 4.25 million .
Our relatively high fertility levels have been augmented by increasing immigration and the return of economic exiles in recent years .
If that is maintained it will help to support the balance between the generations .
( PL ) Mr President , in rising to speak in this debate , I wish to draw attention to the following problems : among the important causes of a low birth rate in Europe we have , firstly , difficulties in reconciling family life with working life , i.e. the inadequate number of places at nurseries for small children and the lack of socio-economic support for families and for women 's employment .
Secondly we have uncertainty arising from the material and employment situation that young people face , with a lack of employment continuity , late access for young people to employment , and finally expensive housing , which is consequently inaccessible to young people .
What is needed is support for families through the tax system , chiefly the structure of income tax on natural persons and VAT ; in the former instance the best solution is the kind adopted in France , for example a family quotient enabling the tax burden for families bringing up children to be markedly reduced .
In the latter instance , what is needed is preferential tax rates for children 's goods .
Thirdly we must maintain application of the principle of intergenerational solidarity in social security , in other words the principle that the working population bears the costs of benefits , pensions and health care for those who are not working - that is , children , young people , people who cannot manage on their own and , lastly , old people .
Mr President , inside the European Union , Britain has lost control of its borders .
Immigration to Britain is now uncontrolled , unlimited and indiscriminate .
As far as anyone knows , immigration to Britain is currently running at about half a million people per year .
Taking into account those who leave , the net increase in population is about 200 000 per year , or a million people every five years .
The birth rates of the immigrant population are much higher than that of the indigenous population .
The dramatic rise in population in England , in particular , is fuelled purely by totally unnecessary immigration .
Demographers have calculated that , on current trends , within two generations , the native British , and especially the English , will be an ethnic minority in their own land .
Britain simply cannot control its immigration policy inside the European Union , and that is yet another good reason why we should leave .
Member of the Commission . - ( CS ) Ladies and gentlemen , let me emphasise once more the high quality of Mrs Castex 's report , as it clearly provided the platform for a wide-ranging debate , which touched on almost all the fundamental issues .
It would be very difficult to try to respond to all the issues raised , so allow me just to state briefly that the European Commission 's fundamental principle , which is reflected in all our documents , is based on equal opportunities ; in none of our documents would you find the idea that demographic development is a problem for one gender only .
It is quite clear that it is an issue of equal opportunities and equal rights for men and women .
It is also evident that one of the answers to this problem is creating an active society , which means a society with the highest possible level of social inclusion , a society that can offer opportunities of active employment to as many individual members as possible .
Let me also say that as a result of earlier debates a more stable and constant platform has been established , including the demography forum and the Alliance for Families .
I would also like to point out that the Commission has been working with the social partners on assessing the possibilities of legislative initiatives in the area of work / life balance .
The Commission is focusing , too , on immigration with a view to the gradual development of a more cohesive European policy , including , for example , the Blue Card proposal .
Ladies and gentlemen , I would also like to say that , regardless of the fact that - as in all debates - this debate has encompassed some extreme opinions , we are starting to see a general consensus and , in my view , this consensus sits very well with the basic recommendations that the Commission presented at the beginning of this demographic debate .
As I have said , a stable platform has been established and I therefore expect this debate to continue , because I believe , as almost all of you do , that Europe 's demographic development is one of the basic components that will determine our future both in the medium and long term .
Mr President , I will be brief because many things have been said .
I would like to thank Mr Špidla for having pointed out that the issue of demographics is not an issue about women only , and that it concerns women , men and couples .
I would like to point out , for my fellow Members who made the criticism that men had been forgotten , that I devoted a paragraph in my report to the issue of promoting paternity law and developing the involvement of fathers in family life .
Anyway , to try to round up a bit what was said and sum up the main thrust of the report , I would like to highlight the strong demand that exists for effective public policies .
These are policies , in the plural , concerning support , care and education , which might seem slightly paradoxical for an issue that in fact relates to the intimacy of couples and the family .
However , I believe that an appeal is being made to the public authorities at European level , and in the Member States , that needs to be heard and must be taken on board .
I would also like to underline this issue of strong demand for solidarity , not only solidarity between the generations , which we have dealt with several times in this House , but solidarity between different regions .
Mrs Schroedter and Mr Beaupuy highlighted and recalled this evening how important it is to take account of the regional imbalances the demographic issue will cause between ageing regions that demand more care and therefore more expenditure , and younger regions that will be creating wealth , because that is where the productive population will be .
This is something the European Commission has to take into account in managing the EU Structural Funds and Cohesion Funds .
Finally , the issue of the job market , as Mr Andersson , Chairman of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs , mentioned , is an important issue in the demographic question .
It is not peripheral , because it will be necessary to do more with a smaller , shrunken active population .
From this point of view , the calls for better management of human resources , for investment in lifelong education and training are extremely important , and they must be heeded not only by the public authorities in these particular cases , but by all the social partners , particularly companies , because they have a major responsibility in this area .
This debate is therefore not yet over .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
in writing . - ( HU ) The ageing of the population brings with it some significant economic , financial and social challenges .
It will have a serious impact on growth and will place significant pressure on social benefits , so it is crucial to prepare for it .
Dealing with the demographic problems is thus a multi-faceted challenge that requires complex , strategic analysis , planning and social dialogue .
It is not only about the gradual fall in the population , but also about the sustainability of the European social model for the welfare of European citizens , ensuring European economic development and global competitiveness at international level , that is to say , it is about the future of Europe , our future , and so looking for the solution is a common interest .
The Member States of the European Union must use all the instruments possible to support demographic renewal , which must be based on the sustainability of closer solidarity between the generations than previously , on ensuring the implementation of equal opportunities in practice , on reconciling professional and private life , on fully implementing the Barcelona objectives , on creating the conditions for active old age and on specific measures to promote the social inclusion of immigrants and ethnic minorities .
The results we want can only be achieved by common goals , common interests , common collaboration and compulsion to achieve the goals .
in writing . - ( RO ) The demographic strategy of the European Union refers to many aspects of a social and economic nature .
Nevertheless , I would like to emphasize the importance of a coherent youth policy , especially as regards access to the labour market .
It is a known fact that , at present , the 25-to-30 age segment is in a relatively small percentage on the European labour market as compared to other population categories .
The European Commission and the Member States should increase the number of legislative initiatives and pilot-programmes in order to facilitate the employment of young people .
Examples of such initiatives could be : providing tax incentives for the companies employing young people or extending the range of flexible labour contracts .
Secondly , especially in the new Member States , we are dealing with the problem of the regions collectively left by young people .
By the structural funds it makes available for the Member States , the European Union 's cohesion policy should create favourable conditions for young people so that they can develop their professional and business projects in the communities they come from .
Member States should supplement the European Union 's financial support by actions such as : priority access of young people to land and dwellings , tax incentives for the enterprising young people or access to subsidized loans for young people 's projects .
in writing . - Europe is not ready for the challenges posed by our demography .
For 60 years , Europe has put its trust in a pyramid scheme .
It works as long as every generation is much larger than the previous one .
But , today , European families are raising fewer children than their parents .
I would like to point out that in the 21st century the low birth rates present less of an economical danger than they did 60 years ago .
Progress of technology lets us produce much more goods with much less labour .
Globalisation means that the countries with young and growing populations will help us to carry the pension burden , if our policies allow it .
My country , Estonia , is a great example of a successful transition to a funded pension scheme .
At the same time , Estonia feels that low birth rates endanger the sustainability of our culture , maybe even nationhood .
This is the problem of many smaller nations .
If we want to preserve Europe as we know it , we must protect our cultures also by protecting our families .
We , the policymakers , must to make sure that technology and globalisation are our servants , not masters .
This report is a good start .
Mr President , according to demographic predictions , in 2050 the average age in Europe will have risen from 39 ( as it was in 2004 ) to 49 , which will have an impact on the population structure and the age pyramid .
This will cause , among other things , a fall in the number of young people , a diminution in the working-age population and a rise in the average life span .
These changes are giving rise to an increase in the cost borne by society in connection with maintenance of the occupationally passive population .
They will also enhance regional differences , which are characterised by an outflow of young people , thus enhancing society 's ageing process , or a positive migration balance which retards this process .
Immigration , however , is only a short-term and partial solution , so Member States should take steps towards respect for gender equality , social and financial support for families and protection of motherhood .
Only societies for whom children are a policy priority and who promote a pro-family environment will be in a position to contend with unfavourable demographic changes .
I want to emphasise that an increase in the average life span is something positive , so preventive measures must be taken to combat poverty among pensioners and to enable them to live out their last years with dignity .
Member States should petition for the creation of affordable care structures for people who cannot manage on their own and for children .
Member States should also draw attention to the problem of infertility , as it has an enormous impact on a process that is amplifying the growth of demographic imbalance , and to cooperation in overcoming difficulties .
Composition of committees and delegations : see Minutes
Scientific cooperation with Africa ( debate )
The next item is the Commission statement on scientific cooperation with Africa .
Member of the Commission . - ( CS ) Ladies and gentlemen , as we all know , the global economy is increasingly shaped by technological innovation .
Developing countries should use technology for introducing innovation , which would improve the living conditions of their poor and increase the competitiveness of their countries and their businesses .
It is true that most developing countries have opened up their economies , but they remain trapped in the production of commodities with low added value and plagued by the lack of a skilled workforce .
Developing countries must , therefore , increase their production capacities and diversify their economies through better application of innovation and new technologies in agriculture , production and services .
At present , African scientists do not participate sufficiently in international research and development projects , including those that receive the financial backing of the European Union .
This is due in part to the lack of expertise in building the necessary research capacity , networks and partnerships and to shortcomings in dealing with intellectual property rights , contracts , technology transfer and the dissemination of research results .
It must be stressed , however , that global problems such as infectious diseases and biodiversity can only be solved successfully with the participation of these countries .
African politicians are aware of this and are doing their best to make science and technology a priority .
The African Ministerial Conference on Science and Technology held in September 2005 adopted a new Consolidated Plan of Action for NEPAD , the New Partnership for Africa 's Development .
In addition , last year , in January 2007 , the Commission of the African Union appealed to Africa at the African Union summit to take the initiative to build large science and technology capacities with a view to training large numbers of scientists , engineers and technicians .
The year 2008 was then declared the Year of Science in Africa .
The European Commission recognises the importance of this issue and places an increasing degree of emphasis on science and technology as an important part of development cooperation negotiations .
African scientists can participate in the Commission 's general research program or the Marie Curie Actions , which provide grants to scientists from third countries , including developing countries .
Under the 9th European Development Fund EUR 35.5 million was allocated to a programme for scientific and technological capacity-building as part of cooperation with the ACP countries .
We are also currently involved in negotiations with our partners regarding further support under the 10th European Development Fund .
Towards the end of last year the European Union and the African Union agreed an EU-Africa Partnership on Science , Information and Space .
This Partnership will help to bridge the gap between us in the area of science , develop Africa 's scientific and technological capacity and help Africa to make better use of science and technology to reduce poverty and promote economic growth and social development .
It will also contribute under the Consolidated Plan of Action for Africa in the sphere of science and technology .
In addition , the Partnership will ensure that the burden is shared equally among the individual Member States .
In this connection , some Member States have assumed a leadership role in specialised areas , for example Holland for horticulture or Sweden for water supply and distribution research .

on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( ES ) Mr President , Commissioner , we are reflecting here today - since we are not going to have a debate because we are not in a fit state for a big debate right now - about the joint motion for a resolution tabled by the parliamentary groups to support measures to improve the development of science in Africa and to enable a stronger , more fluid relationship with the EU than there has been so far in the field of science and applied technology .
As the Commissioner said , the summit that took place in Lisbon , the second EU-Africa summit - we should recall that the first was in 2000 in Cairo - once again highlighted the importance of this dimension , this area of science and technology in the future development of Africa .
In 2010 there is going to be an evaluation of the implementation of the decisions that were made in these agreements , in this summit in Lisbon between Africa and the European Union .
We are now going to adopt a resolution that aims to influence this from the European Parliament ; which therefore follows in the wake of the Lisbon summit , but not only of this summit , but in some way of various initiatives which , in many places in the world , are being implemented at the moment in relation to Africa .
Now that China , as a large country and a large geographical , political , cultural and economic area , is starting to develop considerably , as is the case with India and many Asian countries , more than ever the focus has turned back towards Africa .
What is more , it has turned back in a new way , taking a qualitative step forward in relation to the past .
The focus has shifted back not out of charity , which has largely characterised the relationship between the West and Africa , but out of proximity , equality , association , etc .
In this respect , especially in the field of science and technology , there is still a long way to go , because work has been done in other fields such as health , education , etc . , but there has not been a great deal of work done in the field of science and technology .
However , the benefits that it could bring for the development of Africa and for fully including Africa in globalisation , which to a certain extent it is excluded from - I say that in inverted commas - are going to be incredibly important .
I therefore think that the resolution that Parliament will vote on tomorrow is a boost , an incentive in that direction , which I think is fundamental for Africa and for the future of the world .

on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( ES ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , this is an important motion for a resolution , because we have often talked about Africa here , but rarely about scientific cooperation with the continent .
Nowadays the economic and social development of peoples is inseparable from scientific research , technological development and innovation .
Moreover , in a globalised world , many of the problems that science is still trying to solve require the cooperation of all without exception , especially in specific sectors such as energy , climate change or food safety .
Scientific cooperation for development should therefore be a priority in our overall cooperation strategy with African countries .
This requires increasing the participation of scientists in joint R & D projects , promoting exchanges and the mobility of research personnel , strengthening research infrastructures in accordance with the needs of the scientific community and , above all , supporting what already exists .
Ladies and gentlemen , I have just come back from South Africa where I went in my capacity as a member of the EP delegation .
With the Republic of South Africa , for example , there has been an agreement on scientific and technological cooperation for ten years .
That was the reason for Commissioner Potočnik 's visit to the country in November .
This cooperation agreement is producing significant results that are mutually beneficial : South African scientists have taken part in 117 research projects in the Sixth Framework Programme , a level of participation which is below only that of the United States , China and the Russian Federation , and even greater participation is planned in the Seventh Framework Programme .
This cooperation is in such diverse areas as biotechnology , health , nanotechnologies , aeronautics , transport , energy and climate change .
It is cooperation that as Europeans we should support because we have many problems in common that need an urgent solution and because joining forces in research and development , innovation and technology transfer cannot but be beneficial to both parties .
One example is energy , which is also a red-hot issue there .
We are seeking the same thing : ensuring supply at a reasonable price and in an environmentally friendly way .
Along these lines very interesting research projects are being conducted on carbon technologies , renewable energy and energy efficiency .
Another important area of scientific cooperation with South Africa and the whole of Africa in general that should be highlighted is that on AIDS , a disease that is ravaging the continent and which , in a country like South Africa , has reduced life expectancy by more than 10 years .
I therefore think that the particular reference in the resolution to research into this disease is very important .
Finally , I would like to point out that all cooperation needs to be enhanced , through an exchange of information , frank and open dialogue and sincere recognition by both parties .

on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Mr President , this motion for a resolution on supporting scientific cooperation with Africa is very timely , because it comes hot on the heels of a series of statements on science in Africa over the last 12 months - by the United Nations Economic Commission for Africa in January 2007 , in the G8 Summit Declaration about strengthening research and development cooperation and in the new chapter on ICT and science and technology in the EU-Africa Strategy .
With the Science with Africa conference in Addis Ababa coming up in March , this is indeed the moment for the European Parliament to register its support for a new and intensified approach to EU-Africa scientific cooperation .
Of course , there have been initiatives in the past .
There have been scholarships and research fellowships to help African scientists come and work in Europe .
There has been support for certain projects . But what there has not been is fully developed two-way scientific cooperation between Africa and the EU .
There is not yet a solid research base within Africa for Africa .
The statistics say it all .
Africa has only 1 % of the world 's scientific researchers , but 13 % of the world 's population .
Only 1 in 10 000 people in Africa is a scientist or engineer , whereas the figure is 1 in 200 in industrial nations .
Yet , because of climate change , there is no part of the planet where research is more vital .
Global warming in Africa threatens to wipe out the modest progress that has been made towards the Millennium Development Goals .
But , if only the science and technology base was stronger , climate change could also be an opportunity for Africa .
This motion for a resolution rightly makes specific mention of solar energy .
It is the renewable energy which Africa has in abundance .
Huge advances are being made today in photovoltaic technology .
Last Friday , I was at the New and Renewable Energy Centre in Blyth in Northumberland , where innovative research is going on to reduce the cost of solar electricity by focusing the sun 's rays on very small silicon cells .
I am delighted that this research is happening in my constituency , but unless such research and development happens in Africa too , the immense potential of photovoltaics to deliver megawatts of electricity across Africa will never be realised .
I hope that this is the sort of scientific cooperation we are now moving towards .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( SV ) Good evening .
One of the key issues when we discuss scientific cooperation with Africa is how the African countries will be able to protect themselves against climate change .
As the UN Climate Panel has found , Africa is perhaps the continent in the world that may be hit hardest by climate change .
This is actually already happening here and now .
Crops are being burnt .
The desert is spreading .
Lakes and streams are drying up , and climate refugees on the African continent can now be numbered in their millions .
Many of the conflicts that exist in Africa at present are a result of the pressure and tension produced by climate change .
One of the greatest ironies of the climate problem is that it is those who pollute the least that are most affected .
Ethiopia , to take one example , emits 0.1 tonnes of carbon dioxide per inhabitant per year , whilst my own country , Sweden , emits more than 6 tonnes per person per year .
The EU average is around 10 tonnes .
Sweden therefore emits 60 times more , and the EU 100 times more , than Ethiopia , to take just one specific example .
Seen from this perspective , we in Europe obviously have a huge responsibility .
On the one hand we must reduce our own emissions massively , whilst on the other we must do everything we can to help the developing countries to take action against climate change .
This evening we are debating how we can establish effective scientific cooperation with Africa .
I think that we must ask ourselves , self-critically , here and now : are we really doing all we can to support African countries ?
Are we really doing all we can , for example , to transfer modern , environmentally-friendly technology and knowledge to African countries ?
When we negotiate trade agreements , do we pay most attention to our own businesses or do we pay most attention to African businesses that want to trade with us on fair terms ?
Unfortunately , I for one cannot give a positive answer to these questions .
So there is much to be done .
What is the situation , for example , with our laws on intellectual property and patents ?
In November in our resolution prior to the Bali negotiations we in the European Parliament stated that ' the European Parliament recognises that Intellectual Property Rights licensing fees in the area of clean technologies may constitute a barrier to the transfer of such technology to developing countries ' .
Let me take an example : 75 % of wind power technology is controlled by four companies in the world .
Yes , just four companies in the whole world .
Three of those companies are European . The fourth is from the United States .
When many developing countries now want to develop wind power they must use old and unpatented technology .
They simply cannot afford modern , environmentally-friendly technology .
Much of the modern technology is simply deadlocked by our own legislation .
Of course this supports a minority of large enterprises that control the patents .
But what benefit is this for Angola , Botswana or Rwanda ?
I want a clear answer from the Commission this evening .
Are you doing anything to make the laws on intellectual property and patents more flexible ?
What are you doing so that technology can be transferred more easily ?
Lastly , another example of these shortcomings is the so-called flexible mechanisms .
Of course we in industrialised countries can transfer some of our climate responsibility to developing countries .
The aim is , if it is interpreted lawfully , that we must transfer technology and environmental activity to developing countries .
However , according to a new report which we received in the Committee on the Environment last year , less than 2 % of CDM projects are in African countries .
The majority represent projects which in fact are of no particularly great benefit .
What is the Commission 's view on the flexible mechanisms and CDM projects , the Clean Development Mechanism ?
Are you prepared to revise those mechanisms thoroughly as we in the European Parliament have demanded ?
How will Africa be able to take greater benefit from technology transfers in future ?
Mr President , science and technology have been identified by the African Union as crucial contributors to sustainable development on the African continent .
Currently nearly all African countries are lagging behind with regard to scientific output and scientific capacity .
Take scientific publications as one indicator .
Egypt , as one of the strongest African countries in this area , accounts for a mere 0.4 % share of global publications .
Scientific collaboration and cooperation offers the chance to overcome the extreme disparities in development .
However , it faces considerable challenges in areas such as global sustainability problems like poverty , climate change , biodiversity , HIV / AIDS , infectious diseases , energy , clean water - the list is seemingly endless .
Add to that the brain drain , the problem of free circulation of scientists and limited access to information .
Currently there are more opportunities than ever to collaborate successfully with African partners .
Examples of these are in the areas of biotechnology , ICT , space and nanotechnologies .
Coupled with Africa 's rich natural resources and biodiversity , these could prove highly effective .
In addition a renewed political commitment in Africa and a greater commitment of industrialised countries including China are essential for any further development in this area .
Over the past 20 years the EU has gathered considerable experience regarding the organisation and management of collaborative S & T programmes .
FP7 offers some very interesting opportunities to partners from Africa but more can be done .
We have to realise the full potential that cooperation on matters of science has to offer African countries and the development of the African continent .
The fields of science and technology can and must do more .
We must create broad channels of communication and networks between scientists and development practitioners to learn from each other .
The concept of science diplomacy is back at the top of the agenda and must be adapted for a new era of the internet , of low-cost travel , 24-hour global news , the power of NGOs - a long list .
The fact that science is and must remain outside the realm of politics makes scientists trusted diplomats .
It is time for the scientific community to increase its role in diplomacy .
A vigorous new science diplomacy oriented to African citizens as well as to their governments will provide human well-being , education , economic growth and above all hope .
A diplomacy of deeds and not just words .
The Millennium Development Goals look increasingly challenging in this year of science with Africa .
( SL ) Africa has more than 13 % of the total world population , but only 1 % of the world 's scientists .
It spends only 0.3 % of its GNP on research and development .
At the same time , Europe is faced with two major global challenges which can only be successfully met by global action .
This also applies to scientific research .
The first challenge consists of the so-called millennium development goals to eradicate world poverty .
The poor health or death of adults at an age when they could still be active may push younger and older generations of their family into poverty .
When using the facilities of the Seventh Framework Programme , we must be sufficiently transparent not to invest resources only for research into diseases which afflict the European population .
We must also find an appropriate solution to diseases that present a global threat , such as AIDS , which took more than 2 million lives in 2006 .
The other challenge is climate change .
The data indicate that it mostly affects the poor .
Europe must accept its share of responsibility and cooperate in measures to adapt to climate change , as well as in measures to limit global warming .
The Seventh Framework Programme could also include scientists from developing countries .
However , the message coming from them is that their facilities for this cooperation are too meagre .
The mechanisms within development policy frameworks offer great potential for reducing the differences .
However , we must bring to an end the traditional cooperation based solely on aid .
Forming a partnership means that we have to include science , technology and innovation in our development policies .
( PL ) Thank you , Mr President .
Thank you , Commissioner .
We are living in an age of globalisation , which means acute competition by everyone with everyone .
The African continent is a field of particular rivalry .
The Chinese and Japanese economies , Australia and the United States are all trying to acquire this market .
If one wishes to encourage and strengthen relations , one usually begins with sport , and that has already happened .
Immediately after that , though , come student exchanges and scientific cooperation .
If we are to start working with Africa in that area today , then in five or maybe 10 years ' time we shall be exchanging thousands of students and scientists .
These will constitute thousands of ambassadors for our mutual cooperation .
Today 's joint scientific undertakings will in 10 years ' time equate to major investments , a flow of skilled workers , the opening up of markets , and consequently competition , growth and new jobs in Europe and Africa .
It is worth making the effort today to enable this to come about .
Mr President , scientific cooperation with Africa has to be with the objective of developing a trained and active scientific community on that continent for the benefit of that continent , not , I should warn , to steal their scientists , as we do their trained medical and nursing personnel .
I was very heartened in 2005 , when in Malawi , to meet a young trained agricultural scientist .
He had been to the European Union and had trained there , but was proud to be back amongst his own people , showing them how to use the soil and water to produce food to give them a sustainable life .
I would just finish by saying that one of the areas that have been neglected in Africa is investment in agricultural science , and the World Bank 's draft report for this year is testament to that .
So I think we should collaborate at all levels in science , but we should look particularly at the area of agriculture and natural resources .
Mr President , I might be testing your patience , but I noticed a precedent earlier in the day for speakers taking the floor again if there were not five ' catch-the-eyes ' , so thank you .
I would like to put a specific question to the Commissioner .
I spoke of diplomacy and science diplomacy - a diplomacy of deeds and not just words .
There is a general view that the Lisbon Summit on the EU and Africa last year was a major disappointment , and that there were more words than deeds .
I would like you specifically to respond to that allegation .
Could you indicate any of the deeds , as distinct from words , that will emanate from the hundreds - if not thousands - of people that gathered in Lisbon to talk about this most important issue , and when we might see something flowing from it ?
Member of the Commission . - ( CS ) Ladies and gentlemen , EU policy on Africa is based on a complex strategy , and part of this strategy of course relates to Africa 's access to science and technology .
The European Union recognises the importance of that access , as it will enable the continent of Africa to cope with the challenges of climate change .
The Commission believes that African countries must urgently develop the necessary complex strategies for adaptation , while making sure that such changes do not jeopardise the positive results these countries have achieved in their fight against poverty .
The Commission feels that our cooperation in the field of science and technology is especially important as regards research into agriculture and the monitoring of agricultural products .
The Commission therefore supports the efforts of the African Union to establish a complex programme of scientific research in the area of agriculture and the endeavour of international organisations to harmonise agricultural early warning systems .
We also support the transfer of renewable energy technology , which is an issue closely related to the reduction of CO2 emissions .
However , this transfer should focus more on efforts to attain a sustainable and efficient energy supply and on access to the supply , rather than the issue of climate change .
A very important role in the context of technology transfer is played by the private sector , which the Commission supports through a specific programme .
As regards the Addis Ababa conference taking place in March , the Commission will take part and we hope that it will be a milestone on the road to scientific cooperation with Africa and in the development of science and technology on the African continent .
The issue of AIDS was also mentioned in the debate .
Just allow me to state briefly that the European Commission is one of the largest contributors to the Global Fund to Fight AIDS , Tuberculosis and Malaria and I believe that we have every right to be proud of that .
As I have already mentioned , during the EU-Africa summit in Lisbon at the end of last year the African Union and the European Union also agreed a partnership between Europe and Africa in the area of information society , science and space technology .
We are currently preparing a communication , which will lay down specific points and an action plan to put this partnership into practice .
Ladies and gentlemen , I am afraid I cannot agree with the honourable Member 's opinion that the Lisbon conference was a disappointment .
That certainly was not the case : the conference was the first step on a journey and , as I said before , we are now taking further concrete steps , which will build on the Lisbon impetus .
To conclude the debate , I have received one motion for a resolution pursuant to Rule 103 ( 2 ) of the Rules of Procedure .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
in writing . - The comment ' if you give a man a fish you feed him for a day , while if you teach him to fish you feed him for life ' is all too apposite to this debate .
If Africa is to escape from its poverty trap , it will need to expand the exploitation of its raw materials , strengthen its manufacturing base and increase its exports , but at the same time it will need to improve its scientific expertise .
We in the West must increase the involvement of African scientists in international collaborative science and R & D projects , and reinforce existing research infrastructure .
Agenda of the next sitting : see Minutes
Closure of the sitting
( The sitting was closed at 11.30 p.m. )
Opening of the sitting
( The sitting was opened at 10.05 a.m. )
Documents received : see Minutes
4th report on economic and social cohesion - Territorial Agenda and the Leipzig Charter ( debate )


rapporteur . - ( FR ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , this morning we are discussing two parliamentary initiative reports , but I feel both of them are extremely important for a number of reasons .
Firstly , we are considering the Commission 's Fourth Report on Social and Economic Cohesion .
This is a truly remarkable document , much better than the previous versions , and it constitutes a firm basis for all manner of reflections on the future of cohesion within Europe .
It is also important because the brand new Lisbon Treaty establishes territorial cohesion as one of the EU 's main objectives .
As we know , new and formidable challenges are now looming together with those we are already aware of , and cohesion policy must make a major worthwhile contribution to their consideration , to allow us to move forward to the Europe we want to see : that is , an effective , solidarity-conscious Europe .
What does the Fourth Report show us ?
That social and economic convergence between the Member States is moving in the right direction , with a definite reduction in discrepancies in terms of income and jobs over the last decade , but also that there are still considerable disparities between regions , and occasionally within regions , with a frequent tendency to become more acute .
Development is real enough , but is plagued by far too many imbalances .
It is here that the new concept of territorial cohesion comes into its own , and this is where it must take centre stage in the continuation of regional development throughout the EU alongside economic and social cohesion .
Implementing this will require an integrated approach among sectorial policies , and genuine multi-level governance .
Here we await with interest , and I must say with some impatience , the Commission 's Green Paper in September .
There is an obvious need for a common language on this issue , as emerged from our discussions in the Committee on Regional Development .
The teachings of the Fourth Report project our thoughts to after 2013 , since operational programmes for 2007-2013 are now in place at almost all locations .
One of their main features is a credit earmarking system to channel the basic essentials of resources towards the objectives of the Lisbon Agenda .
While we wish to stress the close relationship of priorities between the Lisbon Strategy and cohesion policy , we feel the latter must forge beyond this sphere and take up a position within a broader perspective .
Our report firmly states that convergence on different levels is a prior condition for long-term competitiveness in the regions , and that in years to come complementarity of the two policies will be necessary to reconcile effectiveness and solidarity .
Periodic assessment over the 2007-2013 period , which we are calling for , must allow us to confirm the appropriateness of the process , or to implement any adjustments that may be necessary in a properly informed fashion .
Questions must also be asked as to the dissociation implemented over the current scheduling period between rural development and regional policy .
Its relevance does not appear to be well established on the ground , and we feel that maintaining this separation after 2013 may pose a problem .
Our report emphasises the new challenges to be faced by the EU and their substantial territorial impact .
There are problems such as population ageing , climate change , energy , urban concentration etc .
We feel that necessary and urgent convergence and an appropriate territorial approach for these challenges call for enhanced political and financial cohesion policies after 2013 .
In this perspective , Parliament will staunchly oppose , as it has always done , any attempt to renationalise the policy .
I wish to finish , Madam President , by thanking the shadow rapporteurs , who were of great assistance to me in this task , for the large number of compromises we were able to achieve .
I also wish to emphasise coherence with Mrs Kallenbach 's report .
I think it would be good if a fully coherent whole were presented in the House today .
rapporteur . - ( DE ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to start by thanking all the shadow rapporteurs for the good and constructive cooperation .
Equally , I would like to thank the committee and group staff and Members ' assistants .
The stronger the community , the better the product !
I greatly welcome the fact that we are discussing the report by Mr Guellec and my own report jointly today .
When it comes to the aim of achieving genuinely sustainable development in Europe , these two reports form a complementary whole .
Cohesion policy is the hardware , as it were , with the Leipzig Charter and the Territorial Agenda being the software .
These instruments can only work in tandem .
The EU is equipped with the legal and financial competences through its cohesion policy .
We do not have any real responsibility for regional development , urban and spatial planning .
That is why a coherent policy - at local and regional level , the level of the national ministers and the EU level - is the prerequisite for sustainable European cities and regions .
This is the only way to generate European value-added .
The cities are the focus of opportunities and problems .
They impact on rural regions and the immediate periphery .
That is why we are relying on balanced development of the territory as a whole , on solutions which proceed from a holistic perspective and which at the same time are adapted to the specific situation .
There can be no single solution , but there can be common principles such as the integrated approach , the partnership principle , horizontal and vertical , between the cities and the periphery , but also with the various actors who are directly concerned .
We have achieved a great deal of progress at European level .
Besides the Leipzig Charter and the Territorial Agenda , the First Action Programme under the Portuguese Presidency , territorial cohesion was included as a Community objective in the Reform Treaty .
This strengthens Parliament 's weight through shared competence and the codecision procedure .
With today 's debate , we wanted to deliver a statement from Parliament in advance of the Council 's Spring Summit so that territorial and urban issues can be included as clear components in the Lisbon and Göteborg strategies .
It was also the joint wish of the Informal Council of Ministers in Leipzig that the Slovenian Presidency should put the Territorial Agenda on the agenda for this year 's Spring Summit in order to achieve greater political recognition of the territorial framework for the development of regions and cities and new forms of participation in the EU 's political decisions .
This was clearly reiterated at the meeting in the Azores in November .
So far , I have no real information available about progress here .
I would therefore have greatly welcomed the presence of a Council representative here today , so that we could have obtained this information about the status of the preparations .
Regrettably , I have heard that there is apparently no consensus in the Council to comply with the Ministers ' request .
I would have liked to hear from the Council whether , and in which form , the Territorial Agenda is to be discussed at the Spring Summit .
I would also be interested to hear whether it is true that in the current draft of the Council 's Conclusions , no mention is made of territorial issues and nor are relevant amendments envisaged in the Treaty of Lisbon .
However , that is the only way to turn our many fine words into real action .

Member of the Commission . - Madam President , I wish to begin by congratulating - and perhaps , even more , by thanking - both Ms Kallenbach and Mr Guellec on their reports , and also the Committee on Regional Development on its excellent work both on the fourth cohesion report and on the report on territorial cohesion .
The Commission fully shares your views that European cohesion policy has played a major role in narrowing disparities across the European Union and thus fostering European integration , and also getting the Union closer to its people .
Therefore , the Commission firmly rejects attempts to renationalise this policy .
We also share your view that adequate financial resources for cohesion policy must be guaranteed in the future in order to deal with the anticipated new challenges which will affect all European territories .
We have also to keep in mind that , at the same time , cohesion policy will have to continue to cope with regional disparities resulting from the most recent , and forthcoming , enlargements .
Let me reassure you that , in the context of the ' Lisbonisation ' of our policy , the main priority of European cohesion policy is , and will remain after 2013 , the objective of narrowing disparities , as it is enshrined in the Reform Treaty .
The solidarity dimension of the policy is central to this policy and the allocation of resources will certainly follow an inverse relation with the prosperity of countries and regions .
This view is also shared by an impressive majority of stakeholders across the Union .
What is also shared is that European cohesion policy is much more than just a distributive mechanism of resources between Member States and regions ; this policy is first and foremost a development policy whose objective is to foster the endogenous development of all European regions .
The Commission also shares your concern about the need for more coherence between European cohesion policy and other Community sectoral policies , especially rural development , research or competition .
I would add here that the need for coherence between the different development policies also applies to the coordination between European cohesion policy and national polices .
I am convinced that this is a key issue for the future of European cohesion , also in its territorial dimension .
I fully share your view that the success of the territorial agenda and the Leipzig Charter depends on two conditions .
First , we need to put in practice an integrated approach to the territorial development in order to avoid a piecemeal approach to our territories .
A classic example here is thinking in categories of purely rural or urban strategies , which misses the key importance of the true economic regions .
On the other hand , the integrated approach means also the need for integrating different sectoral policies both at the EU and Member State level , which affect the development of all our territories .
The second condition , as you rightly point out , is the need for the Commission to monitor and to assess regularly the progress in the implementation of actions agreed under the territorial agenda , and here we need to know more about the effects of these actions in the Member States so that the Commission can offer them adequate assistance .
For example , on the basis of better monitoring , the Commission can further progress in the area of defining indicators of territorial cohesion .
Clearly the Commission sees as good news - as does your report - the introduction of the notion of the territorial dimension of cohesion in the Lisbon Treaty , and now we have to make the most of this new dimension of cohesion policy and the avenues it opens up such as , for example , the new definition of subsidiarity giving more weight to local and regional authorities .
That is why the Commission included the Green Paper on territorial cohesion in our legislative and work programme for 2008 .
Even if there is no standard definition of the concept yet , territorial cohesion synthesises the legal objectives of the Union to achieve a sustainable balance and harmonious development of its territory and also to provide equity of access to services of general interest .
We are all aware today that there are a number of aspects of territorial balance in the Union which threaten the harmonious development of the Union economy and society in the years to come .
They are at EU , national and regional level and also in some specific areas and with regard to outermost regions .
I am pleased to confirm that the key recommendations made in Ms Kallenbach 's report , as regards the definition of the concept of territorial cohesion and the implementation of an integrated approach to territorial development , and also the improvement of the synergies between Community policies , are all taken on board in the preparation of our Green Paper that will be adopted by the college next September .
Let me also use this opportunity to inform you that we are progressing with the Member States in our common understanding of territorial cohesion and its key components .
We are currently working on the responses to the questionnaire which we have sent to 25 Member States on territorial cohesion , thus clearly making progress possible .
We have also established in the Commission an inter-service group which is giving us a framework to work in-house on territorial cohesion , and we have already completed the first part of this exercise : the identification of the territorial dimension of key EU policies .
We have now embarked on the process , specifically on the process of developing some tools which also match your request .
As you probably know , investigating territorial impact assessment of policies and also developing territorial cohesion indicators are among the priorities of the new strengthened ESPON programme .
As regards urban affairs , in March we will have the next Urban audit which is currently finalised and the second report on the state of European cities is due for June 2009 .
URBACT II has now been upgraded to a strategic instrument for networking and for exchanges in urban development .
My feeling is that we have , in the case of both reports , a high coherence of your views and of those of the Commission , and I now look forward to the debate for a better understanding of your concerns .


draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Budgets . - ( FR ) Madam President , Commissioner , I also wish to thank our rapporteurs , especially Ambroise Guellec , for his presentation and work on the subject .
As permanent rapporteur on the structural funds for the Committee on Budgets , I also wish to elaborate very briefly on budgetary issues .
This policy is now one of the most significant policies for solidarity between the peoples of Europe in budgetary terms .
Today , as we have already heard this morning , the major issue is increasingly optimising the efficiency of cohesion policies .
The Committee on Budgets wished to draw Parliament 's attention to a number of disturbing signs such as completion delays and commitments outstanding .
I wish to emphasise what I feel are a number of salient points within this problem .
The EU must urgently make it a point of honour to simplify procedures , such as implementation of technical assistance , with a view to preparation and execution of many projects our countries need .
We must also proceed with a clear distribution of responsibilities between the EU and the Member States to ensure better shared management , and I welcome the Commissioner 's words in relation to Tuesday 's decision to adopt an action plan on audit strategy for structural funds .
Something I have been pointing out for a long time now , which I am also glad the Commissioner has just mentioned , is the need to provide both qualitative and quantitative performance indicators common to all the Member States , in order to assess budget needs and help define the next legislative framework for the post-2013 multi-annual period and , in a word , to improve the clarity of Europe 's presence in relation to EU policies and European citizens .
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Fisheries . - ( PT ) I must start by expressing my regret that the Committee on Regional Development has not included any of the amendments tabled by the Committee on Fisheries on the Fourth Cohesion Report .
These amendments reiterate , for example , the contribution made by the fisheries sector to the socio-economic situation of fishing communities in convergence regions , regions handicapped by permanent geographical or natural disadvantages , such as the most remote regions , and also poor fishing communities within more prosperous regions .
I also regret that the financing for the European Fisheries Fund ( EFF ) , in a Union with 27 members , does not differ significantly from the budget of the FIFG ( Financial Instrument for Fisheries Guidance ) in a Union with 15 members .
The EFF must therefore be financially reinforced .
That is why I have re-tabled in this part-session two amendments which aim to underline the importance of the fisheries structural policy to economic and social cohesion .


on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( CS ) Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the reports we are debating today are significant not only in the way they deal with the present situation of our cohesion policy and its territorial dimension , but also in turning our attention to the future beyond 2013 .
I would like at this point to thank Ms Kallenbach and Mr Guellec for their excellent work and their open-minded approach .
The two reports , as both rapporteurs mentioned , are complementary and should be considered together .
Territorial cohesion , by virtue of its inclusion in the Lisbon Treaty , has become as important a concept as economic and social cohesion . But territorial cohesion as a concept is the least researched and the least understood .
Territorial cohesion so far even lacks a clear definition .
The general aim of cohesion is to even out differences , but these differences still persist and they are most pronounced in the border areas between the former Eastern block and the democratic West .
Territorial cohesion , in my view , also includes cohesion of towns and country .
It is indisputable that towns are the engines generating growth in the individual countries and therefore it is right to include the question of urban development in our motion for a resolution and at the same time call for strengthening of the integrated approach .
However , in the future it will be necessary in this regard to improve and simplify access of urban areas to structural funds and foster better links between municipal authorities and developers when financing projects of urban development from private funds .
We have adopted the Leipzig Charter and now we must gradually start putting it into practice .
At the same time we must create the right conditions for life in the future , for the development of our countryside .
I am convinced that we should analyse very carefully whether it is best to include rural policy in the common agricultural policy or whether we should be considering a different solution .
Ladies and gentlemen , just one closing remark .
The debate on cohesion policy is above all a debate on the allocation of funds .
It is evident and it is right that cohesion policy is getting stronger and is beginning to show in the European budget .
Cohesion policy will have to deal with new phenomena , such as the aging and dying out of the European population , the instability of energy supplies and the deterioration of the environment .
It is therefore necessary to modify the policy accordingly and ensure sufficient funds .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( DE ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , Mr Vlasák is quite right to say that we have the task of preparing the cohesion policy for the period after 2013 .
We have used these two reports in order to address this as an issue .
In fact , we have drawn together everything that we think is important in this context .
I would like to remind you , however , that we should be mindful of the strategic objectives of European cohesion policy , namely narrowing disparities in living conditions between the European Union 's regions and supporting the Lisbon and Göteborg strategies .
If the European Parliament wishes to play a role in shaping the future cohesion policy , it must , in my view , concentrate on key strategies rather than reverting to the ' watering-can ' principle .
We must face up to the new challenges arising in the context of cohesion policy .
Let me give you just a few examples : demographic change , climate protection , regional depopulation , and also , indeed , a modern European urban policy .
From my perspective , the ' equal opportunities for people and regions ' approach is essential for solutions in this area .
I believe that more investment in education , research and innovation and their infrastructures is important , and increasingly so , and is genuinely sustainable , in my view .
However , this can only work if , in future , we involve European citizens more effectively in the development of programmes and projects , as the European Parliament has demanded for a long time and does again in these reports .
I would like to appeal to the Member States - I think it is regrettable that no Council representative is here - and point out that we are giving them some homework to do .
If we are to fund additional tasks in the framework of cohesion policy , the financial resources that are needed for this purpose must also be made available .

on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( PL ) The Fourth Cohesion Report and the report by Mr Guellec highlight the success of cohesion policy in narrowing disparities between Member States .
They also note the growth in countries that were formerly lagging behind , for example Greece and Portugal .
At the same time , however , they confirm the marked failure of this policy as regards approximating the level of development between regions .
Member States unfortunately condone undue concentration of investment and other elements of development in national capitals .
A similar situation is true of the regions , where investment also tends to be concentrated in central areas , thus preventing the whole region from developing at an even pace .
The differences within and between regions of the European Union are significantly greater than in the United States or in Japan .
Everything points to the need to introduce a mechanism that would stimulate decentralisation within the Member States .
A long-lasting but dynamic regional policy for the next Financial Perspective is needed .
The report by Mr Guellec points in a considered way to the need to forge appropriate links between the Lisbon Strategy and cohesion policy .
The latter must not become simply an instrument of the former .
Cohesion policy aims at sustainable and harmonious development , and is an important end in itself .
It is the cheapest way of preventing what can later prove to be very costly situations from arising . I have in mind conflicts , mass emigration and immigration , relocation of companies and similar events , which all represent an upheaval for local populations .
In addition to the Lisbon Treaty , the report adopted today emphasises the importance of the territorial dimension .
There is an urgent need to clarify this concept , however , and establish an unambiguous definition of what the territorial dimension involves .
At present we are using this term somewhat blindly , and it can be understood as meaning many things .
There are parts of Mr Guellec 's report where this notion takes precedence over the policy of economic and social cohesion , whereas in others it is presented as complementary .
In certain instances it concerns equal access to services , and in others it involves the balanced distribution of research centres , for example .
I think it is unfortunate that the debate on the Green Paper on the territorial cohesion is planned for the autumn , after the report on cohesion policy . The Green Paper should be debated much earlier .
on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( PL ) Madam President , Commissioner , on behalf of the Union for Europe of the Nations Group , I should like to thank both rapporteurs very much for their work .
The term cohesion has acquired special significance within the Union .
References to the need to reduce differences between the various regions in order to unite national economies and support their harmonious development date back to the Treaty of Rome .
The Fourth Report covers the years 2000-2006 .
It is the subject of the Guellec report , which contains many valuable findings .
This report presents a summary of the situation in all the Member States .
It also highlights the areas where disparities are greatest .
Narrowing disparities in those regions must be perceived as a long-term undertaking .
The report tabled by the Commission contains many comparative parameters that were lacking in earlier documents .
The suggestion of using indicators supplementing basic GDP per capita in relation to different NUTS levels remains , however .
Cohesion policy is the foundation of integration and makes a valuable contribution to the harmonious development of the Union .
Its regional , local and environmental aspects are important in this context , as Mrs Staniszewska has already mentioned .
We should also recognise its impact on the Union 's innovation and competitiveness , and therefore on implementation of the Lisbon Strategy .
Demographic issues are important too , as certain areas are threatened with depopulation .
When we refer to cohesion we perceive it as economic and social .
A sound definition of the term territorial cohesion is urgently required .
Cohesion should be understood as ensuring that , regardless of where they reside , Union citizens enjoy equal opportunities for access to health services , education , culture , the Internet and transport , for example .
Cohesion policy should be strengthened and improved with adequate Union resources .
The urban aspect is particularly important , as Mrs Kallenbach pointed out .
The question as to how to choose between cohesion or competitiveness , equality or efficiency has recently arisen .
My brief answer is to choose both , in due measure .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( DE ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , in the late 1990s the philosophy which prevailed in the European Union was that the integration capacity of the Union was to be measured according to the success of the internal market .
The hope that the problems existing in the European Union could be resolved with the development concepts of the internal market , which were geared solely towards economic growth , remained unfulfilled , however .
The European internal market focussed the growth of economic activity on the centres of gravity which pulled in additional activity , at the expense of disadvantaged regions and the natural environment .
And even in these centres , not everyone was able to share in the benefits ; instead , poverty increased , triggering tensions and unrest .
Today , the Commission is making the same mistake .
It is subordinating cohesion policy to the Lisbon strategy .
Instead of genuinely prioritising the problems of the particularly disadvantaged regions and only promoting sustainable development projects , it is investing in outdated infrastructural concepts and , in consequence , only in the economic centres .
The municipalities and regions will become dependent on the major European banks for generations .
In my view , this is a massive problem , because ultimately , it is the next generation who will then pay the price of failed development policies .
And that in turn will trigger migratory movements - my colleague Mrs Krehl has already indicated as much - and it will also trigger an anti-European mood because some sections of the population will not share in the benefits .
These are dead-end strategies .
I believe we must be very careful not to put the European Union 's internal cohesion at risk .
Economic and social cohesion must genuinely remain a separate policy area and the benefits must be available to all the regions and people in Europe .
This can only happen if cohesion policy is genuinely underpinned by a social model based on solidarity and on sustainable development models which are not pursued at the expense of the environment .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( PT ) In this brief speech on such an important issue as the future of the cohesion policy in the European Union , we can only underline some of the fundamental principles that we believe should guide this debate .
Firstly , regional policy is a key instrument for promoting the highly cherished economic and social cohesion .
It is a structural policy which must have as its primary and principal objectives , as has already been stated , the reduction of disparities between the levels of development of the various regions , the encouragement of the least-favoured regions that are lagging behind , the promotion of real convergence and the stimulation of growth and employment .
It must therefore serve as a factor of redistribution and compensation , as regards the increased costs of the single market , Economic and Monetary Union and the liberalisation of international trade , for the less-developed countries and regions of the European Union .
Secondly , the cohesion policy and its associated financial resources must be used to promote projects for economic , social , environmental and regional development .
As a result , these projects must not be subject to a policy which has , as its priority and dogma , the competition , deregulation or so-called adaptability and entrepreneurship which are priorities of the Lisbon Strategy .
In other words , we believe that competitiveness must not be a substitute for convergence in the Member States and regions which are lagging behind in their socioeconomic development .
Thirdly , the current Community financial resources for the cohesion policy are insufficient to meet the needs of real convergence , regional disparities , high levels of unemployment , inequalities in income and poverty in the European Union .
We therefore reiterate the need to increase the Community budget , making the promotion of economic and social cohesion in the European Union the central and primordial objective .
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - ( NL ) Madam President , I have read the reports by Ms Kallenbach and Mr Guellec with interest .
The cohesion of European countries remains a fascinating theme .
The integration of internal policy and cooperation between EU Member States and regions is increasingly taking shape .
That such a strategy produces results is clearly shown in the cohesion report .
Cohesion between the Member States has increased .
At the same time it shows that cohesion between regions within Member States is decreasing , particularly between urban and non-urban regions .
In my view , it is right in such situations for national , regional and local authorities to play an important role .
I do not understand , therefore , why the option for Member States independently to increase their contributions to regional development has been rejected in advance .
It is too early to ascertain how long the current policy should be continued .
That it presents some specific challenges is clear .
But let us also examine whether it is able to solve the so-called divergence , i.e. not only cohesion at Member State level but also at a regional level , between and within Member States .
As that will probably not be the case , a different approach with a larger role for Member States is desirable .
No-one knows the national and regional situation better than the individual Member States .
They can introduce solutions which will make the goals of cohesion at subnational level achievable .
( FR ) Madam President , the European Commission is so concerned with cohesion between the Member States and within the Member States that 350 billion euros have been allocated to it between now and 2013 .
A Green Paper is also in the offing because , in Brussels , whenever a problem arises a paper has to be written on it .
There certainly is a problem of cohesion between western Europe and eastern Europe , the Europe of villages and the Europe of cities , or the Europe of the upmarket districts and the Europe of working-class neighbourhoods .
But whose fault is it ?
Who depopulated villages where they tended vines and reared cattle , Madam President , in Greece , where they produced tobacco , cotton and olive oil ?
Who , and which policies , took away thousands of post offices in Sweden , Germany and France ?
Who closed down rural train stations , railways and maternity homes ?
In ports , is it the wind destroying fishing craft , fishermen 's livelihoods , small businesses and shipyards ?
Is it the wolves in the Pyrenees or the Alps that are eating up the shepherds , or lamb imported from New Zealand ?
We all know the answer : it was the international trade policy conducted by the Commission through GATT agreement and the WTO that has been leading to the closure of 90 farms a day in Spain and France for the last 20 years .
It was the dogmatic removal of customs protection that destroyed industrial balances beneath a wave of imports .
Now , in order to establish cohesion , first we have to establish coherence between policies .
We cannot have one policy in Cotonou for the ACP states and then destroy this policy in Geneva over the banana trade .
We cannot have a Community preference for rural produce between 1962 and 1986 and then destroy all this with free trade at the Uruguay or Doha Rounds .
Cohesion therefore requires a certain amount of coherence between choices .
Commissioner , either we build Europe or we build the world .
Either we focus on social tasks , or we focus on the world .
- ( NL ) Madam President , Ms Hübner , the unique and peculiar nature of this Fourth Report lies in the fact that not only has the current policy been well thought out but it looks ahead to the new challenges which Europe must tackle .
It covers globalisation and its effects , it covers climate change , it covers the problems of energy and demographic challenges .
It is good that we are doing this now , particularly in preparation for the spring recess this March .
Mr Guellec has done everything very well .
He has stated that the cohesion policy should not change in its essentials - which is specifically reconfirmed in the new Treaty - but that the content of the regional commitments and the programmes should change .
This week we have also looked at the Lisbon Strategy , and what strikes me is that we should continue strongly and make an express contribution , earmarking 60 - 65 % of the cohesion budget to be committed to this end .
This will show to what extent the core of the cohesion policy stands to meet the challenge of new circumstances .
What is stated in the Kallenbach report is also important , that we consider territorial cohesion as a core function of the European Union .
Globalisation focuses on a number of key regions , metropolitan areas , and Europe 's answer is that it is imperative that knowledge is shared and the conditions created for entrepreneurship in all regions , including rural areas .
That is the new agenda .
The PPE finally resisted using renationalisation as an answer to the 2013 debate .
This leads to the achievement of a new consistency between R & D , innovation policy , the internal market and the nuts and bolts of the Union , coupling a knowledge-based economy - which will be implicated here in the long term - with high employment and prosperity in our regions .
I also gladly subscribe to the transparency initiative put forward by Mrs Hübner .
The people must know how relevant to them this policy is .

( ES ) Madam President , I wish to begin my speech by thanking Mrs Kallenbach and Mr Guellec in particular for their work on these reports leading to a majority agreement within the context of the Committee on Regional Development .
European cohesion policy has been an example of a successful EU policy , which has abided by the principles on which it is based , and which has helped to remove inequalities .
Countries such as Spain have achieved indisputable results in terms of convergence thanks to the cohesion policy .
We would therefore reaffirm its role in enhancing the potential of Member States for development and job creation through progress in training human capital .
Nevertheless , we must also admit that territorial inequalities still exist , and therefore we must give a firm response if we are to move forward with a policy that has to tackle new challenges such as ageing or depopulation processes in certain areas , especially rural areas .
We must deal with the remaining challenges in order to reduce regional and interregional disparities and secure economic and technological growth , and this means that our focus on compliance with the Lisbon Strategy must be a priority issue , while not neglecting other matters such as demographic change .
If EU regional policy is to secure balanced sustainable development , it must be carried out in close cooperation with regional players and in coordination with other policies .
We are likewise aware of the need to push forward specific measures in order to reduce disparities between accessible regions and those with structural disadvantages : mountainous areas , islands , or sparsely populated areas .
With a view to the future , therefore , it is absolutely essential to reinforce cohesion policy with major economic resources to cope with all the challenges involved .
Yesterday we adopted the Lisbon Treaty in Parliament by a large majority , and today we must drive forward a new component of the Treaty , setting out territorial cohesion as a basic EU objective to make progress towards a more prosperous future for Europe .



( FR ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I wish to say , Commissioner , that as I listened to your reply to the two reports by our colleagues Mr Guellec and Mrs Kallenbach , I felt there would be no need for me to say anything at all , since it was so obvious you were showing you had fully understood us .
This is an initial stage , and I am extremely pleased and wish to congratulate the House since these close-knit reports between you , your associates , our committee and our Parliament have produced such a level of cohesion between our points of view .
Now , however , beyond this cohesion , we must move forward with implementation , for it is all well and good to achieve cohesion among ourselves , but this must produce some specific results .
I feel this is possible by means of the Green Paper you are drawing up for the autumn , and here I would like to mention two items dear to my heart , which in my view are essential to implement the entire cohesion policy and the Leipzig Charter we desire so much .
The two items are : firstly , the necessity , which you have already mentioned and which I wish to reiterate in the strongest terms , of showing how different EU policies must be made coherent at the level of urban and periurban areas .
Yesterday evening we were discussing population .
Yesterday afternoon we were discussing transport .
Before that we were discussing social issues .
All the Commission 's DGs are involved , all the various EP Committees are involved ...
All this must be made coherent within the microterritory of a town and its surrounding area .
I expect a position to emerge from the Green Paper .
Second item . How could we , Parliament and the Commission , if we agree on all this , succeed if we do not have European citizens and governments on board ?
I have already told you , Commissioner , we must make a huge effort , and I know you are endeavouring to do so , in terms of communication , so that all our speeches , all our comments , all our hopes with regard to cohesion , emerge in words and phrases that will encourage governments to act and persuade and motivate our fellow citizens .
These are the two main points , Commissioner , that I expect to see in the Green Paper .
After listening to us , I trust you will help us find specific applications .
( PL ) Madam President , Commissioner , one of the fundamental aims of the European Union is to even out differences in the development and income of individual countries and regions .
These differences have become more marked in recent years , because significantly less developed countries have joined the Union in the latest enlargements .
It is estimated that these countries are more than 15 years behind the others . Swift development is the only way to level out the differences .
This represents a considerable challenge , especially taking into account the cuts in financial resources and the limited opportunities the countries striving to move forward have to make use of them .
It is unlikely that the success achieved in Spain , Portugal , Greece and Ireland will be repeated , certainly not quickly .
It is also unlikely that we will catch up with the United States and Japan in the near future .
We should remember , however , that the start is always the most difficult stage , and look to the Czech Republic for a positive example of how much can be achieved .
Our citizens ' outlook on life has changed and is continuing to do so , which bodes well for the future . In addition , the Lisbon Strategy lays down clear guidelines for our actions .
As I conclude , I should like to thank our rapporteurs most sincerely for their statements .
I see Mr Martínez is no longer in the Chamber , but I must add that I totally disagree with his intervention .
Madam President , it is nice to see the Commissioner here in Parliament .
We look forward to seeing her in Scotland again soon and to continuing our very fruitful cooperation on this policy .
Before I make my brief points , I would echo Mr Guerreiro 's points about support for the fisheries sector within cohesion policy .
We will be supporting his amendments , and I do think this sector is of particular strategic importance in our geography .
I would pick up on the rapporteur 's call for better statistics , particularly for the targeting and monitoring of the efficiency of funding programmes .
It seems pretty clear , as things develop , that targeting at NUTS I , NUTS II or even NUTS III level is pretty broad and pretty scatter-gun .
I welcome moves in the future funding streams towards more thematic activity , be it the Lisbon Agenda , the promotion of a knowledge economy , the promotion of R & D , cross-border cooperation or , indeed , support for the fisheries sector under the Lisbon Agenda .
That is , I believe , the future for a really vibrant cohesion policy for the European Union , which is very much the jewel in the EU 's crown .
It has brought the EU closer to our citizens and it has made us one Union where the Member States would keep us a series of different states .
We have a great potential to make this policy even more relevant and we look forward to hearing about the Green Paper in the Commissioner 's speech .
( GA ) Mr President , the two reports given today show the necessity of the cohesion policy and how that policy should be implemented .
Balanced regional development is very important .
The focus of Mr Guellec 's report was on ensuring that regional funds are sufficient and that they will focus on promoting the needs of the citizens and the needs of the regions effectively .
The only way to deal with a cohesion policy is as an implementation tool for the Lisbon Strategy .
I would like to thank the Rapporteur .
Ireland has benefited a great deal from cohesion money and in order for other countries to benefit in the same way we must ensure that increased resources are directed at promoting regional development and tackling social exclusion .
Not only must the gap between Member States be decreased but we must also decrease these gaps within Member States as well as the gaps between regions .
Mr Guellec reports on Ireland , Spain , Portugal and Greece 's impressive growth rates between 2000 and 2006 .
He has highlighted , however , that in spite of this growth , there are great inequalities between regions within those countries .
I would like to thank Mrs Kallenbach as well for her report and I especially welcome the emphasis placed on strengthening the role of local urban authorities in order to make access to public services available to every citizen .
There is a need for local empowerment , respect for the environment and a high standard of public services to be universally available so that the urban environment is an attractive place to live and work in .
Sustainable development is a huge challenge within urban areas in the 21st Century and the framework presented to us today by Mrs Kallenbach can help us to face this challenge .
Madam President , these reports comment on the disparity between the rural and urban economies , between rich and poor , especially in eastern Europe , and between the disadvantaged and the rest of society .
The answer , apparently , is to offer a vast catalogue of cultural , economic , technical developments and social engineering provision .
It notes the success of such programmes in Ireland , Spain , Portugal and Greece to relieve these inequalities and encourages similar strategies , frameworks and action programmes to generate progress in affected areas , especially in eastern Europe .
Above all it mentions cohesion funds .
We get to the nub .
EUR 65 billion on such programmes in needy western countries in the last few years , but eastern Europe is much poorer than those countries ever were .
So these subsidies - for that is what they are - will be taken from those countries still receiving them and from an ever smaller pot as the chill economic winds from the USA reach us .
Unfortunately for all its citizens - the well off and the poor alike - these subsidies are self-defeating for they strip away initiative from people and produce a culture of dependency .
If you really want to help , listen to Professor Buchanan of the London School of Economics .
His paper states clearly that ' to help a poor country , trade is worth six times more than aid ' .
Will you ever learn that ?
Or , to put it another way , if , in a poor country , you give a starving man a fish , you feed him for a day .
Teach him how to fish and you feed him for life .
( DE ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the fact that the Fourth Report on Economic and Social Cohesion is of major political significance certainly does not need to be repeatedly underlined here .
I agree with the rapporteur on all the basic issues and congratulate him on his good work .
He rightly emphasises that the anticipated new challenges can be dealt with only if cohesion policy remains a Community policy , which is anyway in accordance with the Treaty .
His report clearly rejects , therefore , all attempts to renationalise this policy .
The prerequisite , however , is a balanced cohesion budget for the EU .
Yes , adequate resources must be available in order to safeguard the harmonious development of all regions in the EU and deal with the new challenges .
A different view exists , however , regarding the choice of wording in the report on the demand for financial resources for cohesion policy post-2013 .
Like many of my colleagues , I do not feel it is right that at this early stage , in 2008 , the report should contain anticipatory demands for more financial resources for the future , not least in view of the fact that we are quite rightly facing criticism that we do not always draw down , on time , all the funding which is already available .
The Committee has therefore found good compromise wording which , however , only applies to the text of the resolution and not to the recitals .
So we should not include any conflicting statements in the recitals , but should remain consistent with the wording ' adequate resources for a balanced cohesion policy ' .
Ultimately , this is about credibility : in the past , cohesion policy has been able to achieve sustainable successes and can do so in future too if it is adequately resourced , without our calling for more financial resources at this stage .
Commissioner , you referred in your introductory statement to adequate financial resources to deal with future challenges .
That is a good formula .
( FR ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , it is hands that build the town , and men that build the city .
Jean-Jacques Rousseau must certainly have favoured the integrated approach .
It is a method that falls directly within the scope of this approach of building cities and not fragmented towns , as set out in the Leipzig Charter and the Territorial Agenda .
I therefore wish to thank all those responsible , especially Mrs Kallenbach , for their excellent cooperation on this task .
I welcome the scope of the proposals in relation to social and economic aspects , the environment , spatial development and territorial cohesion , and likewise the close attention paid to proposals intended to improve the report submitted by our Socialist Group .
Paying closer attention to the territorial and urban dimensions of EU policies , especially through integrated development plans and better cooperation between urban and periurban areas , will draw all the benefits out of this integrated approach .
Cooperation , however , must not end there .
Provision must also be made for a relationship or some kind of connection between rural areas , urban and periurban areas .
Here I must stress the importance of stimulating the attractiveness and competitiveness of rural areas as a tool to combat the mass exodus from the countryside .
If the main points in this report had to be specified , my first mention would be the urgent need to create integrated multimodal transport networks supported by Europe to improve infrastructures , especially environment-friendly transport such as bicycles and walking .
Identifying the signs of decline in certain areas and stepping up work to implement a social integration policy constitute a framework for a public policy to reduce inequality in an efficient manner and prevent social exclusion .
Positioning human beings at the very centre of the construction of infrastructure policies by reconciling urban concerns with human concerns , and all the more so within the current context of a housing crisis , in a society where not everyone has a roof over their head , and placing more emphasis on decent affordable housing , are still essential , and constitute a crucial factor of social integration and standards of living in cities , within a context of sustainable urban development .
It is for this reason that I call on all my colleagues to vote en masse in favour of this report , which demonstrates the EP 's wish to support the sturdiest form of territorial cohesion and a comprehensive integrated approach that will finally allow us to build the city .

Mr President , it is difficult to single out any one thing from these two excellent reports , but I wish to express particular thanks to Mr Guellec for the extent to which his report addresses the issue of disparities within regions .
For , even in those that can be classified as relatively prosperous overall , there may still be certain groups that are disadvantaged or excluded .
This may be a matter of their territorial location .
Inhabitants of islands and mountainous and scarcely-populated border and peripheral areas can be cases in point .
So , too , can fisheries-dependent communities , particularly when they are to be found in areas of the kind just mentioned .
Which is why I , too , very much hope that Parliament will approve Amendments 19 and 20 , which seek to reinforce their position .
But disadvantage and exclusion may be at a more distinctly social level .
I am thinking of a project back home in Aberdeenshire called Can-Do .
It has provided occupation for people with learning difficulties , in sorting cans and bottles for recycling .
It lost eligibility for European support when funding for the current period was relocated to parts of the country where deprivation is more widespread .
But the people concerned remain just as much at risk of social exclusion as before .
Both examples show that , if we are to target funding at those most in need , we need to develop a more sophisticated approach to quantifying that need .
I ask the Commission to pay particular attention to the call in the report for improved statistical tools to allow more accurate measurement of the extent of cohesion and better assessment of the contributions of local actions aimed at achieving it .
Such tools would also allow us to pinpoint actual cases of disadvantage and decide how they can best be addressed .
( PL ) Mr President , cohesion policy makes a crucial contribution to the integration of societies within the Union , as is emphasised in the report .
Nonetheless , administrative and procedural obstacles preventing regions with weaker infrastructures from attaining the level of developed ones continue to multiply .
Who is such a complicated procedure for mobilising Union resources supposed to help ?
After all , in the case of road infrastructure , funds could be transferred directly to the relevant local authority departments that are under the control of institutions in the Member States .
It would not then be necessary to wait several years for construction or repair work to take place .
Clearly , other principles must apply regarding individuals , law firms and associations .
If we really want to achieve something in the less developed regions , we should transfer targeted aid to local authority budgets , even without input from their own resources , because sometimes they cannot afford even a small contribution as they are so poor .

( PL ) Mr President , Commissioner , the report by Mr Guellec presents the European Parliament 's position on the Fourth Report on Economic and Social Cohesion .
The latter contains information and analysis regarding the effectiveness of cohesion policy . In effect , pursuant to the procedure adopted , it represents the first stage in the debate on cohesion policy in the new programming period .
Mr Guellec 's report therefore presents proposals as well as opinions on the analysis .
The debate on the future of cohesion policy must take account of the new conditions and challenges .
Ongoing implementation of the Lisbon Strategy , climate change , changes in energy policy and appreciation of the implications of migratory processes mean that the European Union is facing new challenges . All this also means that action must be taken to reduce new disparities in development .
Obviously the question arises as to which actions should be financed from common funds and which should be undertaken as Union policy .
In the debate on the future of cohesion policy we refer to the debate on the future of the European Union .
We often speak of a so-called Union of action or Union of results and of a Union such that it is appreciated and accepted by its citizens .
At the same time , we are aware that so-called reformers are promoting new solutions , such as , for example , renationalising cohesion policy . In essence , that would amount to negating the policy of solidarity .
We must bear in mind that the Member States are implementing their own internal policies to narrow disparities and that they are doing so independently of European funding , drawing on their own resources . The richer countries are therefore proving most successful .
In effect , renationalisation will amount to restricting cohesion policy and we must oppose that .
Accordingly , if we want to create a so-called Union of results or Union of action , we must strengthen cohesion policy .
Mr President , the fourth cohesion report provides evidence of the positive effects of EU cohesion policy , so the EU must continue to assist EU regions to achieve economic and social prosperity and convergence .
We are now addressing new challenges , and have agreed that our efforts must be directed towards dealing with these .
However , I would like to emphasise a problem we addressed in July 2007 in the form of the resolution adopted on the poorest regions in the EU .
Unfortunately , no further attention was given to that important issue .
Just as the outermost regions have had a special strategy , we now need priority treatment and a strategic approach for the least prosperous regions , in order to overcome their specific difficulties , which are a combination of socioeconomic problems and territorial and spatial characteristics .
I hope the Commissioner will address that issue in her Green Paper .
Therefore , I strongly support the future implementation of cohesion policy in its three dimensions - economic , social and territorial - which could stand as a successful example of the European Union 's solidarity principle .
Mr President , first of all I would like to congratulate both rapporteurs .
Mr Guellec 's report highlights the fact that , while there is economic convergence occurring between Member States , there is also a widening of regional and local disparities .
That situation goes to the very heart of cohesion policy and clearly indicates the need to include a significant territorial dimension in all policies , but particularly in the Lisbon Strategy .
I have seen this situation occurring in my own country , Ireland , where convergence with the EU average has been achieved - indeed surpassed - but where the economic gap between different regions is widening .
It is extremely important that this gap does not continue to widen , and one of the ways of ensuring this is to increase investment in innovation , research and development in those regions that are lagging behind .
I want to thank Mr Guellec for including my suggestion on the importance of social capital in boosting regional economic growth .
We are all aware of the role played by physical capital , natural capital and human capital as the basis for economic growth and development .
However , social capital , which is the latent resource residing within and among cooperating groups , provides the added value .
Data from the UN Handbook , which relates to a very significant number of countries , indicates that the contribution of social capital to economic growth is in the order of 5 % of GDP .

Finally , in response to the comment by Mr Clark , who suggests we should have ' trade not aid ' , I would say that in the EU we manage both - trade via the single market and targeted aid where needed .
That is the best of both worlds .
( PL ) Mr President , Commissioner , the scope of this report is so broad that I shall limit myself to commenting on a couple of issues .
One of the main challenges facing the development of the Union is the swift spread of built up areas , together with energy consumption , transport and demographic changes , such as the depopulation of certain parts of the Union and the widening disparity between richer areas and less affluent ones .
An integrated development policy focusing mainly on modernising infrastructure , improving energy efficiency and introducing cheap environmentally-friendly transport will help to ensure continuity in this sector .
Another aim of the strategy in question ought to be focusing on the development of rural areas so as to make them more competitive , and thus slow down the depopulation of those areas , which is so significant for the new Member States .
I would also like to draw attention to the importance of cooperation between urban and rural areas in order to promote the development of the territory as a whole .
Access to information and communication technology should play a vital part in creating territorial cohesion and developing individual areas , and that is where our greatest problem currently lies .
( DE ) Mr President , first of all , as regards Mrs Kallenbach 's report and the Leipzig Charter , yes , we must consider spatial planning in a European context to a greater extent .
But does this require new European powers in respect of housing policy and spatial planning ? There is a very big question mark here , to my mind .
As regards Mr Guellec 's report and specifically the prospects for future structural policy , the regional challenges posed by globalisation , demography , climate change , migration and so forth are all accurately described .
The same applies to the political outlook .
We should stick to the tried and tested objectives of structural policy , and we should supplement them with these new components .
I welcome the integrated approach advocated by the rapporteur , also as regards the challenges arising in relation to rural development .
However , we should be focusing , as a general principle , on the European value-added of these programmes to a greater extent .
Whether in relation to cohesion , innovation or transnational funding , Europe should only be providing support where we can genuinely make a sustainable European contribution .
To achieve success in the future , we must also be looking more critically at the instruments hitherto deployed .
The one-off operational subsidy does not create any European value-added , whereas long-term expansion of research , education and infrastructure certainly does !
We can only enhance the efficiency of structural policy through greater transparency in the deployment of funding and through leverage effects , for example by funding loans and with more public-private partnerships .
Although we certainly have not exploited all our options here , I cannot support the rapporteur 's blanket call for more money from 2014 .
We need to evaluate the current period first of all , and we need to gear our instruments more efficiently towards challenges such as climate change and demography .
Then we can start demanding a budgetary contribution .
The blank cheque for the future currently being demanded in the report really cannot be taken seriously .
I therefore ask you to support our amendment in the vote .


( PT ) Mr President , Commissioner , I must firstly congratulate the rapporteur and the shadow rapporteur of my Group , Mr Guellec and Mrs García , on the quality of the report and their openness to dialogue on cohesion .
The report rightly recognises the enormous efforts made ( particularly in Portugal , Spain , Greece and Ireland ) in terms of growth and convergence .
However , these efforts must be continued and expanded , not just in those countries which are most lacking solidarity and cohesion , but also in certain regions of those countries as the wealth assessment process cannot solely depend on GDP but must be extended to other criteria .
In this respect , I made contributions aimed at clearly recognising insularity and remoteness as factors restraining development .
In particular , in accordance with Article 299 ( 2 ) of the EC Treaty and as stated by Commissioner Hübner , accessibility problems form one of the main obstacles to development .
This is why it is essential to adapt the Community policies to take account of this constraint resulting from insularity and remoteness .
( FI ) Mr President , Commissioner , I would like to bring the northern viewpoint to this debate .
It is important that the permanent problems of the north - the long distances , the cold climate and the sparse population - are taken account of in the future as factors that need support just as much as the problems of the mountain regions and islands do .
It is also worth remembering that the northern regions produce added value in areas such as mining , wood processing and tourism .
Research in the north and new technology applications in cooperation with universities , businesses , the public sector and consumers continually produce fresh and important innovations , from which the whole of Europe benefits .
I would also like to remind everyone of the opportunities afforded by combining the Baltic Strategy with the Northern Dimension in , for example , the utilisation of energy resources in the Barents region .
Finally , I want to congratulate the rapporteurs on their excellent reports and thank Commissioner Hübner for her interest in the northernmost corner of the Union .

- ( EL ) Mr President , Commissioner , I should also like to congratulate the two rapporteurs on their very important reports .
Cohesion policy is important because it has helped in the economic and social development of many regions .
It has reduced the gaps between regions , brought regions closer to the norm and reduced disparities within them .
There is still much to be done .
Uniform development has not been attained .
There are divergences , which are acute in many cases .
Any thought of a renationalising cohesion policy ought to be rejected .
New Member States have joined , with regions that are very far removed from the norm .
The term ' territorial cohesion ' described in the Lisbon Treaty needs to be worked on and further analysed .
Finally , particular attention ought to be paid to isolated regions and islands , as in the case of Greece , where cohesion policies will significantly help the local population to stay put , find employment , have access to new technology and professional opportunities , and to comply to the Community norm .
For these reasons , the terms in the cohesion policy report are correct : funding will need to be secured and increased , even for the period after 2013 .
The challenges are significant and the cohesion policy ought not to fall short or be delayed because of financial inadequacy when all parties recognise its usefulness .
In closing , I also welcome today 's statements by Commissioner Hübner and the Commission 's determination to progress with the cohesion policy .
We await with interest the Green Paper and the conclusions that it will contain .
( PL ) Mr President , Commissioner , reducing the social and economic disparities between European regions is a fundamental aim of the European Union .
We are aiming to create a Europe where all regions are equal .
Following the latest enlargements , it has become increasingly necessary to strengthen the cohesion aim . This is because , according to certain estimates , at the present rate of economic growth , countries such as Poland , Bulgaria and Romania will take more than 15 years to reach a level of GDP equal to 75 % of the average for the Union .
Full use of structural funds pursuant to Community legislation is a sine qua non for reducing social and economic disparities between European regions . This applies especially to the new Member States .
The latter are experiencing many problems .
For example , Polish local authorities have recently had to cope with difficulties caused by the continuous fall in the value of the euro in relation to the Polish currency , thus reducing the actual value of Union funds allocated to the implementation of regional projects that had already been confirmed .
In addition , the cost of labour and production in Europe is constantly rising , which leads to an increase in the cost of investments funded from Union resources and to a reduction in the value of those funds in real terms .
Consequently , implementation of many Union projects is threatened .



( PT ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I must firstly highlight the excellent work carried out by Mr Guellec and the intelligent and determined manner in which he emphasised and defended the optimisation and reinforcement after 2013 of a policy of solidarity towards the European regions .
In truth , with this report , more than with the assessment of the cohesion policy 's impact in 2000-2006 , we have opened the debate on what type of cohesion policy we want for post-2013 .
Accordingly , I must make one comment on the present and three on the future .
My first comment is that , as shown by the Fourth Report , the cohesion policy continues to be essential for reducing disparities between the levels of development of the various regions and for encouraging the least-favoured regions that are lagging behind or , in other words , for creating a European Union that is more harmonious and viable and has a greater sense of solidarity .
However , we should not forget that , in addition to this essential objective , the cohesion policy has made a decisive contribution to the construction and expansion of the internal market , to the success of the successive enlargements , to the creation and consolidation of the single currency and to the increasing identification of citizens with the European Union .
My second comment is that the cohesion policy must now revamp its role , boosted and reinforced by the new territorial dimension to cohesion enshrined in the Treaty of Lisbon , by taking advantage of the diversity and complementarity of the territories and by firmly targeting the polycentric development of the European Union .
The report by Mrs Kallenbach , who I also congratulate , offers us some good guidelines in this respect .
My third comment is that the cohesion policy must increasingly encompass and respond to the current challenges such as those represented by globalisation , migration , population ageing , climate change , energy diversification , research and technological development .
In order to be coherent , we must therefore consider increased resources for a reinforced regional policy .
Finally , a new perspective for the most remote regions will be necessary to guarantee that these can continue feeling comfortable within the European area .
It will be vital to find new answers to the serious problems , such as isolation , lack of accessibility and competitive disadvantages , that these regions face .

( HU ) Thank you very much , Mr President .
Madam Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to congratulate Mrs Kallenbach and Mr Guellec on their excellent reports , both of which are milestones in the debate on cohesion policy .
There are significant differences in the development of our regions , but if we look into it more deeply there are even greater chasms between individual areas within the regions .
We have not managed to deal appropriately with liquidating rural poverty and bringing into line those areas that have fallen behind , within the framework of agricultural policy .
There is a need for much greater effort in this area , within the framework of a renewed , integrated cohesion policy that is capable of turning round the negative processes in the areas that are growing poor .
The synergy between cohesion and the reinforcement of competitiveness must be strengthened , because they cannot be subordinated to each other .
New challenges have emerged , such as ageing or even the matter of energy efficiency and climate change , which we must also deal with .
For this very reason it is vital to reinforce cohesion policy , and we must reject its being put at national level .
If we put solidarity and cohesion at the heart of the European project , the Union will truly be strong and competitive . Thank you for your attention .
( SK ) Ladies and gentlemen , the well-planned and responsible development of urban areas is becoming extremely important , in particular in the face of challenges such as congestion of urban transport networks , environmental damage and land development .
This is why I very much appreciate the adoption of the Territorial Agenda and the Leipzig Charter .
Cities have a unique responsibility for climate protection : this protection should be a priority at all political levels .
Cities could help solve a bad traffic situation and lower global emissions causing the greenhouse effect by , for example , interconnecting different modes of transport and developing an infrastructure for cyclists and pedestrians .
I would also suggest that cities prioritise energy-efficient buildings and use already existing buildings for new purposes , instead of developing new sites .
I would like to stress that not only metropolitan regions but also suburban areas and rural areas are successful in meeting cohesion goals .
This is why I appeal to the Commission to monitor such successful projects and to prepare , on their basis , a development model for smaller and medium-sized towns outside metropolitan areas .
One of the characteristics of Europe , in spite of its relatively small size , is her geographical diversity .
This is why it is necessary to be mindful of unique regional features and resulting differences , and to give people in different regions the chance to make use of the unique opportunities and potential offered by the areas in which they live .
To me it is also very important to include , among our policy goals , the need to solve territorial issues relating to islands and mountain areas , border regions and sparsely populated regions , so that the quality of life of people who live there is also enhanced .
To conclude I would like to stress that urban development must follow an integrated and well-coordinated strategy , supported at all levels by both the government and the private sector .
( SK ) Thank you , Mr President .
We are debating the Fourth Report on Economic and Social Cohesion and the reports by Mrs Kallenbach and Mr Guellec at a time when the first subjects for the 2014-2020 budget plan are beginning to emerge .
I would like to link the two and to emphasise the importance of such a link .
I do not fear that cohesion policy funding will disappear from the budget plan but I would not like to see the extent of this fund during the life of the next budget in any way reduced .
In addition to that , as the rapporteurs rightly point out , major regional disparities still exist , including structural problems , and since this situation has worsened due to enlargement , it is necessary to contemplate giving more weight to this chapter of the budget .
As the reports correctly point out , the situation is so complex that we cannot solve it at Commission level .
Although governments of the Member States play an important role in this matter , it is becoming more and more clear that it will not be possible to solve the problem without the participation of regional and local authorities .
Their role lies not only in the possible synergy between them and the government in the process of making decisions on the issues of development in their territories but also in the responsibility for this development and , last but not least , in providing feedback about how development and cohesion are progressing .
Who can provide more information about the real development in a region , if not the people who live in it ?
Therefore I appeal to the Commission not only to include in its monitoring process the macro-economic indicators but to be creative and to draw on such information ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
Mr President , first of all I would like to give my congratulations to the rapporteurs for their excellent reports .
I would also like to say that I understand the passion of Members from the new Member States .
I know that it is far from easy to satisfy your constituents back in your own Member State , but you are now part of the European Union and , as such , like the rest of us , you will at times not get everything that you would like or want .
I have to say to those who are merely playing on words that the difference between increased resources and sufficient resources is very small indeed .
I certainly will be supporting the wording of ' sufficient resources ' .
Sometimes it is wise to recognise what you have achieved and bank it .
I personally support the use at this time of the word ' sufficient ' , especially when many of the funds in those areas have not been spent .
I only wish that my own region was half as lucky - we never were - in achieving such help .
We are now even as far behind as some of the countries were that we are talking about .

( EL ) Mr President , Commissioner , I should also like to congratulate the rapporteurs on their excellent work on these two reports .
Once again , the European Parliament is confirming its very clear position on the importance and role of the cohesion policy , which brings Europe closer to its citizens . This is a policy with very clear added value for the whole of the EU .
In future , this policy should not just be maintained ; it should be strengthened with the requisite resources .
Both reports point to this approach .
I should like to highlight the importance of :
the partnership and participation of local authorities in particular , at all levels ,
synergies between Community policies , particularly the cohesion policy , and the rural development policy ,
planning policies and actions that promote the polycentric development of EU territories , with special emphasis on the countryside ,
the important potential role of small and medium-sized towns , and finally ,
combating intra-regional inequalities , youth unemployment and the high levels of poverty to be found in many regions of the EU .
( BG ) Regardless of the existing difference of viewpoints , let us recall the raison d 'etre of the cohesion policy and its objectives , i.e. it embodies the hopes for more prosperity and better all-European future .
All Europeans strive for better life and the cohesion policy is the instrument to support them in these efforts .
Let us remember that there are a lot of differences within the European Union and , at the same time , financial resources tend to dwindle .
Therefore I believe that the cohesion policy must be reinforced and strengthened .
I also believe that it is worthwhile to ensure its optimal implementation .
Some procedures and rules are still too complex and , probably for this reason , inefficient .
A procedure like an overall review of the cohesion policy could contribute to its general improvement to the benefit of all Europeans .
Finally , I would like to reiterate the important role of the cohesion policy for the least developed regions .
The citizens who live there believe in the EU support .
We must not let them down .

( PT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the cohesion policy , which is a Community policy par excellence , has a vital role to play in achieving a Europe which offers solidarity , which is close to the people and which is by everyone and for everyone .
It is a clear manifestation of the importance of the Union to the everyday lives of every European citizen .
The enlargement to 27 brought about changes in the nature of Europe .
The goals now being set are different from those which existed at its genesis .
The challenges to which we must now respond , such as globalisation , population falls , desertification of certain regions or climate change , combined with the increased frequency and scale of natural disasters , are much more demanding and require a greater effort on our part .
Innovation is also giving this policy new goals but , despite facing greater challenges and a larger Union , its budget has not increased in proportion .
However , it has been adapted , in the name of solidarity , which has led , for example , to regions which were previously in Objective 1 now being regarded as wealthy regions not eligible due to the statistical effect .
It is therefore imperative that the disparities are reduced through access to an adequate budget , without having to abandon certain regions in this vast Union to their fate .
The adoption of the Treaty of Lisbon reinforced this need and firmly enshrined in law the territorial cohesion which is the most important aspect of the cohesion policy .
It is essential that this policy tackles not only economic and social cohesion , but also solidarity between regions ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
Mr President , I welcome the opportunity to speak briefly on the future of cohesion policy , which is of crucial importance to old and new Member States alike .
I work closely with Scottish local government bodies on their concerns , and was delighted that the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities ( COSLA ) recently welcomed the draft EU Treaty as far as local government is concerned .
The Treaty recognises the principle of local self-government , as well as that of territorial cohesion .
It was no surprise to me that regional policy was among the five key areas recently raised with me by the COSLA .
In the context of reduced EU structural monies and funds , regional development monies must be better targeted - as many speakers have said - at local areas and local authorities , which must be the key deliverers of those funds .
The Guellec report reinforces the role of local authorities in delivering Structural Funds - after all , we forget at our peril that all politics are local .

( RO ) Mr. President , Madam Commissioner , the reports we debate and for which I congratulate both rapporteurs raise a few extremely important questions , in my opinion : that of the partnerships between the urban and the rural areas for the balanced and sustainable development of the overall territory , the issue of the chaotic extension of urban settlements that generate fragmentation of the landscape , as well as the continuous loss of land .
All these things , together with climate changes , and depopulation of rural areas , are challenges we are forced to take into consideration , both at a European level and at the level of local administrations managing these policies .
As a Romanian Member of the Parliament , I strongly support the idea that not only the metropolitan areas have potential for innovation and I ask the Commission to work more intensively towards drawing up a development for small and medium-sized towns in rural areas .
( PL ) Thank you , Mr President .
The Fourth Report on Economic and Social Cohesion is more detailed than its predecessors .
It is based on many indicators and provides useful comparative data , referring also to countries such as the United States , Japan , China and India .
From its inception , cohesion policy has played an important role in strengthening the ability of all the Member States to promote harmonious development and create new and permanent jobs .
It is rather too early to assess the results of cohesion policy in the new Member States of the Union , but there is cause for concern regarding the obvious delays in use of current structural funding in those countries .
Convergence between countries often masks deepening differences between regions and within them .
Regional and local disparities are arising in many areas , affecting employment and also productivity , income , level of education and potential for innovation .
Social integration and the policy of equal opportunities must be taken into account at every stage of the implementation of projects undertaken in the area of cohesion .
I trust that the forthcoming review of the financial framework will result in the budgetary resources needed to rise to the ambitious challenges of the new cohesion policy for the enlarged Union being made available , thus ensuring that all citizens ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
Mr President , I commend both reports , but would at the same time like to draw attention to a contrasting view , linking industrial relocation inside the EU and structural and cohesion fund policy .
Structural Funds can be seen as an overall subsidy provided by the EU to the less developed areas .
Should we understand that this regional cohesion policy is questioned by leading politicians in leading EU Member States ?
What should happen ?
Should areas in the less developed Member States of the EU stop the development of infrastructure for fear of being accused of unfair competition ?
I refer to a Financial Times article published the Monday before last , to the effect that a market economy should not be a jungle .
Public policies do have a role to play , and not only for social reasons .
However , we should keep our poise because there is no infallible local or national economy in this world , and however much we believe in social justice , not all citizens can always be winners at the same time , in the same place and all the time .
( HU ) Thank you very much for the floor , Mr President , Madam Commissioner .
There can be no doubt about the importance and success of cohesion policy .
I feel that this is supported by the report , on which I would like to congratulate the rapporteur .
Its aim is to create real alignment , but it is vital that the sums set aside for this are used effectively .
I am convinced that a project waiting to be implemented is not rendered valuable by the very fact of how large a material sum we set aside for it , but that its value lies in how effective it is .
Effectiveness can be measured in two ways : by how it serves alignment and by how well the given sums of money are used for similar things in individual countries .
After all , a given project in a Member State cannot receive many more times the amount of another one .
I would like to draw your attention to this measurement and , in future , to the fact that effectiveness is the basis for strengthening cohesion policy . Thank you very much .
( DE ) Mr President , when does the citizen need Europe 's solidarity ?
When does a Member State need Europe 's solidarity ?
Surely , in the first instance , during a disaster .
That is why I find it incomprehensible that a decision adopted by Parliament in 2006 to adapt the Solidarity Fund - as set out in paragraph 45 of the Cohesion Report - has still not been implemented .
So I ask everyone - Parliament and the Commission - to bring pressure to bear on the Council to resolve this issue very quickly , for the next disaster will come , that I can guarantee .
( SK ) If cohesion policy is to be implemented successfully , there must be local players capable of action who are able to concentrate their efforts and make maximum use of European funds .
This is why the Member States should decentralise administration , increase administrative capacities at a regional level and cut down on excessive bureaucracy in cohesion policy management .
Although the process of dividing sectors into clusters and innovation poles , which brings clear benefits to larger sectors and their neighbours , may lead to the discovery of several integration zones , there is an absence of effective , simple and spatial support for smaller sectors .
In Slovakia a number of communities that have less than 2 000 inhabitants and are in geographically disadvantaged regions will lose their places in several operational programmes and in cohesion policy .
I appeal to the Member States to provide a non-discriminatory system for all their regions so that everyone can actively participate in the application of cohesion policy .
( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , I am the rapporteur for urban mobility .
In our deliberations , the issue of the relationship between the urban centres and the municipalities on the periphery plays an especially important role .
We are also aware of the fact that the new Member States have particularly serious problems here in organising their infrastructure in such a way that we can maintain more environmentally-friendly transport options and do not move towards private vehicles again .
In this context , may I voice a specific request : that within the framework of its regional policy options , the Commission helps us to seek and identify solutions to the issue of transport in the urban periphery and to social cohesion in the new Member States .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , I would like to take this opportunity at the end of the debate to thank Members for all their contributions .
There are many points to which I cannot respond now , owing to the lack of time , but which I will take with me .
These include the concerns expressed with regard to small and medium-sized towns , as well as the issue raised about urban transport development .
There is a clear link between the past and the future in your reports .
You are in fact building a bridge , which is why I would like to say a few words on the stage reached in the public consultations on the future of European cohesion policy .
We launched those consultations at the end of September 2007 , and to date more than 100 well-elaborated statements and opinions have been submitted , not only by national , regional and local governments , but also by a number of European spatial planning associations , as well as economic and social partners , academics , research institutions and private citizens .
At the request of one of the governments , we have extended the consultations until mid-February , because there are still opinions being prepared .
A preliminary assessment of those opinions clearly shows there is overwhelming and impressive support for the policy .
The direct impact on growth and development is pointed to , as is the fact that this is a policy that triggers new ways of thinking and also performs a very effective leverage role by attracting additional financial resources .
There is strong interest in the delivery mechanism and broad support for all the principles we have jointly developed with the European Parliament in recent years .
There is also strong support for the need for this policy to respond to the challenges that you have been discussing today , and which are linked not only to globalisation , but also to demography , climate and energy , and restructuring in general , with strong support for the integrated approach .
One of the issues of importance you have raised today is how we will proceed with the Green Paper , which will be adopted by the Commission in September .
We will then have a broad period - probably of four months - for discussion in all formats , not only on the web .
In the mean time , our services are organising a meeting with the key stakeholders for mid-April .
This will help us to take into account further views .
I would be prepared , if there is such a need , to organise a hearing with Parliament 's Committee on Regional Development and with any other institution interested in sharing with us its views on the Green Paper , ahead of its adoption by the Commission .
Another issue raised , which is also a concern for the Commission , was that of statistics and indicators .
Through our analytical institution , ESPON , which we have strengthened very substantially , including financially , for the years to come , and which now has a significantly higher budget , we will endeavour to measure some of the new dimensions and some of the existing dimensions of territorial cohesion .
That work is ongoing , and we hope to have the results soon .
I can assure you that the Commission will also continue to look into appropriate indicators to complement both the GDP and employment indicators , and will in the Fifth Cohesion Report propose a new composite type of indicator .
Thank you very much for all your comments .
I would especially like to thank the rapporteurs for their contributing to the debate - not just in the past , but also in the future .
rapporteur . - ( FR ) Mr President , I will be brief .
First of all , in relation to the observations made on the amendments submitted by the Committee on Fisheries , I must say immediately that fishing is an issue dear to my heart as a coastal MEP , but unfortunately we did not manage to add the committee 's amendments to the text that is about to be put to the vote .
We regret this , but I feel it does not mean any less attention ought to be paid to a sector so important to certain EU regions .
I would also like to say that cohesion is a major European policy .
I also think it was portrayed as a major theme in the House this morning .
This is an important point , particularly in relation to future tasks .
The Commissioner said earlier that we are dealing with a report , but obviously it is the future that interests us .
She realises expectations are running high with regard to territorial cohesion , and what this represents once it is taken up in the Lisbon Treaty .
We might say that the ball is now in the Commission 's court with , of course , our assistance and support , Commissioner .
The job must be done , and it must be done well , on a joint basis .
I wish to add that the fact that regional policy as a whole will now be a matter for codecision by the Council and Parliament will help us move forward together , to make this clearer for our fellow citizens , also a point I feel was solidly made this morning , and also to implement genuine solidarity to the benefit of regions which need it most .
Both these concerns were pointed out most firmly this morning .
A huge task therefore awaits us .
We welcome a policy that is essential to the European Union .
rapporteur . - ( DE ) Mr President , I would also like to voice my thanks for the valuable contributions and support of many of my fellow Members .
I think it has been shown that on the one hand , we must maintain solidarity as a key European asset , and that on the other hand , we must target and deploy our instruments - in this case , cohesion policy - far more efficiently towards genuinely sustainable development , and thirdly , that we must genuinely communicate with citizens from the outset .
I would particularly like to thank Commissioner Hübner .
Commissioner , you have made it clear that , together with this House , you are interested in the practical steps : the integrated approach , indicators which produce measurable outcomes , the definition of the territorial dimension , the Green Paper .
I think we will particularly need your help in ensuring that the Council is on board .
Again , I think it is regrettable that no one from the Council is present at this important debate .
The conclusions drawn in these two reports must lead to an amendment of the Lisbon Strategy and must genuinely underpin the new Community objective , the territorial dimension , in practical terms ; otherwise , they will be nothing but empty words .
Let me make one final appeal to my fellow Members before the vote : let us be practical .
Let 's not only review and analyse again ; let 's make it a condition that we demand the integrated approach for the provision of funding from the Structural Funds , and let us establish clear commitments for the reduction of greenhouse gases as well .
Climate protection must be implemented in the cities ; otherwise , all our pledges at European and national level have no value at all .
The debate is closed .
The reports will be put to the vote , which will begin in a few minutes .
Written Statements ( Rule 142 )
in writing . - ( PL ) The economic and social cohesion policy is the foundation of European solidarity .
This feature of European policy is the envy of regional integration initiatives in other parts of the world .
The unique nature of the European project is largely due precisely to the notion of cohesion .
In the case of regional initiatives in Africa and South America there are no funds for even a token cohesion policy .
Plans for enlargement of the Union are often assessed in terms of the potential to conduct effective action in order to increase cohesion .
It may be stated quite unequivocally that cohesion policy is a great success for the Union and for all its Member States .
There is no doubt that the Union 's own citizens assess it in terms of whether , in their view , cohesion policy is being implemented and is attaining its stated aims .
In many Member States , especially in those that have acceded to the EU only recently , there are very high hopes of cohesion policy .
It is hoped that solidarity will not prove merely a fine term , but will translate into a specific commitment to those who fate has treated less kindly .
Cohesion is also an instrument for creating equal opportunities and a splendid advertisement for the Union .
It is for that very reason that we should not consider limiting the financial resources allocated to increasing economic and social cohesion .
On the contrary , we should contemplate allocating more financial resources to cohesion , if only because of the many new challenges arising .
Thank you .
in writing . - ( PL ) Mr President , cohesion policy is not one of the key policies that have been present in the European Union since it was first established .
It was no accident that cohesion policy was devised when relatively less developed countries acceded to the European Union as these countries did not cohere well with the six original Member States .
From that time on , cohesion has gained importance , becoming a pillar of European integration and central to treaties and budgets .
The allocation of more than EUR 308 billion to cohesion in the framework of the 2007-2013 Financial Perspective is evidence of this .
A tendency to question this fundamental Union policy has arisen of late .
Curiously , the tendency has coincided with the expansion of the European Union to include the countries of Central and Eastern Europe . The latter have the most ground to make up , for historical reasons .
That is why it is not proposed to do away with cohesion policy outright , but to radically refocus it , due to alleged waste of Structural Funds and abuses in the area .
That is the greatest mistake we could make !
Irregularities must be detected and eliminated , but it is precisely regional policy that makes the Union 's presence felt in all 27 Member States .
Cohesion means creating equal opportunities and a sense of fellowship and must not be subsumed into other policies . The latter , competitiveness and combating global warming for example , ought to have their own budget lines .
Assessment of what should be financed within the framework of cohesion should remain within the competence of countries and regions .
They have a far better understanding of their own needs than the Brussels authorities .
in writing . - ( RO ) The Commission 's Report refers to the depopulation of rural areas , against the background of the absence of workplaces except for agriculture or due to poor living conditions .
The Rural Development Fund contributes , together with the other funds , to the economic and social cohesion .
The efficient use of the rural development funds represents a timely solution to these problems .
Nevertheless , the condition for the efficient use of these funds is better knowledge of the potential beneficiaries of the financing opportunities offered .
The access to information is even more important in the new Member States , which are not yet familiar with using the Community financing instruments .
I would like to offer an example from Romania , the country I represent : according to a study , half of the rural environment inhabitants know nothing about the existence of the funds designed for them and only one citizen in ten knows which institution he / she should address in order to access the funds .
It is regrettable that the Government of Romania has not made enough efforts to inform the citizens and , at the same time , it is obvious that nobody can replace the Romanian Government 's work .
Nevertheless , I consider that ensuring adequate access to information and preparing the future beneficiaries should represent an important subject on the Commission 's agenda , as a premise for the efficient use of the instruments designed for cohesion .
in writing . - ( DE ) The EU 's enlargement on 1 May 2004 has increased the economic and social disparities within the EU .
In January this year , a new programming period for cohesion policy began .
This will focus on new priorities and objectives : environmental protection , competitiveness , and the creation of more and better jobs .
The EU 's cohesion policy is intended , through its four separate programmes , to help make Europe and its regions more competitive , for example through innovation , the development of the knowledge society , and strengthening economic competitiveness .
It is also intended to increase the attractiveness of the regions for investors and residents through sustainable regional development .
Better and above all more jobs are to be created , and the regions developed further in order to promote opportunities and reduce disparities .
With its further enlargement , EU funding now has to be divided among 27 Member States .
The money must therefore be used better , more efficiently and transparently .
As regards the financial framework , the European Council has made EUR 307.6 billion available for the period 2007-2013 .
This is a great deal of money .
It is important that regions with development problems in the wealthy Member States such as Austria also have a fair share of the funds .
Mountain regions in particular require further support .
in writing . - ( HU ) Whilst reviewing the last three years of the alignment policy , and seeing the good things , but also the mistakes that need to be corrected , the European Parliament is not only looking back but also looking forward .
In order to speed up the development of the underdeveloped regions , we must change two things .
We must pay much more attention to the effectiveness of the programmes , including increasing the amount of value created on the scene .
( There is a need for further theoretical work in connection with this , so that the results can be assessed more accurately . )
However , we cannot keep quiet about the fact that we must guarantee more resources than at present for programmes that use aid effectively and that are free of corruption and political influence in the period after 2013 .
Aligning the underdeveloped regions more quickly is in the interests not only of those who live there but also of citizens living in more developed areas that guarantee the necessary resources .
I therefore ask my fellow members to follow the advice of the rapporteur in this respect too , and not to amend the text laid before them .
( The sitting was suspended at 11.55 pending the vote and resumed at 12.05 )

1 . (
- Before the vote on Amendment 2
rapporteur . - ( IT ) Mr President , I wonder whether it might be advisable in this case , given that the amendments have been agreed between various groups , to take a block vote on these amendments , unless there is any opposition from the House .
( Parliament gave its assent . )
2 . (
3 . (
4 . (
5 .
Situation in Gaza ( vote )
- Before the vote
( ES ) - Mr President , following consultation with the political groups signing the joint resolution , we wish to request a change in the structure of paragraph 3 .
This is not an oral amendment , for we do not wish to add or remove any words .
We merely wish to maintain the text as it is , dividing it up into three separate paragraphs .
To remove any doubt , Mr President , it would read as follows :
' 3 . Reiterates its call for an immediate end to all acts of violence ; '
' 4 . Calls on Israel to cease military actions killing and endangering civilians , and extrajudicial targeted killings ; '
' 5 . Calls on Hamas , following the illegal takeover of the Gaza Strip , to prevent the firing of rockets by Palestinian militias from the Gaza Strip into Israeli territory ; ' .
Thus there is no change in the wording , Mr President .
We are not asking for any words to be added or removed : only that this paragraph be divided into those three sections .
( Parliament approved the proposal )
6 .
Seventh Human Rights Council of the United Nations ( vote )
7 . (
- Before the vote on Amendment 21
rapporteur . - ( FR ) Mr President , I would like Amendment 21 to be moved to after paragraph 40 .
( The request was granted . )
- Before the vote on Amendment 62
rapporteur . - ( FR ) Mr President , this was for a linguistic oral correction to Amendment 62 to remind the House that the reference is in French and that the term ' income ' in the English version has been retained .
Moreover , the French version will constitute the reference for all amendments .
Before the vote on Amendment 30
rapporteur . - ( FR ) Mr President , I have an oral amendment .
I wish to remove the word ' fragmentation ' in the first sentence , and then in the second sentence replace the word ' assurer ' ( ensure ) with ' renforcer ' ( reinforce ) .
Likewise , in the English version I wish to point out for Mr Bushill-Matthews , that ' précarité ' translates as ' non secure ' .
( Parliament agreed to accept the oral amendment )
- Before the vote on Amendment 55
Mr President , I think there is a typo on the PPE-DE Group voting list on this .
Could I beg your indulgence perhaps to draw it to the attention of our rapporteur ?
I suspect , on this , he means a plus and not a minus .
I am referring to the roll-call vote on amendment 55 .
- At the end of the vote on the Castex report
- ( NL ) Madam President , I find it strange for the House to be voting on a report that still has amendments under consideration on some of its pages .
I thought we were not going to do this any more in plenary , but leave the work to the Commission , in order to limit the number of amendments that are brought to plenary .
Yes , you are quite right to make that point , Mr Sterckx .
8 .
Scientific cooperation with Africa ( vote )
9 . (
10 . (
Voting time
The next item is voting time .
( For the outcome and other details of the vote : see Minutes )
Explanations of vote
Oral explanations of vote
( CS ) Madam President , in the debate on the CE marking yesterday I drew the attention of the Commission yet again to the fact that registration of the CE marking has still not been initiated , although it has been enshrined in European legislation for 16 years now and I asked for it in parliamentary interpellation three months ago .
I welcome the promise the Commissioner for Enterprise made again yesterday as regards speeding the matter up , but I am not sure if he is aware of the importance of having the marking registered in foreign markets .
Until this happens , it will be impossible to sue for damages in cases of manufacturers and importers who misuse the European conformity mark symbolising the safety of the product to gain unfair advantage and deceive customers both in Europe and abroad .
It would surely help to free the market of unfair competition .
( HU ) Thank you very much .
It was a shocking experience to enter the Gaza Strip and come face to face with the everyday consequences of the occupation and blockade .
80 % of the population is unemployed , the Israelis cut off the electricity and water supplies from time to time , many people only get to eat once a day , and the vast majority of the population have not been able to leave an area smaller than Budapest for years .
As an Israeli professor said , Gaza is a prison , and its residents are prisoners from whom it is difficult to expect rational behaviour .
At the same time , it is also embittering that some Palestinian groups are using rockets from the Gaza territories to threaten the lives of innocent Israeli civilians .
The crisis goes too far back for it to be solved in the traditional way .
By now , both sides have become the prisoners of their own extremists and are unable to make real concessions because of them .
The international community , and above all the European Union , must force Israel and the Palestinians to reach an amicable settlement .
I have voted for the recommendation , in the hope that the Member States will take more resolute steps .
( CS ) I also feel very deeply for the people of the Gaza Strip , who have become hostages in the hands of Hamas .
However , I could not support today 's European Parliament resolution because the article calling for negotiations between the Palestinian Authority and Hamas has not been removed from it .
We all know there is no negotiation possible with the terrorists who have occupied Gaza .
Such an appeal is an act of hypocrisy , which aims to put Hamas in the role of a partner to the Palestinian Authority .
I do not wish to be part to legitimising this terrorist organisation .
I am afraid that the situation will soon demand intervention , which should , however , be authorised by the United Nations .
And this is where Europe should play a very active part .
- ( NL ) Madam President , in contrast to what is claimed by this Parliament , the UN Council of Human Rights does not in fact play such an important role in the promotion of human rights in the world .
How could it possibly be any different ?
Only 25 of its 47 members are free democracies , nine of them are not free and three , China , Cuba and Saudi Arabia , are among the greatest human rights offenders in the world .
These countries trample the UN Declaration of Human Rights underfoot and defend themselves and other regimes against any criticism .
In some cases the Council has simply undermined the overseeing of human rights .
The Council has still not pronounced the slightest condemnation of the world 's current largest human rights crisis , Darfur .
Rather than shouting for joy about such a creature , this Parliament would do better to include such matters in its resolution .
- ( NL ) Madam President , I want not only to agree with what my colleague Mr Dillen has just said , but also to point out that the resolution insults the religions that have been adopted by the Council .
This resolution literally states , and I quote , that people ' with responsibility must speak out , and that the freedom to express one 's opinion may be limited in matters relating to public health and morality ' .
This resolution concerns , of course , the prohibition of all criticism of Islam .
The UN Council of Human Rights is hereby rightly going against its own official objectives , the protection of the right to free expression of opinion and thus also the protection of human rights itself .
( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , it gives me great pleasure to take the floor to argue on behalf of the entire Group of the European People 's Party and European Democrats , as well as on my own behalf , for a favourable vote on the final version of this report .
The report tackles the hard fact that there are many more elderly than young people , because both medical care and lifestyles enable all of us to live longer on average - not all of us , unfortunately , but on average .
Therefore there are many more elderly people , also because the birth rate has declined , which is why in the document we call for measures to stimulate the birth rate .
I would point out that the European People 's Party , along with the UEN and other groups , requested the deletion of paragraph 24 .
We voted in favour of deletion but regrettably the majority in this House was not in favour .
I believe my speaking time is now at an end .
- ( NL ) Madam President , the merit of the Castex report is undoubtedly that it indicates the enormous demographic challenges with which Europe is faced .
Admittedly , a lot of good questions , trains of thought and solutions are enumerated .
More and better relief for children must indeed be urgently provided , older workers must indeed also be provided with continuing opportunities within the employment markets , and health services must indeed urgently prepare themselves to face the challenge of the accelerated aging demographic .
On the other hand , this Parliament is straying off course in considering immigration as an instrument with which to secure the demographic and economic future of Europe .
Just recently , one of the British Prime Minister 's most important advisers , Lord Turner , described the axiom that immigrants are necessary to make up for the shortage of workers as , and I quote , ' economically illiterate and completely incorrect ' .
Europe already has a million unemployed immigrants , coupled with all the problems which go along with that .
As more immigrants enter , these existing problems can only get worse .

Madam President , when voting on the Guellec report on cohesion policy , I could not support compromise amendment 4 , which calls for ' increased financial resources for cohesion policy ' in the future .
Automatically increasing EU subsidies is not , perhaps , the most responsible approach when we have the practical problem of making a meaningful and efficient use of them .
Instead , I am in favour of using the term ' sufficient financial resources ' .
Written explanations of vote
in writing . - ( PT ) In a European Union flooded with a wide variety of directives on detailed issues that would be better tackled at Member State level , given their specific nature and level of development , it cannot fail to be interesting to see how the European Commission will act in terms of monitoring the application of Community law .
One of the conclusions that can be drawn is that each Directorate-General has its own very different way of working , but it is not clear whether the Member States also work in different ways , although experience tells us that the small and medium-sized countries generally act more rigorously than the European powers .
This is what has happened with the Stability Pact .
This latest report introduces a new element which the Committee on Petitions of the European Parliament applauds .
In the Annual Report and its related annexes , the European Commission has included , for the first time , particulars of the specific and detailed treatment of infringements relating to petitions .
in writing . ( PL ) Mrs Frassoni has prepared a good report .
I support the proposal to simplify the application of Community law and the introduction of package meetings for that purpose . I am also in favour of workshops devoted to transposition of Community legal acts .
In addition , I endorse the idea of improving the efficiency of application of Community law through closer cooperation between the European Parliament and national parliaments .
These actions will help to improve the effectiveness of European Union policies regarding for example European Fund actions and harmonisation of standards for products on the Community market .
As regards the report relating to the Commission 's Annual report on monitoring the application of Community law , I am of the opinion that one of its major themes is the Commission 's intention of improving working methods in cases of reported breaches of Community law in the Member States .
Under the framework of the proposed new working method , citizens ' queries and complaints should be handed back directly to the Member States in question .
As the rapporteur , Mrs Frassoni , rightly pointed out , this new working method of the Commission , in other words the handing back of the complaint , carries an inherent risk of the Commission renouncing its fundamental responsibility for the application of Community law .
In this connection I would also like to point out another fact , which has already been subject to criticism in the European Parliament : it is the lobby groups , which always manage to access the Commission 's notifications directed at Member States in cases of suspected breaches of Community law , while citizens do not .
Yet it is precisely the citizens , whose submissions provide an irreplaceable source of information and alert us to breaches or non-application of Community law , not some interest groups with their own agenda .
in writing . ( PL ) I voted in favour of the report by Mrs Frassoni on monitoring the application of Community law ( 2005 ) .
Mrs Frassoni has presented a very good report .
In particular , the individual issues contained in the motion for a resolution call for cohesion in the area of joint action by EU institutions , national parliaments and the citizens themselves .
The main points concern the ideas for better monitoring and the proposals for simplifying implementation of the provisions of Community law and improving its effectiveness .
Their implementation is essential to improving the effectiveness of European Union policy on , for instance , European Fund actions and harmonisation of standards for products goods on the Community market .
Furthermore , the appeal to national parliaments contained in the motion for a resolution is very important . National parliaments are urged to go beyond a purely formal transposition of Community legislation and avoid fragmentation when incorporating it into national legislation .
in writing . - I welcome André Brie 's proposal for regulation on the accreditation and market surveillance of products in the European Community .
The proposal will improve the amount of protection given to consumers and will improve product safety .
To ensure greater protection it is necessary that accreditation and market surveillance be carried out by a public body .
The report attends to these points and I voted in favour of its recommendations .
in writing . - ( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , at a time when the European market seems totally incapable of defending itself against dumping from outside of Europe , I note with great satisfaction the first ' institutional ' step towards new legislation and harmonisation of the EU market .
The European Parliament in Strasbourg has proposed a new way of regulating products placed on the Community market .
These products will have to comply with the rules in force and , following a careful appraisal , will be able to bear the CE mark .
Over and above the introduction of joint liability on the part of importers and foreign manufacturers for damage caused by non-compliant products , the report proposes the development of a complex system of monitoring which lays down penalties proportionate to the seriousness of the offence so as to constitute an effective deterrent against improper use .
Consumers and businesses can therefore look to the future with renewed optimism .
The removal of barriers , the cornerstone of EU free-trade policy since the very outset , and the creation of a business-friendly economic climate will reflect a high level of protection both for consumers , through the observance of high standards on health and product safety , and for businesses , which will benefit at last from a rigorous system of checks and balances to protect goods made in Europe .
For this reason I am voting in favour of the report .
in writing . - ( PT ) This European Parliament report introduces certain elements which may be positive , although somewhat contradictory .
For example , all those involved in placing a product on the market would bear the same responsibility , from the manufacturer to the distributor and importer , but it is not properly indicated how this would work .
The report also allows national markings to be maintained which , under the European Commission 's proposal , would disappear , with only the CE marking being recognised .
The compromise replaces the reference to ' national markings ' with ' other markings ' .
The report also maintains that this is a non-binding framework , but that anyone adopting it will have to abide by it .
In addition , it inserts a reference to SMEs requiring their specific needs to be taken into account .
However , the objective of the European Commission 's proposal , which the report does not question , is to facilitate the functioning of the single market by removing the remaining obstacles , but without this applying to certain sectors of activity , in particular foodstuffs , animal feed , health and wellbeing of animals , tobacco products , veterinary medicinal products , medicinal products for human use , human blood and human tissues and cells , for which harmonised legislation already exists .
in writing .
( PL ) Mrs Schaldemose rightly points out that the decision in question , aimed at creating a broader and more rigorous system of Community control of the marketing of products , may have a significant impact on the conduct of international trade . This calls for a separate analysis .
I agree that the proposal for importers to be jointly liable for the harm caused by unsafe products and products failing to comply with the accreditation system aims to improve the effectiveness of the system and protect the Community 's public interest .
It also aims to guarantee the citizens ' fundamental right to protection against unfair and unsafe practices .
in writing . - Mrs Schaldemose 's report calling for a common framework for the marketing of products is one that I welcome and have voted in favour of .
The recommendations made in the report will bolster the EU 's efforts to protect consumers .
The CE mark tends to be misunderstood as a safety mark , when in fact it is simply a statement of the product 's conformity with EU legislation .
It is essential that we make sure that the mark is not abused and inform consumers of what the CE mark guarantees .
in writing . - ( SK ) As rapporteur on behalf of the PPE-DE Group for the draft report by Mrs Schaldemose on the common framework for the marketing of products , I would like to express my satisfaction with the results of the vote : the compromise achieved has already made it possible to finalise the legislative process at first reading .
The agreed compromise includes the transfer of some of the articles dealing with the CE mark to the report by Mr Brie on market surveillance , so that they can be put into practice more quickly .
Our decision to do so was based on clear information proving that products made in developing countries and wrongfully CE marked , that is bearing the CE logo that indicates that a product is in conformity with European legislation , keep turning up more and more often in the European database of dangerous consumer products ( RAPEX ) .
Trusting or not trusting the CE mark cannot be based on the CE mark alone , out of context .
There must be trust in the entire system of accreditation , notification and market surveillance .
I see no reason for introducing additional marking on products , not even if these were quality marks .
Such new marking could be confusing for the end consumer and furthermore the extra cost could be reflected in the price of the goods .
This is why I will curiously await the results of the impact study assessing the usage of national markings alongside the CE marking that the Commission should prepare , as requested by the Committee on Internal Market and Consumer Protection .
in writing . - ( PT ) The European Commission 's argument for proposing this Regulation is that ' the " principle of mutual recognition ” ... is hampered by several problems ' ( in other words , products marketed in one Member State may be prevented from being marketed in another ) .
It believes that the possibility of national technical rules creating unlawful obstacles to the free movement of goods between Member States should be minimised .
It therefore lays down requirements which authorities must meet when implementing a national technical rule and imposes on them the burden of proof .
In other words , it is imposing conditions with the clear aim of restricting the possibility of each State applying its own rules .
For its part , the European Parliament report actually adds further obstacles to the action that each State may take , for example : ' The aim of this Regulation is to strengthen the functioning of the internal market , with free and undistorted competition , by improving the free movement of products whilst ensuring a high level of consumer protection and product safety ' .
In practice , the Member States will be prohibited from restricting the sale in their territory of products where these are manufactured and marketed in another Member State , even though they may not fully comply with the rules of the Member State of destination .
in writing . - I agree with the recommendations contained within Mr Stubb 's report .
The document aims to clarify and define the role of national authorities and economic operators in the implementation of the mutual recognition principle .
While I am in favour of increasing the efficiency with which the mutual recognition principle is implemented , it must not affect the single market 's base of further harmonisation .
Furthermore , safety aspects must form part of the principle 's implementation .
I am confident that the report sufficiently deals with these issues and therefore voted in favour of it .
in writing . - We do not agree with the mutual recognition principle as a guarantor for advanced consumer , social or environmental rights .
The principle says that if the product is accepted somewhere in Europe , it cannot be denied access to another Member State unless the authorities can provide evidence that the application of a national technical rule is justified .
However , the criteria for exceptions to the principle are already established by EU court rulings .
And these apply to all Member States , regardless of whether or not we adopt the goods package .
In addition to that , consumer rights at EU level are strengthened with the goods package .
Furthermore , we are against any measures taken in the goods package that may give political support to a future harmonisation of criminal law at EU level .
Having taking all this into consideration , we have decided to vote in favour of the reports .
in writing . - ( DE ) I am in favour of the Internal Market for Goods Package , because it is essential to have a common framework for the marketing of products abroad .
In an internal market which is based on the principles of technical harmonisation of rules governing the sale of products in the European market and the mutual recognition principle , we cannot have a situation in which the marketing of products which can already be put on sale in one Member State is substantially delayed or , in a worst-case scenario , actually obstructed due to excessive bureaucracy in another .

I therefore welcome the reports by our fellow Members , Mrs Schaldemose and Mr Brie , who advocate a reduction in red tape and a common legal framework for future sectoral provisions so that in future , as much coherence as is politically and technically feasible is guaranteed .
Finally , however , I would point out that both proposals require further refinement so that key definitions and especially the scope of the legal framework are properly clarified .
If these proposals themselves lack clear terminology , achieving the desired harmonisation will be impossible .
in writing . - ( DE ) The package on the marketing of products in Europe , to be voted on today , undoubtedly brings improvements for consumers .
The problems with imported children 's toys last year demonstrated that there is a clear need for action here and that it must be possible to hold importers liable to a greater extent for product safety .
What is important is what Parliament has achieved , namely that the New Approach will be implemented to a lesser extent and its application must be assessed on a case-by-case basis .
We cannot be satisfied with the treatment of the CE mark to date .
It is certainly not a quality mark denoting a product produced in Europe , which is what it implies to many consumers in its current form , and it is therefore very misleading .
in writing . - ( NL ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I have voted with conviction for the three-party agreement regarding this legislation package to make the common market truly free .
I am also convinced that we can round off this matter in one reading , and even within a year of launching the proposals .
This legislation is so necessary that I have honestly wondered to myself why consumers and SMEs have had to wait so long .
The principle of mutual recognition was formulated by the Court of Justice almost 30 years ago and is now enshrined in legislation .
Nevertheless , the Member States do not apply it systematically .
I am convinced that the reversal of the burden of proof which we are now carrying out is the best way to respect this principle and to allow the internal market for non-harmonised products to work .
Furthermore , we are genuinely ensuring much better consumer protection with much better market supervision .
Nothing less would be acceptable in a Europe which boasts of its high standards .
Finally , we are taking care to get rid of a number of bad , protectionist tendencies .
The new accreditation scheme for organisations whose products are certified as conforming to harmonised standards will entail administrative costs but will lead to a better result , a working internal market and more equal conditions of competition .
The costs that we will save with this package will ultimately produce more jobs and economic growth .
Better consumer protection is one very good reason to approve this package with enthusiasm .
in writing . - I will be voting in favour of this resolution .
The humanitarian and political crisis in the Gaza Strip must be viewed with deep concern .
We must ask Hamas to stop attacks against Israel from the territory it controls , and Israel to cease military actions killing civilians and extrajudicial targeted killings .
The policy of isolation of the Gaza Strip has totally failed at a political and human level .
The blockade must end , with the re-opening of crossings in and out of Gaza .
I welcome the EU 's financial contributions to the Palestinians over the previous years which - with the appropriate controls and monitoring - should continue .
in writing . - ( SV ) Unfortunately , once again the EU is using a humanitarian disaster to advance its position in the field of foreign policy .
The June List expresses its sympathy with the civilian population affected by the conflict , but it is only through the UN that this conflict can be resolved , with broad international support , and not through the EU .
in writing . - ( PT ) While it is true that we share many of the concerns expressed in the resolution , it is also true that these fall well short of the necessary denunciation and condemnation of Israel 's colonialist policy with regard to Palestine and its people .
Among other aspects :
Once again , the resolution places the aggressor and aggressed , occupier and occupied on the same level , thereby ignoring the terrorism of the Israeli State ;
The resolution does not condemn the criminal embargo imposed by Israel on the Gaza Strip and its population nor does it denounce the connivance or silence of the United States of America or the European Union in this respect ;
The resolution says nothing about the deplorable statements made by Commissioner Frattini who is responsible for justice and home affairs and who stated that the EU would be prepared to ' take on board Israeli concerns and interests in a way that was not on our agenda in the first years of intifada ' .
It is at the very least abominable that someone who talks so much about terrorism not only ignores Israel 's terrorism but is prepared to cooperate with it .
For our part , we continue to condemn Israel 's policy of apartheid against Palestine and to defend full compliance with the inalienable rights of the Palestinian people , enshrined in numerous UN resolutions .
in writing . - I voted in favour of the joint motion for a resolution on Gaza and am pleased that Parliament has taken such a strong stance on lifting the blockade .
This is a humanitarian disaster in the making .
There are insufficient drugs available in hospitals to provide basic care ; food assistance to part of the population only fulfils about two-thirds of daily requirements ; the fishing industry ( which employed about 10 000 people ) is under severe stress , as boats are only allowed to operate close to the coast .
There is an ecological disaster under way , threatening the coastlines of the region , as the Beit Lahia plant sewage plant is not operating properly and repairs cannot be carried out , as supplies are blocked .
Businesses cannot survive and the unemployed have to find work with the smugglers and extremists .
The rocket attacks continue and the few involved in this threaten the peace and the future of the many - both Israeli and Palestinian .
Hamas must stop the perpetrators .
Only the extremists on all sides are benefiting , as I heard time and again on my recent visit to Gaza .
The EU must do everything possible to break the blockade , and Israel must recognise that it is not giving them long-term security .
in writing . - ( DE ) Let 's be absolutely clear from the outset : the embargo by Israel is clearly a violation of international law and is completely unacceptable .
As a result of the embargo and the denial of access to drinking water and food , Israel is artificially creating a situation for the people in the Gaza Strip which is without parallel in terms of its inhumanity and lack of concern for human dignity .
It is thanks to the Egyptian Government and the cool head of the border police that a major disaster has so far been averted and people who are themselves not participants in the conflict have been given access to basic goods for their essential needs .
What is irresponsible , on the other hand , is shifting the responsibility onto Egypt , which is completely blameless in terms of the escalation of the current situation .
It is unacceptable , in the 21st century , for a civilian population to be treated as the scapegoat for terrorist acts by Hamas .
The infrastructure must therefore be restored immediately and supplies to the local population guaranteed .
The Palestinian side , for its part , should do its utmost to de-escalate the situation in order to facilitate the conclusion of an agreement by the end of 2008 .
In the present situation , however , prospects of achieving this noble aspiration would appear to be remote .
in writing . - While every effort must be made to find a solution to the situation in Gaza , this resolution at best will contribute nothing and at worst will have a negative impact .
If Parliament wants to be an honest broker for peace in the Middle East it should stop producing unbalanced resolutions .
It is difficult for any member not to vote for a resolution addressing humanitarian concerns but by linking those concerns to an unfair portrayal of Israel its value falls .
A parliamentary resolution should not call for Hamas to release a captive as a mere " act of goodwill ” .
Hamas is not a benevolent medieval king ; it is a terrorist organisation largely responsible for the situation in Gaza .
In demanding that Israel fulfils its obligations , this House should note that Israeli workers continue to risk their own lives to supply electricity to Gaza despite the manipulation of that electricity supply by Hamas .
In addressing the needs of those who are suffering , we must include the people of southern Israel on whom some days an average of a rocket an hour has been fired and where 75 % of children are reported to be suffering from anxiety and post-traumatic stress .
in writing . - ( EL ) The Israeli authorities are perpetrating ever more criminal acts against the Palestinians .
They have been cracking down on the movement of people , goods and food for many months and barring access to drinking water , electricity and other basic utilities , while the Israeli army continues to attack and murder civilians .
The sympathy expressed in the resolution as regards the disasters endured by the Palestinian population is a sham because the EU and the United States are part of the problem .
Imperialist interests back Israel in its criminal policies .
The imperialists want to retain control of a region that is important for its position and for geostrategic activity ; they wish to keep their right to intervene , even militarily .
The Quartet 's plans have demonstrated the failure of yet another imperialist attempt , and the Annapolis agreements will have the same result .
The proposal for their revival is an attempt to pull the wool over the eyes of the people ; it essentially equates victims with persecutors .
The imperialists cannot provide a solution to the Palestinian problem .
It must emerge from the struggles of the peoples of Palestine and Israel themselves , and from international solidarity with their struggle for peaceful coexistence via the creation of an independent Palestinian state with East Jerusalem as its capital .
in writing . - ( FR ) If , despite a certain amount of reluctance due to a totally unbalanced text , I eventually voted for it , this was because an oral amendment tabled by the Group of the European People 's Party restored the truth to a certain extent as to the current situation in Gaza .
Whoever is responsible , it is totally unacceptable , utterly and totally unacceptable , that initially paragraph 3 of the text set Israel and Hamas on an equal footing .
Does Israel 's concern with protecting its people from acts of violence perpetrated on a daily basis by Hamas and Palestinian militias have anything to do with the indiscriminate attacks , most recently in Dimona , or the streams of Qassam rockets raining down on Sderot every day , targeting chiefly schools , and therefore children , the lifeblood of Israeli society ?
Of course we may have different views on the conflict , but the honest MEPs in this House will refuse to make Israel , a democratic country and government , and Hamas , a terrorist movement listed as such by the EU ( this is true , just like the repeated refusal to meet the conditions of the Quartet , which this resolution moreover oddly conceals ) , equal partners in the midst of terrible violence .
in writing . - The tone , and much of the content , of the Gaza Resolution , is skewed in an anti-Israeli fashion .
It is certainly the case that the Palestinians in Gaza live in a perpetual state of privation , and this is inhumane .
But the blame for this rests only partly with Israel , and primarily with Palestinian terrorists and extremists such as Hamas , and the failure of Arab states to assist the rehabilitation of the population , and regeneration of the area .
Gaza has been allowed to remain a running sore .
I regret that there was no call for those currently in authority in Gaza to take the necessary steps for a peaceful accommodation with Israel .
I welcome the call for the release of Corporal Shalit .
I therefore abstained in the vote .
in writing . - ( SV ) The June List supports the UN Human Rights Council and the important work carried out by that body .
However , we oppose the provision laid down in paragraph 34 which states that each EU member must express the EU position on these matters .
Each EU Member State is an autonomous member of the UN and therefore has the right to express its own opinion .
We have therefore chosen to vote against the resolution .
in writing . - ( PT ) Not forgetting its previous positions on the definition of this UN body 's operation , in which the attempts to guarantee its monitoring and organisation were obvious - we recall the EU 's criticisms and pressure in relation to , for example , the way in which certain countries were elected to this body ( regretting the ' clean slate ' principle and defending the introduction of eligibility criteria ) , the ' Special Procedure ' mechanism , the reinforcement of country mandates and the possibility of creating new mandates by simple majority , or even the terms of the ' Universal Periodic Review ' - the European Parliament has adopted a resolution which , although heading along the same lines , is more moderate in the explanation of its true objectives .
Among other aspects , we would highlight its unacceptable pressure for each Member State to make its proposals in this UN body dependent on the positions which may be adopted by the EU , thereby subordinating their sovereignty on foreign policy .
We would also highlight the political opinion withdrawn from the countries mentioned - and also from some not mentioned - showing once again the application of ' double standards ' , in other words the orchestration of human rights according to the EU 's interests .
in writing . - ( SV ) We Swedish Social Democrats have voted in favour of the report on the demographic future of Europe .
However , we believe that the report is too far-reaching and addresses aspects that go beyond matters relevant to demographic change .
We also oppose various proposals for tax breaks for companies that organise crèches and for people being able to work at home .
However , we have chosen to vote in favour of the report as it also addresses important aspects of the challenge Europe is facing .
in writing . - ( PT ) We regret that not all the amendments we tabled have been adopted .
These were intended to improve the report , question certain grounds and include measures which we feel are essential in order to defend the rights of women , families and children .
For example , we know how low wages and precarious employment worsen social instability and , as a result , drastically reduce the stable prospects of those opting to have children .
That is why improving job stability , increasing wages , extending social security and occupational health and safety , reducing overall working time without any loss of wages and ensuring a fairer distribution of income and full employment constitute fundamental issues for the management of demographic change .
It is also important to create new and better educational and social infrastructures , for both young people and the elderly , including more lifelong learning , child-care , nursing care and elderly care structures .
This requires more and better public services , with a guarantee of equal access for all .
By not fully promoting these aspects , this report does not effectively respond to these problems , despite containing positive proposals which we applaud but which are not sufficient to allow us to vote in favour of the report .
in writing . - ( SV ) Large parts of Europe are facing demographic challenges .
However , these should be resolved by national measures , not by catch-all EU proposals which perhaps suit certain countries , but may be unsuitable in other Member States .
Many EU countries , including Sweden , have also largely coped with the low birth rate and the demographic problems , partly through a well-developed welfare policy and through immigration .
The Member States that so wish may do well to study Sweden and other Scandinavian countries and copy the measures that they have taken .
in writing . ( PL ) I fully support the report on the demographic future of Europe .
It is a fact that the constant fall in natural growth in recent years , accompanied by an increase in average life expectancy , is likely to lead to significant changes in the population structure of the European Union by 2050 .
The changes will include general ageing of the population and a reduction in the number of persons working . This will result in a significant increase in the burden on Member States ' budgets .
The process will be a painful one not only for the individual Member States but also for the Union as a whole . The latter may be faced with losing its competitive edge and with a fall in economic growth compared to the situation in other parts of the world characterised by swift demographic growth .
It is clear too that this demographic imbalance will have negative consequences for the financing of social care and the sustainability of pension schemes .
I therefore support the remedial measures proposed in the report aimed at demographic renewal , lengthening the period of professional activity , guaranteeing high-quality social care and promoting solidarity between the generations .
These actions are vital to maintaining the competitiveness of the Union 's economy whilst simultaneously guaranteeing the functioning of the European social model in the long term .
in writing . - ( FR ) Europeans are a disappearing species .
With an average birth rate of less than 1.5 , by the year 2050 EU-27 will have lost some 20 million people and those over 65 years old will account for 30 % of the population .
The measures proposed by Mrs Castex to rectify the European birth rate are laughable because , like all Europeanists in power , our fellow Member does not want to renew the European population , but to replace it with immigrants from Africa and Asia .
That is why she uses 15 articles in her report to call for facilities to reunite families , civil rights for immigrants , and increased efforts to integrate them ...

This policy , advocated in France by Mr Attali and implemented by Mr Sarkozy , will bring a further 80 million immigrants to Europe by the year 2050 , and will eventually lead to the disappearance of our peoples .
To guarantee the survival of the European peoples , migratory flows must actually be reversed and a large-scale birth promotions policy implemented based on the family and the embracing of life .
This means that our nations must seek their sovereignty and identity within a new Europe , the Europe of nations .
in writing . - ( DE ) I am in favour of a cohesion policy for the European Union 's demographic development , as the structural shift in European society 's age pyramid points to a worrying future .
I draw attention to the fact that all Europe 's industrialised countries face the same major social policy problems which constitute a serious risk to the European social welfare model that is essential for our current prosperity .
In this context , I would particularly like to stress the rise in the European average old-age dependency ratio to 53 % in 2050 , which is due to the current abnormally low average birth rate in the EU of 1.5 , and which not only leads to intergenerational conflicts and can thus be regarded as an obstacle to social cohesion , but could also weaken Europe 's competitiveness in the world economy .
The demographic change which is taking place thus requires a general adaptation of the individual social systems and rapid and efficient implementation .
in writing . - ( FR ) The Castex report on the demographic future of Europe is appallingly trite , featuring all the clichés one might expect to find in surveys on the subject .
Mrs Castex forgets , among other aspects , to mention contraceptive methods which have been largely responsible for reducing the birth rate in Europe , where it stands at only 1.5 per woman , a far cry from renewal of the future generations .
A population-friendly environment depends on the possibility of women being willing to bring up their children over a relatively long period of time .
This is a priority investment for society , and would substantially reduce school dropout rates and juvenile delinquency .
As for immigration to offset empty cradles , this is a dangerous idea which would not only destabilise our western societies , but could be a genuine time bomb with all the consequences we can well imagine .
Justifying immigration by a lack of manpower , qualified or unqualified , when Europe has over twenty million unemployed , is penalising European workers , who will certainly appreciate the proposals of the Commission or the European Parliament .
For these reasons we intend to vote against the Castex report .
in writing . ( PL ) Mrs Castex rightly points out that in view of the fact that the European average old-age dependency ratio ( the number of persons aged 65 or over divided by the number aged between 14 and 65 ) will rise from 25 % in 2004 to 53 % in 2050 , the European Union risks losing its competitive edge and suffering a fall in economic growth .
I agree with the proposals to develop five main directions for action aimed at demographic renewal , namely high quality active life , a more efficient Europe , better integration of immigrants , guaranteeing social care and solidarity between the generations .
in writing . - We voted against this report because the solutions it proposes as regards the demographic crisis are counter-productive .
In contrast to what the report says , only traditional families and social respect for motherhood provide the remedy we need .
The social experiments proposed in the report ( so-called ' alternative family structures ' ) bring nothing but risks for our societies .
in writing . - ( FR ) Rarely have I taken such pleasure in voting on a resolution , since it clearly shows that women and elderly people have a major role to play in the challenge of our demographic future .
Women are expected to be willing to bring more children into the world while carrying out a professional activity over a longer period of time .
In that case , a facility must be created to motivate them .
Women cannot be expected to feel they are in the wrong , or to expose themselves to poverty , every time they bring a child into the world .
The more they procreate , the more they are discriminated against in terms of welfare cover , especially if they are full-time family carers , the less they earn , and the shorter their retirement will be .
The most wonderful resolutions , therefore , will serve no purpose if there is no political courage to implement them .
This , unfortunately , was the case with the 1995 resolution on the distribution of pension entitlements in the event of divorce and the resolution on the situation of spouses helping with SMEs , aimed at rectifying the many discriminations still suffered by women , and the terrible plight of far too many men in relation to paternity leave .
in writing . - I welcome Françoise Castex 's recommendations regarding Europe 's demographic future .
The overall message of encouraging economic competitiveness while preserving the European social model is one that I feel is both logical and just .
I agree with the report 's focus on the role of areas such as education , childcare and financial mechanisms in securing this goal .
There also exists a necessity for the promotion of professional equality between men and women along with a well and calmly thought-out immigration policy that incorporates the goal of successful integration .
The report deals with these issues and I voted in favour of its recommendations .
in writing . - ( DE ) Mass immigration and ageing are putting the stock of indigenous population at risk .
The first is heralded as a miracle cure for the second , but merely leads to ethnomorphosis - in other words , to Umvolkung : the forced change of the population 's ethnic composition .
Unless the EU establishment finally starts to lobby for a pro-birth policy for the indigenous Europeans , promotes the traditional family with many children , finally takes action against attempts - such as gay marriage - to destroy the traditional family , and reintroduces zero tolerance to immigration , also in relation to family reunion , in fifty years ' time we will be sitting here palavering about the Kosovisation of Europe , just as we are doing now with the Kosovo issue itself .
In the report before us , an attempt is made yet again to sell immigration to us as a panacea , with Europe 's hereditary population soon having to adapt to the migrants .
That is why I have rejected today 's report .
in writing . - ( SK ) The EU must respond to serious demographic changes if it wants to preserve its demographic and territorial balance .
On the one hand it is necessary to deal with population ageing .
The situation is alarming .
Each year after the year 2010 the number of people at work will decrease by 1 million and that will threaten intergenerational solidarity .
On the other hand there are the problems caused by the decreasing birth rate ; these problems have already existed for several years .
Postponing childbirth until later in life may be the reason for an increase in infertility of couples .
Protection of mother and family must be the focus of all EU policies .
Pension systems must not punish women for being mothers .
In recent years the differences between the Member States have been reducing but at the same time the differences inside the individual Member States have become much deeper .
Disadvantaged regions in particular are less developed and on top of that they are also the ones most affected by demographic changes , namely by population ageing and migration .
Since there are not enough well-paid jobs , qualified workers leave for the big cities .
Heavy concentration of economic activities in capital cities erodes the demographic , economic , social and environmental balance and leads to a population decrease in rural areas that often lack the basic infrastructure needed for development .
I voted in favour of the report by Mrs Castex on the demographic future ; this is one of the important reports .
We have to realise that demographic development is a fundamental component of all policies , whether they are medium- or long-term .
in writing . - ( PT ) The renewal of the European population is a crucial factor in ensuring a balance between the youngest and oldest and in increasing the working-age population .
The consequences of the current falling birth rate and increased life expectancy will be an increase in the old-age dependency ratio and a decline in the working-age population .
It is therefore essential to take steps to promote demographic renewal which will ensure a more productive and advanced Europe with a high degree of social protection and solidarity between the generations .
We must develop policies that encourage the continual renewal of the European population and which ensure continued economic competitiveness , at the same time as preserving the European social model .
We cannot ignore one other aspect of this issue which is linked to Europe being a point of destination for significant migration flows , given that these populations invariably help to increase birth rates .
The combination of the demographic issue with the migration issue poses potential risks and we cannot simply count on these populations for demographic renewal .
I therefore want to stress the measures aimed at stimulating the birth rate , accompanied by appropriate policies on education and training and on solidarity between the generations , intended to halt the demographic decline of Europe .
in writing . - ( SV ) The demographic challenge faced by Europe is enormous .
This is a perfectly relevant subject for discussion at European level - I addressed it myself as the author of an opinion on flexicurity .
However , an essential condition is that the starting point for the discussion is that most of the measures proposed , such as a later retirement age , a prudent family policy , good conditions for parental leave etc . , come under the subsidiarity principle .
A number of proposals in the wide range of solutions , to say the least , that the report mentions are practised and have worked well in Sweden .
However , that does not mean that they would turn out equally well in other parts of Europe .
The fundamental problem with Mrs Castex 's report is not therefore the intention , but that most of what is discussed relates to policies that should be conducted by the Member States - sometimes at municipal level .
I therefore voted in favour of amendments which stressed the subsidiarity principle and abstained in the final vote .
in writing . ( PL ) We have adopted an important report on the demographic future of Europe .
Enabling citizens to live longer certainly represents an achievement for the Member States of the Union . It also leads , however , to the gradual ageing of the population .
In the long term , this situation can only upset the balance between the productive population and those who are past that stage .
It is a threat to solidarity between the generations , because a smaller number of professionally active people than at present will have to bear the ever-increasing cost of benefits , allowances , pensions , care and health services for those who are not in work .
Action to lengthen the period of professional activity and increase the birth rate is called for in order to counter such a situation . Programmes for the full integration of immigrants are also required .
Technical modernisation and the introduction of information technology into the workplace will ensure that work is more effective and productive . This will make a significant contribution to improving the situation .
Consideration should also be given to the migratory flows from rural to urban areas , and to the hidden human capital in rural areas , notably in the less developed countries .
Demography is one of the key challenges for the European Union , especially in the context of significant overpopulation in other parts of the world .
in writing . ( PL ) In view of the serious nature of the demographic problem facing Europe , it is entirely appropriate for Parliament and the Commission to have devoted time to it .
Unfortunately , I found it necessary to vote against the report on the subject by Mrs Castex because so many key amendments were rejected .
In particular , Parliament 's acceptance of the provision indicating full acceptance of the definition of family in the legislation of an emigrant 's country of origin in the event of conflict with the legislation of the host country , together with the consequent financial obligations in the case of polygamy , cannot be condoned .
This intrudes upon the internal provisions of Member States , thus infringing the principle of subsidiarity .
in writing . - ( GA ) I do not agree with everything that is written in Mr Guellec 's Report , but nevertheless , I welcome the report and I voted in its favour .
I welcome the emphasis Mr Guellec has placed on balanced regional development .
Not only must the gap between Member States be decreased but we must also reduce the gaps within Member States as well as the gaps between regions .
We must ensure that increased resources are aimed at promoting regional development and tackling social exclusion .
The only way to deal with a cohesion policy is as a tool for the implementation of the Lisbon Strategy .
in writing . - ( PT ) Although this report contains certain aspects which , despite being moderate , we regard as positive , it does not effectively tackle the major funding issues .
An example of this compromise is the approach taken with regard to the Community financial resources needed for an effective cohesion policy .
The report recognises , in the recitals , that ' increased financial resources for cohesion policy must be guaranteed in the future in order to deal with the anticipated new challenges ' ( whether or not this actually relates to cohesion is a separate issue which has yet to be clarified ) .
However , in the articles , or in other words in the actual proposal , the report merely alludes to an ambiguous need to reinforce the cohesion policy , to which ' sufficient ' financial resources should be allocated .
Regrettably , the amendments that we tabled were rejected .
These amendments aimed , for example , to recognise that there are countries and regions which are at odds with the EU , to prevent use of the cohesion policy for other purposes , particularly to finance objectives included within the Lisbon Strategy which would be contrary to cohesion , to recognise the need to increase Community financial resources for cohesion , to impose conditions on Community aid for enterprises so that relocations are discouraged , to highlight the need to adopt permanent measures with adequate funding for the most remote regions and to recognise the role of fishing in cohesion .
in writing . - I welcome Ambroise Guellec 's report on the Commission 's fourth report on economic and social cohesion .
The findings point towards definite progress in improving economic and social cohesion across the EU .
However , the findings that disparities have increased in a number of Member States , especially between capitals and rural areas , demonstrate the need to continue in this policy 's goal to try and reduce the differences within and among the EU 's multiple regions .
in writing . - ( SK ) Cohesion policy helps solve problems such as demographic changes , migration from rural to urban areas , segregation or climate changes .
These challenges can be confronted only if cohesion policy remains a Community policy .
This is why I definitely give my support to the report .
We can see how beneficial this policy is when we look at the countries that received support from the Cohesion Fund in the past .
Greece , Spain , Portugal and Ireland have recorded strong growth .
Similar help must be available for the new Member States .
Like everyone else who grew up and lives in a more remote region , I know that there are pronounced disparities between regions , and even inside individual regions .
Sometimes these disparities are even greater than disparities between individual countries : disparities in living standards , in the number of jobs available , in income and in education opportunities .
This is why I emphasise that there is a real need to reduce the disparity between territorially accessible regions and regions facing structural disadvantages .
I see the way forward as prioritising such policies that would decrease the pressure on capital cities and support the development of second-tier cities .
It is necessary to support the development of rural areas ; this is where small and medium-sized towns play an important role .
It is also necessary to direct the funds towards projects intended to make each region attractive in its own right .
I support this report because I know that cohesion policy is the right answer to many demographic changes .
in writing . - ( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , cohesion has been one of the mainstays of Community policy in the past , the expression of a principle of solidarity which marked out and accompanied economic growth in the European Union .
It has been an economic success story for many European countries and regions ; there has even been talk of a miracle in some cases and , thanks to the proper implementation of cohesion policies , the quality of life has improved for many of our citizens .
Cohesion plays an even more important role in the Europe of 27 , with its pronounced economic and social disparities .
The first effects of EU economic aid are beginning to be seen in some of the regions where development is lagging behind , even though it will only be possible to assess economic convergence on a longer-term basis owing to a very low initial GDP per capita .
Comparative circumstances will be different in the near future , but perhaps even today . Therefore the cohesion policy will have to confront other , new challenges having a strong territorial impact , such as demographic change , urbanisation and new urban planning , migratory movements , energy supply and climate change .
While voting in favour of the report , I would call upon the Commission and national governments to devise a joint approach for tackling these issues in an appropriately dynamic and cooperative manner .
in writing . - ( EL ) The aim of economic and social cohesion is to create a delusion among workers so that the gap in social and regional disparities can be narrowed , and the living standards of workers in countries and regions that diverge from the Community average can be raised .
The law of unequal growth within capitalism is , however , inflexible .
These disparities are ever on the increase ; the poor become poorer and the rich become richer .
That is what workers have to put up with every day .
In the face of the charge made by capitalist restructurings and the frontal attack on employment rights , however , even verbal use of this term is tending to disappear , and with it the paltry provision of the Community budget .
In the third phase of implementation of the Lisbon Treaty , all the policies have to be replaced with imperialism 's magic word , ' competition ' .
This will lead to competition between states , regions and workers , where the law of the jungle holds sway .
The resolution is limited to flowery declarations and mere wishes that do not touch upon the essence of the problem .
Only the struggles of the workers , disobedience and insubordination to the EU 's anti-worker and unpopular policies can reverse the worsening trend in the living conditions of the working classes .
This trend is now becoming more marked even in the more developed countries .
in writing . - ( PT ) The cohesion policy is one of the distinctive trade marks of the European Union , one of its major successes and also one of the main attractions of our community .
The idea that it is right and necessary to ensure an identical level of development across all the Member States is a concept that we must not abandon and whose positive result we must celebrate .
However , not everything has been successful in this area .
Firstly , it is essential that the cohesion funds are increasingly integrated with other funding programmes in order to guarantee that the benefits of these funds are not lost in the absence of a concomitant investment in policies directly aimed at more advanced stages of development .
Sometimes it is necessary to take bigger steps , otherwise we will always be lagging behind .
Secondly , it is worrying that we are seeing a constant process of retraction in the Portuguese State in terms of guaranteeing equal access to basic services throughout its territory .
What point is there in calling for Community-level cohesion when this is absent from national policies , with citizens in less developed regions being abandoned in the name of , not a development idea , but a merely accounting-based view of the allocation of resources ?
None whatsoever .
in writing . - ( GA ) I don 't agree with everything written in Gisela Kallenbach 's Report , but despite that , I welcome it and voted for it .
I especially welcome the emphasis Mrs Kallenbach places on strengthening the role of the local urban authorities .
Sustainable development of urban areas is extremely challenging in the twenty first century and the Framework presented by Mrs Kallenbach today can help us to face this challenge .
in writing . - ( PT ) This report on the follow-up of the Territorial Agenda and the Leipzig Charter contains aspects which we consider important .
However , it must be stressed that the actual content of the territorial dimension of the cohesion policy is yet to be defined , with the adoption of a green paper on this issue being planned for next September .
Although many of the objectives mentioned so far are to be welcomed and all make sense - for example , establishment of a polycentric , balanced urban system and creation of a new urban-rural relationship ensuring parity of access to infrastructures , conservation of the natural and cultural heritage , preservation of high-quality public spaces and upgrading of housing stock and street furniture , strengthening the local economy and local labour market policy and ensuring proactive education and training policies for children and young people - we would stress that :
Land management and planning must be the responsibility of each Member State ;
The new priorities must receive new financial resources ;
The territorial dimension must not contradict or dilute economic and social cohesion , in other words the reduction of disparities between the levels of development of the various regions and the encouragement of the least-favoured regions that are lagging behind .
in writing . - Gisela Kallenbach 's report ' Follow-up of the Territorial Agenda and the Leipzig Charter ' is a report that I voted in favour of .
We need to be more sensitive to the territorial and urban dimension of EU policies .
In improving cooperation between urban and rural areas and implementing efficient strategies that aim at sustainable spatial development we can successfully achieve this .
Corrections to votes and voting intentions : see Minutes
( The sitting was suspended at 12.45 and resumed at 15.00 . )

Approval of Minutes of previous sitting : see Minutes
Communication of Council common positions : see Minutes
1 .
East Timor
The next item is the debate on six motions for a resolution concerning East Timor .
author .
( PL ) Mr President , we are witnessing yet another crisis in East Timor .
This crisis cannot be resolved without the involvement and cooperation of the East Timorese authorities .
The latter must bring about the dissolution of all paramilitary groups and disarm civilians . Armed criminal groups must also be disbanded .
Those responsible for attacks on the most important people in the country must be taken to court .
All the political forces , both those in power and those in opposition must refrain from the illegal use of force .
Recent events indicate a strong likelihood that East Timor will become yet another country whose key institutions no longer function . It may well be deemed a failed state .
We are all aware of the threat posed by such states . I am sure I do not need to quote examples , but let me just mention Somalia .

In view of the role it played in setting up the state of East Timor and its continued involvement in it , the international community cannot allow such a bleak prospect to become a reality .
The European Union 's commitment to supporting democratic forces and institutions remains essential . On its mission , Parliament should assess the effectiveness of that support .
author . - ( PT ) As underlined in our Group 's motion for a resolution , it is currently vital to express our solidarity with the East Timorese people and to condemn the attacks on the President of the Republic and the Prime Minister of East Timor .
We would stress that such attacks can only increase the instability of the East Timorese political situation , created by the events of 2006 and 2007 and maintained by the political process resulting from the recent legislative elections in that country .
We call for a thorough investigation , within the constitutional and legal framework of East Timor , to identify and try the main perpetrators of these attacks .
We must be alert to any manoeuvres which , in light of these events , may aim to justify further outside interference and which may threaten the independence and sovereignty of East Timor .
We therefore reject the joint resolution of the European Parliament which , among other aspects , seeks to ignore all the outside interference which has tried to condition and mould the free choices of the East Timorese people .
Also , by trying to lump everyone together , it seeks to exempt from responsibility the main perpetrators and mentors of the violence and destabilisation of the situation in East Timor .
It also seeks to ignore the fact that , in order to understand the current situation in East Timor , it is vital not to forget that its people were victims of colonialism , brutal repression and the destruction of their country and that its people heroically won their independence and sovereignty , in particular over their natural resources , in a fairly recent past , even after having been abandoned , at fundamental points in their struggle , by the international community .
Despite referring to respect for the sovereignty of the people of East Timor , this resolution forms a basis for interference in the internal affairs of that country .
In fact , it adopts a stance which seeks to present East Timor as a failed state .
Finally , this resolution ignores the fact that the solution is political and lies solely in the hands of the people of East Timor .
In the past , the East Timorese people have more than adequately proven their dignity and courage and we express our confidence in their ability , by their own hands , to declare East Timor a sovereign and independent state .
author . - ( PT ) On behalf of the Socialist Group in the European Parliament , I want to express our solidarity with the people of East Timor and our strong condemnation of the barbarous attacks against the democratically elected institutions of the President and Prime-Minister of East Timor .
I also want to call for an independent investigation , as requested in the motion for a resolution before us which we support , to find out who carried out the attacks , what they represented and what has failed in the security system of East Timor , both within East Timor and , in particular , internationally .
I believe that this episode indicates that the international community must make further efforts to reinforce the state institutions of East Timor and , in particular , to reform the security system which was also called into question in the 2006 crisis .
In addition , the issues relating to justice , compliance with justice and law and order must be considered .
In this context , I must say that the attempts at national reconciliation with the rebel groups may have given a negative and counterproductive signal of impunity which has led the rebels to carry out this miserable attack .
East Timor is not a failed state and bears no similarities to Somalia with which Mr Onyszkiewicz has tried to associate it .
East Timor gained its independence heroically , despite the international community 's silence , and the East Timorese people have already demonstrated on several occasions that they are committed to democracy .
They once again demonstrated this in an exemplary manner in the presidential and legislative elections that took place last year during which I had the honour of heading up this Parliament 's mission .
The international community now has a responsibility to show its support for East Timor , to coordinate this support which it clearly failed to do in relation to the security system , and to resolve the basic issues of the structure of the East Timorese state .
In terms of the signals given by the East Timorese people , there is no doubt that they want democracy and the rule of law .
author .
( PL ) Mr President , East Timor recently won its independence fighting for its Catholic identity .
The war of independence was bloody and involved heavy loss of life .
The President of East Timor has been awarded the Nobel Peace Prize .
This is an additional reason for the international community to assist in restoring order to the country .
I fully agree with Mrs Gomes that this country was developing appropriately and meeting all the standards required to function correctly .
The war is now destroying those standards and the internal order .
I believe it is worth returning to the proposals made some time ago by Mr Kaczyński , the President of Poland , and reiterated lately by President Sarkozy . They involve establishing a European military force capable of intervening when necessary .
Unless we have the capacity to intervene , we shall go on forever meeting here for debates on Thursdays and not achieving anything .
author . - ( PT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , there is a poem by Ruy Cinatti which I have committed to memory and which reads : ' Perhaps we will be defeated or embattled , but only united ' .
Unfortunately , on 11 February , crisis returned to East Timor , once again at the hands of the same people who were responsible for the crisis two years ago .
This prompts us to ask questions about the return of those who would harm the stability of this country and the gravity of an attack which seriously injured , and could even have fatally injured , the President of the Republic , José Ramos-Horta , and which also , fortunately without any personal consequences , affected the Prime Minister , Xanana Gusmão .
The violence and the disruption of the normal functioning of the institutions have once again laid bare the failures of a country with the history and circumstances of East Timor , which courageously fought and is fighting for independence , democracy and progress .
Anyone having supported East Timor from the beginning cannot fail to feel renewed sadness at this incident which we vehemently condemn .
We hope that President Ramos-Horta will fully recover and we call for a thorough investigation into what happened and into the necessary response to this .
Unfortunately , the international forces were slow to act , with the exception of the Portuguese GNR ( National Republican Guard ) .
There are also clear failings in the rule of law in East Timor which is not functioning fully and which has in fact never functioned fully .
East Timor needs to rebuild the very core of its security system in order to ensure law and order .
The international community must assist the East Timorese people in these steps .
This is not a failed state ; it is a state with failings that we must support .
However , the main responsibility obviously lies with the East Timorese people who must try to achieve a cross-party compromise for lasting peace and respect for the rule of law and judicial decisions , without hesitation , without prevarication and without complacency .
They have already managed to reach agreement on what we would call a national consensus with regard to the very core of the state 's operation .
It is this consensus that Ruy Cinatti referred to in his poem which is the most pressing need of East Timor .
As a result , dear friends , we must help the people of East Timor to help themselves and make their country stronger .
author . - ( ES ) Mr President , I think East Timor is an example of where self-determination processes can be carried out , and carried out well .
It would , in fact , be a good idea if some of our friends , Spain included , for instance , took a leaf out of the Portuguese book and assumed their responsibilities in terms of legacies from former colonies , as is the case in Western Sahara .

It is , however , obvious that all these cases are no simple matter , nor do they produce immediate results .
Mention must be made of the difficulties experienced by East Timor where , following peaceful elections a few months ago , there are still many disturbances , including an attempt on the life of President Ramos Horta . Here I wish to add my best wishes to those already sent by the House for a speedy recovery , and also to Prime Minister Xanana Gusmão .
No one , I feel , will dispute the willingness to reach agreement , as demonstrated by President Ramos Horta , among many others , and I am sure that even after this attack President Ramos Horta will lead any work that is required to find a political agreement between the opposing factions to settle differences in a democratic , non-violent manner .
For this , however , the international community must be fully committed , and the UN mandate renewed , as some countries have suggested .
It must be renewed in any case until 2012 and at all times in response to the needs and requests of the Timorese Government and democratic forces .
The UN presence on the ground also ought to be in line with the needs of the country and should be reviewed not only in terms of reconstruction and dealing with basic necessities , but also in terms of the ability to act in a preventive fashion and react to disturbances .
Lastly , the EU must set up a delegation in Dili as soon as possible and Parliament must also make arrangements for a delegation of observers to support the democratic forces in the country and to assess the focus and effectiveness of EU assistance at the present time .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - Mr President , East Timor is certainly not a failed state .
However , the fact that on 11 February 2008 both the democratically elected President and the Prime Minister became victims of armed attempts on their lives is proof of how fragile a young democracy can be .
I should like to make three points .
First , we are really worried about the lack of timely and efficient reaction by UNPOL and other international forces to these attacks .
Second , the EU has a responsibility to assist the democratic institutions of East Timor and to consolidate the rule-of-law system there .
The motion for a resolution rightly emphasises the urgent need to reach a national agreement on core issues of democracy .
Third , the EU , in full cooperation with the UN , has to contribute to the reform of the security sector in East Timor . East Timor , after all , is not as far from us as it may seem , and Ms Gomes is good proof of this .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , I wish to add my voice to the expressions of solidarity with the badly injured President of East Timor , but also to the expressions of solidarity with the people of East Timor who had to struggle for a very long time for independence and their rights .
The European Parliament condemns the attempted murder of President Ramos-Horta in the strongest terms .
The attacks were carried out after the President had attempted to achieve a negotiated solution with the rebels .
As the precise sequence of events is still unclear , we call for a thorough and rigorous investigation into the attempt on his life and an inquiry into the failure of the security system .
We welcome the joint investigation by the United Nations and the East Timorese police which has already been launched .
We call for a ban on all paramilitary groups and armed gangs and for more financial resources to be provided to support the security sector reforms that East Timor needs .
on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( PL ) The EP motion for a resolution on East Timor is entirely appropriate .
It explains the tragic situation of the people of that country and the powerlessness of national authorities , international institutions and the peacekeeping forces .
The internal conflict is still continuing , despite many efforts and substantial international aid . People are losing their lives , livelihoods are being destroyed and cultural heritage damaged .
There is widespread poverty affecting almost 80 % of the population , unemployment , disenchantment and illiteracy . All this is having a negative effect on the people , leading to despair and inciting revolt .
The people of East Timor want to live in peace and harmony . They want to work , learn and develop their country 's economy .
For this to happen , the democratic authorities in the country must be strengthened , and aid from international institutions increased .
The authors of this resolution therefore rightly call for East Timor to be assured political , technical and financial support . They also recall that both the European Union and the United Nations have made public commitments to supporting independence , democracy and rule-of-law governments .
The Union for Europe of the Nations Group will support this resolution .
- ( NL ) Mr President , some of my colleagues have already touched on the fact that it is no exaggeration to state that following the attacks on President Ramos Horta , East Timor is once again entering a critical phase .
I will say it again , because who does not recall the pictures from last year , following the appointment of Gusmão , of hundreds of houses and some government buildings in flames ?
Indeed , an international force is probably necessary in order to deal with the current crisis .
However , it certainly must not create the impression by so doing that the government needs foreign soldiers to protect itself against its own people .
A foreign force can maintain stability by manu militari in the short term , but in the long term the people of East Timor themselves must ensure their own future .
In order to guarantee political stability , democracy and respect for human rights in the long term , in the first place they need an independent and reliable media , they need a reformed police force and they need a sound judicial system .
( PL ) Mr President , East Timor is widely considered to be the most successful example of a transformation process in the history of the United Nations .
East Timor does , however , seem to have forgotten the sacrifices it made during its war of independence to put an end to its brutal occupation by Indonesia lasting 24 years , and the joy with which it celebrated its own independence .
Less than six years after regaining its independence , however , East Timor now stands on the brink of chaos .
The transition to democracy and independence is never easy .
It is not the end of the journey but only the beginning .
One thing is absolutely certain , however , namely that violence never can be and never has been the way to deal with problems . That must be made quite clear .
The way to resolve problems is through dialogue , political pluralism , strengthening democratic institutions such as the parliament , an independent judicial system and governments working under democratically elected leaders .
I call on the Council and the European Commission to ensure that as much as possible of the assistance allocated to East Timor under the 10th European Development Fund is devoted to strengthening democracy .
( PL ) Thank you , Mr President .
Eighteen months have now passed since the last European Parliament resolution on East Timor .
Officially , this country became independent in 2002 . Four years later a civil war broke out , triggered by a group of demobilised soldiers .
After the attack on President Ramos Horta on 11 February of this year , East Timor experienced yet another political crisis .
A state of emergency was declared and a request made for the then 1 600-strong peacekeeping force to be reinforced .
The political crisis in East Timor is accompanied by an economic one .
Unemployment is in the order of 80 % , and 40 % of the unemployed are living below the poverty threshold .
The country cannot be stabilised unless all the political forces reach a consensus on the fundamental functions of the state .
We must condemn the brutal attack on the President and the Prime Minister and call upon the government of East Timor to put an end to violence , including the activities of gangs .
The international community , notably the UN and the Security Council , must support the consolidation of democracy . It should also be remembered that East Timor urgently needs economic aid to combat poverty and develop administration and infrastructure .
( PT ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I want to express my support for the joint motion for a resolution condemning the attacks .
I also want to congratulate the institutions of East Timor for their calm response to the tragedy and I must underline , like Mrs Gomes and Mr Ribeiro e Castro , that East Timor is not a failed state .
It is a state that requires international assistance , a delegation from the European Commission , the extension of the UN mission and support from all of us for any initiatives that might help to promote unity among the East Timorese people , with respect for the law and condemning all violence .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , the Commission has condemned the attacks against President Ramos-Horta and Prime Minister Xanana Gusmao in the strongest terms .
The young democracy of East Timor is still extremely vulnerable in its political , judicial and security institutions .
The country is confronted with poverty and high unemployment , especially among the young people who have so far little expectations for a prosperous future and are amenable to violent groups .
In its meetings with the leaders of the country , the Commission has supported a peaceful settlement of the conflict , including the eventual disbanding and disarmament of any paramilitary group .
Following the 2006 violence , the European Commission has reacted quickly : firstly , with humanitarian assistance to the internally displaced persons ; secondly , by supporting dialogue among the leaders ; and thirdly , in implementing a cash-for-work programme for unemployed youth .
The European Commission also decided to open a fully-fledged delegation in Dili , and the new head of delegation is expected to start work in March 2008 .
The delegation will become fully operational towards the second half of 2008 .
This will create the opportunity for a formal political dialogue with the government and a faster assessment of support to the country .
The strategy of the European Commission for East Timor under the 10th European Development Fund has recently been approved .
It aims to support the still weak judicial sector , the Parliament and other institutions , thereby assisting in building up a democratic culture .
Support to rural development will help to alleviate poverty and to improve infrastructure .
Health-related activities will contribute to tackling poverty-related diseases and reducing alarmingly high mother and child mortality rates .
Addressing the root causes of the present conflict and providing support for their solution will be as important as the longer term programmes .
The East Timorese Government has submitted a comprehensive Governance Action Plan , which will be the subject of political dialogue between the delegation and the Government , supported by the Commission .
In a mission during the next weeks , the Commission will assess the situation and the possibility of assisting with further measures addressing some of the root causes of the conflict .
This may include requests of the Government to support some labour-intensive programmes to combat unemployment .
In a joint Commission-Council paper of December 2007 , both the Commission and the EU Member States supported the central role of the United Nations in coordinating the assistance to the security sector .
In summary , the envisaged support under the Commission programme , more than EUR 80 million , is comprehensive and will help to address many of the present problems of the country .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place at the end of the debates .
2 .
Belarus
The next item on the agenda is the debate on six motions for a resolution concerning Belarus .
author , ( PL ) Mr President , most of the political prisoners held in Belarus were recently released , in fact nearly all of them were , with only one exception .
This does not mean we can be confident that things are moving in the right direction in Belarus . On that very same day , the homes of a whole range of individuals connected with the opposition in Belarus were raided .
In addition a secondary school teacher was sacked . By way of explanation he was told that since he was a member of the opposition Civil Party he did not represent an ideology in line with that of the State .
A very strange situation exists in Belarus . In that country , there is a concept of state ideology , and therefore it is hardly surprising that when candidates apply to study journalism , law , and international relations , they have to present recommendations from the authorities .
That is how the selection process works .
This is totally unacceptable , although we do welcome the step taken and are cautiously pleased about it .
As for Belarus itself , the question that immediately springs to mind is what the underlying reason for such action can be .
It would appear that through this action and by consenting to the opening of a European Commission delegation in Minsk , President Lukashenko wishes to demonstrate that he does not feel irrevocably bound to adopt a pro-Russian policy to the exclusion of all others .
Indeed , it is becoming increasingly difficult to conduct such a policy in Belarus .
The country does not wish to become totally absorbed by Russia .
In this instance , even Mr Lukashenko has adopted such a stance , but events speak for themselves .
Russia is quite simply buying up Belarus .
Gazprom has just concluded yet another transaction , as a result of which it now owns one quarter of the shares in the companies controlling the oil and gas transit routes through Belarus .
Gazprom 's share will soon increase to 50 % .
It also seems that Russia will succeed in persuading Belarus to adopt the rouble as its national currency .
As a result of all this , the situation is becoming increasingly threatening . Support for independent action in Belarus and for civil society is all the more necessary .
Support is already being made available , but it must be scaled up . In particular , support must be provided for the institutions that have just been set up in Belarus .
I could focus on television broadcasts to the country , which are an important resource for ensuring that the local people know what is actually going on .
In my view , we should keep Belarus in the forefront of our minds , because this is an issue for Europe as a whole .
We cannot tolerate a situation in which there is a country like Belarus , run by a dictator , in the very centre of Europe .
author . - ( CS ) Ladies and gentlemen , in spite of the strongly critical tone of the contributions I am happy to say that we have at least two positive aspects here .
The first one is the opening of the European Commission delegation in Minsk , which as far as I know , has also been approved by the President of Belarus .
I believe that opening an EU delegation provides the bases for further development and activating of relations with the European Union in such mutually advantageous areas as energy , transport , transit and even protection of the environment .
The other positive factor I consider important is the meeting of experts in Brussels last June , which concentrated mainly on the issues of energy supply and also the planned expert talks on transport corridors and the environment .
I consider this development to be extremely important .
We must not forget that Belarus itself is still struggling with the extremely serious consequences of the Chernobyl disaster .
Present trends in mutual relations reveal that a certain view of Belarus has taken hold among the political circles of the European Union and that view is very critical and one-sided .
We need not just criticism but also cooperation .
The time has come for a positive step on the part of Belarus as well , and I think that the official Belarusian regime should offer at least a moratorium on the death penalty , which could enable us to open new negotiations regarding the status of Belarus ' membership of the Council of Europe .
On the part of the EU , I would welcome for example a relaxation of the visa system or support for young specialists from Belarus on work experience by providing them with opportunities to get to know the workings of the European institutions at first hand .
author . - Mr President , this afternoon I would firstly like to welcome the positive sign of relations between the EU and Belarus .
The recent developments on the agreements to establish the European Commission 's delegation in Minsk are a positive step toward renewing dialogue with the European Union and Belarus .
We would like to encourage the Commission to use the full potential of the opening of a delegation .
The time has come for the international community as a whole to extend more support to civil society in Belarus , in particular to increase financial aid to the independent media , to non-governmental organisations and to Belarusian students studying abroad .
The Commission 's decision to give financial support to the European Humanities University in Vilnius is very wise .
The Commission and the Council should consider offering financial support to the project , which is already in existence , to create the independent Belarusian television channel Belsat .
Secondly , the European Parliament calls on the Commission and the Council to take further steps towards the facilitation and liberalisation of visa procedures for Belarusian citizens .
We call on Member States in the Schengen area to use all available tools , mainly national visa costs , in order to facilitate the movement of Belarusian citizens within each Member State 's territory .
Thirdly , we call on President Lukashenko 's regime above all to move towards liberalisation and democratisation , to release all prisoners of conscience in the country , to introduce the rule of law and freedom of media associations and to abolish the death penalty .
In conclusion , I would like to express this afternoon our solidarity with the United Democratic Opposition of Belarus , the leader of the democratic movement , Alexander Milinkevich , and all Belarusian citizens in their struggle towards an open society .
author ( PL ) Thank you , Mr President .
The actions taken by Mr Lukashenko 's dictatorship against his own people in Belarus are widely known .
Since the beginning of this year alone , three peaceful demonstrations have been brutally suppressed .
The authorities are systematically persecuting opposition activists . They have brought in restrictions on travel abroad by members of the clergy and religious instruction teachers .
Some rather curious provisions have also been introduced . For example , anyone wishing to study law or journalism must be approved by the ruling authorities .
Against this background , imposing stricter sanctions against Belarus unfortunately seems to be the only possible response to recent events . We must not forget , however , that it is our moral right and duty to create and support civil society in Belarus .
One of the immediate measures to assist the opposition is to overcome the news blackout .
A good example of this is the initiative taken by the Polish national television service , which began to broadcast to Belarus on 10 December 2007 through the first independent channel , called Belsat .
Unfortunately , as Mrs Romaszewska , the producer responsible for this project , told me today , no financial support from the European Union has yet been received .
There is not even a budget line from which human rights and democracy in Belarus could be supported .
Ladies and gentlemen , I would remind you that the high cost of Schengen visas is another mayor problem for the people of Belarus .
If access to the European Union for members of Mr Lukashenko 's regime is restricted , we must make access to the Union easier for people who are not connected with that regime .
author . - Mr President , in January of this year , 10 young activists of the Belarusian Popular Front Youth and Malady Front ( ' Young Front ' ) were arrested after they met a delegation of the Democrat Youth Community of Europe ( DEMYC ) in Minsk , and then faced expulsion from their universities .
This is the last real dictatorship in Europe .
Belarus still has the death penalty , political prisoners , arbitrary arrests , media censorship , violence and restrictions on access to the internet .
All Europeans should not take their liberty for granted , and young Europeans should follow the DEMYC example in showing solidarity with their neighbours by standing up for democracy and human rights .
Belarus cannot be a partner of the EU while this intolerable intimidation and targeted arrests continue .
Reading the official internet biography of President Lukashenko , I became aware that he considers himself to be ' notable for his in-depth understanding of events , hard work , sense of duty , realism , fairness and fidelity to principles ' .
Why , then , can Mr Lukashenko not realise a very simple and plain fact : Soviet-style tyrants belong in the past ?
As to the students , repressed and deprived of their fundamental right to education , I urge our Parliament to join me in paraphrasing the song : Hey , Lukashenko , leave the kids alone !
author . - ( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , Belarus is and remains the problem child in our Neighbourhood Policy .
Dictator Lukashenko continues to ensure that his country systematically distances and isolates itself from its neighbours .
He tramples human rights under foot and maintains the death penalty .
This is not only a concern for us ; it is also encountering massive opposition among Belarus 's own population .
More and more young people are leaving Belarus .
It is a dramatic situation for that country .
The European Union 's task is therefore to help Belarus to return to the path towards democracy .
From my perspective , this will not happen with Dictator Lukashenko and his presidential apparatus , but only with the opposition , civil society and the young people who could form the country 's future elite .
So I appeal to the Member States to change their visa policy for these people and give them the chance to engage in exchanges with young people in the European Union , a chance of democratic education and a chance actually to experience democracy for themselves by visiting the European Union .
Visa policy must not become an insurmountable obstacle which obstructs the path to democracy .
That is extremely important .
In negotiations with Lukashenko , however , there should be no concessions on human rights .
There is consensus on this point in Parliament , across all the parliamentary groups : we want the release of all political prisoners , a moratorium on the death penalty , media freedom and respect for all the basic principles of democracy .
That is the fundamental prerequisite for negotiations .
No concessions .
The crucial factor here is what happens at the next elections .
I hope very much for the Belarusian people that they take control of their own destiny .

on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( PL ) Mr President , Mr Alexander Kazulin , the former Belarusian presidential candidate , has served two of the five and a half year prison term imposed on him for vandalism .
Mr Kazulin 's wife Irina is fighting tirelessly to obtain her husband 's freedom , despite being gravely ill .
President Lukashenko suggested that Mr Kazulin could be freed to enable him to accompany his wife to Germany where she could receive medical treatment .
The President reacted with surprise when his offer was turned down .
For Mrs Kazulin , acceptance would have meant a cowardly flight from her homeland .
In my view , if President Lukashenko really wants to improve his image , he should free Mr Kazulin immediately and unconditionally .
Let us hope that Mr and Mrs Kazulin will soon be able to enjoy good health and freedom in their homeland .
on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( PL ) Mr President , Belarus is a neighbour of the European Union .
It shares with us a difficult history of Communist domination , but still does not enjoy democratic rule and respect for human rights .
The regime of President Lukashenko brutally represses any attempt to create civil society . I would remind the House that Mr Lukashenko infringed democratic procedures in order to gain a further term of office .
Journalists and leaders of independent youth organisations and independent trade unions are being intimidated . Members of the political opposition have been arrested .
I could mention the Kazulin case that Mrs Gacek referred to just now , and the repression of national minorities , including the Polish national minority . Latterly the regime has become concerned about the financial independence of small entrepreneurs and taken repressive measures against them .
Such is the sad state of affairs in Belarus .
It is the European Union 's moral duty to provide financial support and information for all those striving to defend human rights and democratic freedoms in Belarus by way of the independent media , for instance through television broadcasts to Belarus .
Establishing a European Union delegation in Minsk would be a good way to monitor the situation .
Ten years after the Chernobyl disaster I took part legally in a demonstration in Minsk .
I saw OMON special purpose police squads that had been brought from Moscow to deal with people evacuated from the danger area .
I saw pools of blood on the streets of Minsk .
This must not be allowed to happen again .
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - Mr President , I have a foster nephew from Belarus , now an adult and considered a wonderful addition to our extended family .
But I remember his condition the summer he first came to stay with my sister , and it is this experience that allows me , personally , to understand the difficulties , especially of someone disabled , raised in an institution in such an unstable environment .
Belarus needs relief - relief not only from economic and political instability but relief for the people .
The people of Belarus are particularly isolated , controlled under a regime that continues to threaten the democratic values and freedoms to which people are entitled .
Before Christmas , I met two representatives from Belarus .
They informed me of the ongoing problem of defending religious freedom .
Religious activity is forbidden without registration with the Government , and a person can be charged a fine or face imprisonment for unregistered religious activity , though government registration is made extremely difficult to get .
( PL ) Mr President , I would like to support the statements made by previous speakers .
In addition , however , I should like to mention another very important issue , namely that we cannot deal with policy on Belarus in isolation from the European Union 's eastern policy as a whole .
We had a tendency to forgive the Russian administration a great many undemocratic actions .
That should be borne in mind .
I know that events in Belarus do not bear comparison with what is currently taking place in Russia , but they most certainly did and do bear comparison with what took place in Chechnya .
We cannot adopt one course of action for Belarus and a different one for Russia .
Conducting our eastern policy from the point of view of enlargement of the European Union is another very important issue .
The fate of Ukraine currently hangs in the balance , and if it swings towards democracy it will enrich the whole of Europe .
If we are prepared to open the door to the people of Ukraine , it will send a signal to the people of Belarus and show them that there is another option , one involving closer links and relationships with the European Union .
In the future it may also involve membership of the Union , although that may not come about for many years .
Ladies and gentlemen , I have encountered a difficulty .
We estimated two minutes for the ' catch-the-eye ' procedure : that is , two speakers .
I already have eight or nine requests , and I can see more hands being raised , taking us up to ten or more .
Thus , either I give the floor to the first two , which is simple enough for me , or I can ask you to make a thirty-second statement and we try to get round everybody .
( The latter solution was chosen )
( PL ) Mr President , it has become clear from this debate that Parliament recognises the problem of Belarus and attaches great importance to it .
I would like to thank all those who have referred to the situation regarding human rights in Belarus .
I would also like to draw the attention of the House to the fact that parliamentary elections are due to be held in Belarus in the autumn of this year .
We must do all in our power both as Members of this House and also as representatives of the large European political families , to support the Belarusian opposition in this just though unfair struggle for a democratic Belarus .
( SK ) Some time has passed since Mr Bernd Posselt and I lit a candle in this House , in spite of the ban on safety grounds , to show our solidarity with the Belarusian people , in the presence of Commissioner Ferrero-Waldner .
What is Belarus like today ?
The last European dictator Alexander Lukashenko is popular in Belarus in spite of the strictly regulated economy and the intimidation of political opponents .
The government intensifies repression and imprisons opposition activists .
The government controls the Belarusian media which is why people in the country often do not know that Lukashenko 's regime is unacceptable to the European Union .
The European Parliament cannot satisfy itself only with awarding the Sakharov Prize for Freedom of Thought to Alexander Milinkevich .
This prize commits the European Parliament to detailed monitoring of the situation in Belarus .
( PL ) Mr President , I would like to refer to a particular case .
It concerns Frank Wieczorek , a young opposition activist who was recently expelled from university .
The official reason for his expulsion was that he had failed to attend classes . The reason he had been absent , however , was that he had been arrested .
Expulsion from university means that a person 's education comes to an abrupt end . It also means that there is a strong chance of being conscripted into the army .
I imagine that only people who have had personal experience of living under a dictatorship will understand what service in the regime 's army can be like for a member of the opposition .
It could prove very dangerous for this young man .
I believe we should do all we can to assist in resolving the situation in Belarus .
( CS ) ( The beginning of the speech was inaudible ) ... as a medical doctor I personally visited the epicentre of the area affected by radiation .
Doctors and scientists are being intimidated and even imprisoned for reporting the truth about the state of health of the local population .
The people had their radiometers confiscated and they are eating radioactive food .
I only have 30 seconds so just to summarise : Lukashenko is a murderer and it has to be said out loud .
By whom , if not by the European Union ?
Thank you , the message has been received .
( PL ) Mr President , one of the features of dictatorships is that they take no notice of anyone .
We can say what we like , and they will act as they like .
The only way to counter a dictatorship is through democracy .
I would say to the Commissioner that , if I were in her place , I would make every effort to assist in training the thinking democratic elite .
If we do not succeed in doing so in Belarus , we might yet do so in other countries .
Someone needs to lead the way , and I would be inclined to rely on those elites .
( PL ) Mr President , it is shameful for Belarus , a country that lies at the geographic heart of Europe , to be the subject of debate at the Council of Europe today because of its violation of human rights .
It is shameful for Belarus that it is the only European country excluded from the Council of Europe , because of its failure to respect any fundamental human rights .
I therefore believe that Mr Bielan was quite right when he said that it is important to strengthen civil society in Belarus by supporting the media broadcasts from Poland aimed at that society .
Mr President , I would like to draw attention to the continuing repression against young Belarusian democrats .
In mid-January , several of them were imprisoned for 15 days and then excluded from university .
There are some specific names : Zmitser Zhaleznichenka , Anton Kalinouski and Franak Viachorka .
I invite EU universities to offer these brave young people alternative options to continue their studies , to facilitate the provision of visas and to add to the EU blacklist the names of those university officials who have consented to use them as tools in the Lukashenko oppressions .
Mr President , I understand that the Free University of Minsk is today situated in Vilnius , Lithuania .
I wonder if Commissioner Figeľ might consider writing a letter to the education and culture ministers of the 26 other EU Member States to suggest there should be 27 Free Universities of Minsk .
When it comes to the United Kingdom , there are of course great universities like Oxford and Cambridge , but I would recommend Bristol .
( DE ) Mr President , twenty years ago , I spoke at the underground universities in Czechoslovakia and Poland .
It is very gratifying for me to hear , today , how much our colleagues from the Baltic countries , Slovakia , the Czech Republic and Poland support the opposition in Belarus .
I would like to express my sincere thanks to them .
You are doing something important for the EU - more than the people who engage in talks which merely bolster and support a corrupt regime which needs to be abolished .
I agree with Mr Buzek : Russia has a responsibility here .
This is a post-colonial and pre-colonial situation and we should no longer accept it .
That concludes our new ' speedy catch-the-eye ' procedure .
I see you have proved it is possible to say many things in a short space of time , and I thank you accordingly .
Now we move on to the Commission 's reaction .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , recently , the situation in Belarus has been evolving rapidly .
Since mid-January , five of the six political prisoners previously identified as such have been released .
One of these political prisoners , though , former presidential candidate Aleksandr Kozulin , is still in jail and in a poor state of health .
The Commission , for its part , through my colleague Commissioner Ferrero-Waldner , has expressed its satisfaction with the release of the prisoners , which has been a long-standing request from all EU institutions , including the European Parliament .
But we have equally been clear that we want to see all political prisoners freed , and that we want to see an end to the systematic harassment of Belarusian civil society , before we can give a new dimension to our relationship with Belarus .
In other words , our message to Belarus remains the same : there cannot be a full partnership with Belarus until Belarus takes convincing steps towards democratisation , and respect for human rights and the rule of law .
This is the gist of the European message to Belarus that the Commission released over a year ago and which includes the ' 12 points for democratisation ' that your resolution mentions .
Again , the release of all political prisoners would be an important step in this regard .
In addition , we will be closely watching the parliamentary elections set for September 2008 .
The organisation of free and fair elections would be seen as a decisive step on the part of the Belarusian authorities .
We hope that the OSCE will be able to send a full-scale observation mission to this election and that the European Parliament will also be able to send representatives .
Another important point that your resolution demands is that Belarus should apply a moratorium on the death penalty .
The European Union has carried this message to the Belarusian authorities .
Coming back now to the recent developments in Belarus , another issue close to our hearts has been progressing fast over the last months : the opening of the European Commission 's delegation in Minsk , which we officially requested more than two years ago , is now imminent .
We hope to be able to sign the establishment agreement soon , so that our delegation can be opened without delay .
This delegation will allow us to reinforce our links with Belarusian civil society and also to develop contacts with the middle rank of the administration that could be open to democratic change .
On this matter , as your resolution underlines , we have had a number of meetings at technical level with Belarusian experts on matters of mutual interest , such as energy , transport and environment .
Let me , however , reiterate that the scope of these meetings remains limited as long as the current political conditions prevail in Belarus .
As regards to the Commission actions to support civil society in Belarus , the Commission remains committed more than ever to supporting Belarusian civil society , and our 2008 assistance plan is aimed in particular at cementing Belarusian civil society and independent media .
In addition , the Commission has also made clear that its support to the European Humanity University in exile in Vilnius will continue as long as necessary .
I will also pass the message about the Free University on to Commissioner Figeľ .
I think that this is very interesting and a bright idea .
A few other comments to Mr Pinior and Ms Schroedter .
The opening of the negotiations on visa facilitation and on readmission is amongst the elements that would be considered in the event of a real breakthrough in our relationship .
According to EU policy , visa facilitation can only be considered in the context of the European Commission readmission policy as part of a real partnership in external relations .
This was explained to Belarus in the verbal notes sent by the Commission on 8 May .
The European Union 's willingness to enter into such negotiations with neighbouring countries with an action plan in force has also been reaffirmed , by the Commission communication on this matter of December 2006 .
In the case of Belarus these conditions are not met .
On the point raised by Mr Bielan , Commission contracts are awarded following strict tendering procedures in order to ensure a transparent and fair competition .
This means that the Commission does not support radio and TV stations as such , but specific programmes instead .
The ENPI Regional Information and Communication Programme includes support to media activities of EUR 7 million over three years for seven countries .
The tendering procedure is ongoing , and media from both European Union and partner countries are eligible to submit tenders for contracts .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place at the end of the debates .
Written Statements ( Rule 142 )
in writing . - ( PL ) As joint author of the European Parliament 's resolution on Belarus , I would like to draw attention to the state of democracy , respect for human rights and in general to the situation of the people of Belarus .
Belarus is not only a near neighbour of the Union , involved in the European Neighbourhood Policy , but it is also an immediate neighbour of my country , Poland .
We share a common border .
This is probably the best explanation of why the issue of fulfilling the real hopes and expectations of ordinary people in that country is so important to me in my work here in the European Parliament .
After all , one cannot remain indifferent to what one can see happening just across the border : restrictions and administrative pressure on NGOs , intimidation , persecution and imprisonment of democratic opposition activists , including leaders of the youth movements known as the Belarusian Popular Front and Young Front .
Genuine dialogue between the Belarusian authorities and the European Union should therefore be set up quickly .
It is not only the Union 's right but also its duty to require the Belarusian Government to free all political prisoners , guarantee media freedom , the independence of the judiciary , and also respect for democratic values and the fundamental rights of the people of Belarus . Priority must be given to abolition of the death penalty .
For its part , the European Parliament has moved towards making it easier for Belarusian citizens to enter EU territory and spend time there .
The reduction or even total lifting of visa charges is currently under consideration .
That is the only way to prevent Belarus and its citizens from becoming even more isolated .
3 .
North-Kivu ( Democratic Republic of Congo )
The next item is the debate on six motions for a resolution concerning North Kivu ( Democratic Republic of the Congo ) .
author . - ( NL ) Mr President , this Parliament is rightly paying great attention to what is going on in the former Belgian colony of the Democratic Republic of Congo and in particular to the continued fighting , forcible displacement , rape and mass assassination in the east of that vast country .
These horrors have been part of the conflict in the neighbouring countries of Rwanda , Burundi and Uganda .
Internationally recognised state borders have little meaning for groups of people who must seek new territories as a result of being expelled or the continuing lack of means of existence .
Everything is in motion in this region , and the thing is that the slightest movement one way or the other potentially stirs up either violence or horror .
Warlords who acquire respect , power and wealth by their innate love of conflict increase the already existing problems and make them even more difficult to solve .
Very recently , on 17 January , we discussed the situation in the Democratic Republic of Congo here in this House and adopted a resolution that stated our wish to see all horrors cease .
I fear that we could adopt many more resolutions on this matter without any solutions coming of it .
The expectation that last year 's elections in the Democratic Republic of Congo could solve the problems has ended in disappointment .
The incumbent president , Kabila , has won , but he represents different points of view from the movement from which he originated , and the outcomes of both the presidential and parliamentary elections were controversial for the opposition .
The question is , how is such a large country with poor lines of communication and a wide range of peoples to function in a way that is supported by its whole population and all its divergent political forces .
It does not seem that this is likely to succeed in an area like the Democratic Republic of Congo , where life-threatening diseases reign , the environment and the land are over-exploited , and people remain completely without rights .
The question is whether the armistice of 23 January for North and South Kivu , which takes for granted the disarmament of the warring factions and the return of refugees to their places of residence , is feasible , and whether the United Nations can contribute on the ground to this end .
It will not succeed by electing parties in the midst of conflict but possibly by persuading parties , the warring party for example , to abandon sexual violence and allow doctors in .
author . - ( FR ) Mr President , I do not intend to discuss the situation in the Democratic Republic of Congo in its entirety , but rather the north-east of the country , and the Kivu region , where a vile war has been raging for years , and even more intensely in recent months .
You might say that all wars are vile , but I feel this one is much more so .
This war has produced , and continues to produce , hundreds of thousands of victims , deaths and displaced persons , but hundreds and thousands of women , little girls and grandmothers have also suffered what is now called sexual violence .
It is more than that , however ; it is the use of rape as a genuine weapon of war , and this goes on amid a certain amount of indifference in public opinion and the international community , and more specifically European public opinion .
This vile war has been raging for two years between rival factions : the rebel troops led by Laurent Nkunda , a dissident Congolese general , the former perpetrators of genocide in Rwanda who were imported after the end of the campaign in 1994 , but also , unfortunately , certain elements of the recently dismantled Congolese army .
That is enough .
Fortunately a peace conference was held there recently , attended by all the factions involved , and it led to a cease-fire .
Unfortunately , Mr President , the cease-fire is extremely fragile and tension is again mounting .
We therefore propose two essential priorities : the first concern is protection for civilians , to provide means for the MONUC mission on the ground to defend them .
In accordance with Chapter VII of the UN Charter it can use weapons to carry out the mission , for these massacres simply must stop .
The second priority is to support the peace efforts discussed there , because the solution to the problem in the Great Lakes region would be a political solution involving all parties , including Rwanda , which must honour its commitments to repatriate its nationals operating in Kivu .
author , ( PL ) Mr President , since the end of the Second World War , no other conflict has been as cruel and barbaric as that in the Congo .
Armed conflict in North Kivu province has continued with variable intensity for the last 10 years . It has resulted in more than five million victims .
Some 1 500 people are dying every day as a result of the fighting .
Mass killings , the rape of young girls and mothers , and forced conscription of civilians and children into the armed forces are the order of the day .
Many other serious violations of human rights have also taken place in recent months in the east of the Democratic Republic of Congo . They have been committed by the rebel groups loyal to Laurent Nkunda , by the fighters of the democratic forces attempting to liberate Rwanda , and by the Congolese army itself .
The eastern part of Congo is in need of immediate medical aid and food supplies , as recent events have forced most humanitarian organisations to suspend their activities .
I therefore call on the Council and the European Commission to make crisis funding available in view of the unusually grave humanitarian situation in this region .
author . - ( DE ) Mr President , anyone who has ever seen the Great Lakes region of East Africa from the air might think that it was paradise .
In reality , it is often more like hell on earth .
It is a region of fantastic natural beauty and a wealth of natural resources , on the one hand , and appalling suffering , on the other : natural disasters , war , expulsion , famine , disease , massacres , mass rape and ethnic conflicts - worse than almost anywhere else .
There are 800 000 internally displaced persons in North Kivu alone .
It is important to recognise that this problem of expulsion exists on both sides of the border .
In Africa , there is a phenomenon which does not exist in this form anywhere else , namely that people are not just displaced from one specific side of the border to the other .
Instead , each country expels people from its side of the border into the other country , so there are refugees and displaced persons on both sides .
As a result , the countries are completely unstable .
That is why we need to provide humanitarian aid , and we need a massive presence here in order to help the people .
In essence , however , that is merely tinkering with the symptoms .
Unless we can establish reasonably viable state and rule-of-law structures , the disaster will never end , no matter how much assistance we provide .
That is why it is extremely important for us to play a major role , also politically .
The cease-fire of 23 January is extremely fragile and only really exists on paper .
That is why we need to force all the parties , as a matter of urgency , to get round the table and talk to each other , but it also means that we have to play our part .
Regrettably , Europeans often profit from these disasters .
That is why the call for us to take certificates of origin more seriously , e.g. for natural resources , is justified , for often it is the Europeans who brutally exploit the people 's suffering for their own economic interests .
We have a responsibility here too , and we should not be content with making pretty speeches and applying sticking plaster solutions .
author . - ( ES ) Mr President , we have a new episode today in this tragic serial set in the Democratic Republic of Congo .
In this case the scene is North Kivu , but the plot and the victims are the same , as covered by an emergency resolution in the January part-session .
Almost five and a half million people have died in the war since 1998 , and forty-five thousand more die every month , directly or indirectly due to the war .
The upshot of this is that one thousand five hundred people die every day : in other words , since we started this part-session on Monday , six thousand people have died already in the Democratic Republic of Congo .
The last few months , moreover , particularly in the east of the country , have seen an increase in massacres , rape of little girls and women , and forced recruitment of girls and boys .
Both Laurent Nkunda 's rebel troops and the soldiers fighting in the Democratic Forces for the Liberation of Rwanda are responsible for all this .
We also ought to remember that the MONUC mandate is based on Chapter VII of the United Nations Charter , giving it the authority to use all necessary means to dissuade any attempt to use force that jeopardises the life or integrity of civilians or constitutes a threat to the political process .
To date , however , the MONUC presence has proved totally insufficient to bring an end to these barbaric acts .
We must therefore again appeal to the Security Council to react and provide all available means to curtail these massacres .
Moreover , although we must welcome the Goma Conference paving the way towards political negotiation , its agreements , especially agreements concerning demobilisation , remain ambiguous , and their application is unclear .

Lastly , this is another chance , as Mr Posselt has already said , to again call for control mechanisms to be activated and implemented such as the Kimberley Process for diamonds producing certificates of origin for natural resources imported by the EU .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( PL ) Mr President , Joseph Conrad referred to Congo as the heart of darkness .
From the beginning of its existence , that is to say from 1960 onwards , Congo has been the scene of horrific pogroms , killings and civil wars . As a result , Congo has never been able to stand on its own two feet despite being endowed with abundant natural resources .
The conflict in the area is the most cruel and barbarous to have occurred since the end of the Second World War . Sadly , it is still ongoing , claiming the lives of almost 50 000 human beings every month .
Half of the victims are children under the age of five .
The passage of the armies is accompanied by all kinds of crimes against the civilian population : rapes , looting and murder .
That is why we welcome the outcome of the Goma peace conference and have such high hopes of it .
It could mean the end of armed conflict in the Kivu region , but whether it does will depend partly on us too .
It may , however , prove impossible to resolve this conflict without support from the international community and neighbouring countries .
It is important for international support not to be limited to political declarations , but to focus first and foremost on providing appropriate financial , organisational and technical assistance .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , according to the aid agencies , the situation in North Kivu is in some respects even worse than in Darfur .
North Kivu is not in the spotlight , however , and no one in the international community is taking notice of what is happening there .
Since the official peace agreement in 2002 , Kabila 's government has attempted to integrate the regional militia into a national army , so far without much success .
The civilian population is still vulnerable to the impacts of the armed conflicts .
Doctors Without Borders / Médecins Sans Frontières ( MSF ) highlights the difficulties facing relief workers in gaining access to the civilian population due to the continued fighting and says that malnutrition is another major threat to the population in North Kivu .
We therefore urge the Council and the Commission to provide aid immediately and to launch comprehensive medical assistance programmes for the civilian population in the eastern part of the Democratic Republic of Congo without delay .
We also urge the Council and the Commission to ensure that the recent strengthening of the UN mission leads to substantial improvements in the security of the population .
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - ( PL ) Mr President , despite the agreement reached in Goma on improving security and development in Congo , human rights are still being violated in Kivu province .
Three hundred thousand individuals have been forced to leave their homes due to rising violence since the end of 2006 alone . The violence affects women and children in particular .
They become the victims of rape or are forced to join armed groups . To date , six million individuals have been displaced , and five million have died as a result of conflict and war fuelled by economic interest groups and supported by governments eager to benefit from the riches available there .

That is why what is needed is more than debates and resolutions in the European Parliament and humanitarian assistance to the inhabitants of Congo .
The predatory exploitation of natural resources has to be stopped , together with the speculative activities of international businesses that are enriching themselves at the expense of the life and health of the region 's inhabitants .
. - ( NL ) Mr President , we know that our words here will probably not get us much further forward .
We can only hope that all parties will permanently adhere to the agreement made at the Goma Conference and that the madness which has already gripped North Kivu for too long can come to an end .
According to the UN , since the start of the conflict 800 000 people have fled their homes .
Thousands and thousands of women and young girls have become the victims of vicious rapes , and children are forced to take part in the fighting .
Furthermore , we must not forget that the members of the Nkunda militia are not the only ones responsible for massive cruelties .
No , all parties , including the government soldiers , have systematically committed crimes against humanity .
There are not many ' good guys ' in North Kivu .
Ultimately , therefore , the same number of culprits must be tried .
They must answer for their atrocities .
It is not only the responsibility of the International Court of Human Rights to pass judgment , it is primarily the responsibility of the Congolese leaders and of Joseph Kabila .
( PL ) Mr President , as Mr Posselt has stated , large areas of the Congo are hell on earth .
This has been exacerbated by certain entities not all of which are Congolese .
I wish to draw attention to a situation I have seen for myself , namely the high numbers of children orphaned in the area as a result of the conflict .
In my view the funding should go to missionaries to enable them to care for those children , especially the boys , so that they are not conscripted into the armies .
Once the boys are conscripted they become incapable of anything except shooting and raping .
Allow me to reiterate , Commissioner , that funds are needed to teach and care for those unfortunate individuals .
( CS ) Commissioner , I appeal to the Commission here in Strasbourg to release funds reserved for crisis situations now and to start immediately reconstruction projects , notably with a wide-ranging programme of general medical support for civilians in North-Kivu .
The recent earthquake just worsened what already was a humanitarian disaster .
All of us here also ask the Commission and the Council to initiate immediately an Africa-wide coalition to find a political solution to the conflict .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , the Commission remains very concerned about the dire humanitarian situation in the Kivus , and North Kivu in particular , where the number of internally displaced people - currently exceeding 800 000 in North Kivu alone - has as much as doubled in the course of 2007 , thus alarmingly increasing the vulnerability of the population already suffering hardship .
At the same time , we are aware of , and condemn , the severe human rights abuses - including recruitment of child soldiers and widespread sexual violence - taking place in the region .
Yet , in this context , it is important to remember that today 's critical situation in North Kivu , while exacerbated by the fighting taking place in the second half of 2007 , is a result of years of war in the region .
The root causes of the Kivu conflict can be traced all the way to the Rwandan genocide at the beginning of the 1990s , while also bearing in mind that there are several local components - such as insufficient political representation of ethnic minorities , pillaging of natural resources and land tenure issues - that significantly contribute to the instability and insecurity in eastern Democratic Republic of Congo .
That is why the Commission welcomes the recent Goma Peace Conference and the following cease-fire as positive steps towards solving the enduring conflict in eastern Democratic Republic of Congo .
The Conference restored President Kabila 's credibility after the army 's defeat against General Nkunda 's troops at the end of 2007 , and launched an inter-provincial dialogue process - something that the Commission has always advocated .
Moreover , along the lines of the commitments made by the Democratic Republic of Congo and Rwanda in their Nairobi Joint Communiqué in November 2007 , the Goma Conference also re-emphasised the need to tackle the problem of the ex-FAR as a priority .
At the same time , it was made clear that there is a need to address the root causes of the conflict , while restoring the State authority in the east .
That said , it should not be forgotten that nothing was definitively solved at Goma or Nairobi .
Finding a permanent solution to the root causes of the Kivu crisis , and thus a sustainable restoration of peace in the region , will take time .
Indeed , while complementing each other , the Nairobi Joint Communiqué and the Goma Conference represent an encouraging start - but only a start - of a dif