Resumption of the session
I declare resumed the session of the European Parliament adjourned on Thursday , 12 May 2011 .
Approval of the minutes of the previous sitting : see Minutes
Welcome
I would like to welcome the President of Tajikistan , Emomali Rahmon , who is on an official visit to the European Parliament .
I met with the President a short time ago .
We discussed our bilateral relations and the reforms that need to be carried out in Tajikistan .
Announcements by the President
Ladies and gentlemen , on 4 June , we commemorated the 22nd anniversary of two important events .
On this day in 1989 , the authorities of the People 's Republic dealt with the protesters in Tiananmen Square in such a way that the protests ended in bloodshed .
We all remember this .
Also on the same day , 22 years ago , the first partly-free parliamentary elections took place in Central and Eastern Europe , in Poland , where candidates of the democratic opposition won , taking almost all the seats which were open to a free vote .
Of these seats open to a free vote , the representatives of the democratic opposition won every seat bar one in the Senate .
They won all the remaining seats in the Sejm as well as the Senate .
These two anniversaries remind us how much has changed in Europe and how we Europeans were able to push through changes in Central and Eastern Europe with minimal losses , which culminated in the reunification of Eastern and Western Europe .
° ° ° °
Ladies and gentlemen , I will now give you some very important information .
During the part-session which has just been opened , there will be a fire drill , with no prior warning .
A similar drill will take place during the June mini-session in Brussels .
You have been informed of the details via e-mail .
You have all received an e-mail explaining what you should do when the alarm sounds .
We do not know at what time the alarm will sound , but we should familiarise ourselves with the instructions and act on them when the alarm is sounded .
In a few minutes , I will send you all another e-mail reminder and detailed instructions on what you should do when the alarm sounds and what it consists of .
All this information will be found in the e-mail .
° ° ° °
I would also like to inform you that Mrs Koch-Mehrin has informed me of her resignation from the position of Vice-President of the European Parliament with effect from 11 May 2011 .
Pursuant to Rule 18 of the Rules of Procedure , I declare this position vacant .
Verification of credentials : see Minutes
Composition of political groups : see Minutes
Signature of acts adopted under the ordinary legislative procedure : see Minutes
Oral questions and written declarations ( submission ) : see Minutes
Documents received : see Minutes
Lapsed written declarations : see Minutes
Action taken on Parliament 's positions and resolutions : see Minutes
Transfers of appropriations : see Minutes
Texts of agreements forwarded by the Council : see Minutes
Order of business
The final version of the draft agenda as drawn up by the Conference of Presidents at its meeting of 1 June 2011 , pursuant to Rules 137 and 138 of the Rules of Procedure , has been distributed .
The following amendments have been proposed :
[ Monday ] :
The Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe has submitted a motion for a debate on the selection process of a new Managing Director for the IMF and external representation of the euro , directly after Jo Leinen 's report on European environmental economic accounts .
The motion will be presented on behalf of the ALDE Group by Sylvie Goulard .
You have the floor .
Mr President , as a matter of courtesy , I would ask that Commissioner Rehn be allowed to sit in on the debate on European environmental economic accounts and then on the debate on the IMF .
They are not political debates .
I therefore hope that all the other groups will agree to this as a favour to our Commissioner , who , I might add , is working very hard at the moment .
Mr President , I consider that the request can be granted because I do not see any reason to refuse it .
The debate on the selection process of a new Managing Director for the International Monetary Fund and external representation of the euro area will take place directly after Mr Leinen 's report on European environmental economic accounts .
This is a slight change to the agenda .
( The order of business was adopted )
Commemoration of deportations in 1941 in the Baltic States
Ladies and gentlemen , this month sees the 70th anniversary of mass deportations carried out by the Soviet authorities from the Baltic States , which they had occupied since 1940 .
These deportations were chiefly designed to deprive Estonia , Latvia and Lithuania of their social and political elite .
Scientists and representatives of political circles were eliminated , and people who were famous for being free thinkers were eliminated too .
Today , it is our common duty to cherish the memory of the hundreds of thousands of victims of the Soviet terror in the Baltic States , and to condemn in the strongest terms the totalitarian system and the crimes against humanity committed by its leaders .
The suffering of the Lithuanian , Latvian and Estonian nations gave them the determination and strength to fight for independence and to return to a united Europe half a century later .
I also wanted to remind you that 22 June , in two weeks ' time , will be the 70th anniversary of the attack on the Soviet Union by Hitler 's Germany .
This attack marked the severance of their previous alliance and the secret Hitler-Stalin pact of August 1939 , which divided up Europe .
We thus have a series of anniversaries which are important for us to remember , and for Europe to remember , but I believe that the presence of our fellow Members from Lithuania , Latvia and Estonia proves that Europeans are able to conquer adversity and overcome huge tension , which is why we are very pleased to see our fellow Members here with us , particularly today .
on behalf of the PPE Group . - Mr President , thank you for your kind words of solidarity .
Seventy years ago , about 50 000 Lithuanian , Latvian and Estonian nationals were brutally deported from their homes in the Soviet-occupied Baltic States .
If we compare that figure of 50 000 out of the then 5.5 million population of the three Baltic States to that of the UK or France , the 50 000 Baltic deportees would have meant proportionately 432 000 citizens deported from the UK or 363 000 persons deported from France .
Happily , this did not happen in these countries .
Already in May 1941 , as the President has said , the Soviet leadership had decided to cleanse Lithuania , Latvia and Estonia of anti-Soviet elements in political and economic elites .
The deportees were transported in cattle wagons to Soviet Siberia and the far north to face hunger , cold and forced labour .
Men were separated from their families and brought to prison camps where many of them died or were executed .
In many places , almost 50 % of the deportees died .
The 1941 deportations delivered a devastating blow to democratic civil society .
This indiscriminate violence caused deep psychological traumas for the victims , resulting in long-lasting fears , suppressed emotions , self-censorship and passiveness .
This led to the feeling that justice could never prevail .
To quote Sakharov Prize winner , Sergei Kovalev , there is no doubt that in modern terminology , these acts were crimes against humanity .
Therefore , the remembrance , 70 years later , of the Baltic deportations is an opportunity for a deepened understanding that your past is our past and vice versa .
The full knowledge of the 1941 crimes against humanity should become an integral part of our common European history .
Dear colleagues , I would like to thank you all for your attention and solidarity , which the nations of the Baltic countries have been looking forward to for so many years .
( Applause )

Mr President , Mr Kelam , Members from the Baltic States , ladies and gentlemen , today we are , in particular , commemorating the expulsions and mass deportations from the Baltic States .
These expulsions are among the darkest events of European history .
The last century has been described , not without justification , as the century of expulsions .
We are showing respect today for all of the victims of these inhumane acts .
In this regard , we are demanding a full investigation of Soviet history and , in particular , the atrocities of Stalinism .
The Russia of today should not see this as a political attack , but as an offer of support in engaging with its own history , which , just like the history of the other countries in Europe , is characterised by positive as well as negative times .
However , just as we remember the victims from the Baltic States , we also think of the Armenians , who were expelled from Turkey at the start of the last century .
We remember the so-called population exchange between Turkey and Greece .
Deportations in Europe reached a peak , in particular , in the middle of the century as a result of the Nazi regime and the Communist regime of the Soviet Union .
The expulsions following the Second World War also left deep wounds , as did the expulsions during the war in the former Yugoslavia .
However , we must not forget that many cases of colonial rule were also characterised by expulsions .
We must call for a serious debate on the various forms of expulsions and the supposed reasons for them .
This should also include an investigation of guilt and punishment of the guilty , as far as this is still possible in any case , as is now happening in the case of Mladič , for example .
The decisive answer to this , however , is European unification , particularly with the independent Baltic States , and a clear commitment to continuing the European unification process , which is not yet complete .
This historic task is something that we owe not only to ourselves , but also , and in particular , to the victims of the many expulsions that have occurred in Europe .
Many politicians from all of the countries of Europe , from East and West , have worked to bring this about .
One example is the Gdańsk Declaration , signed by President Kwaśniewski of Poland and President Rau of Germany .
Since we want to learn from the past , we need to be vigilant and also watch out for the first signs of expulsions taking place , as in the case of the Roma , for example .
We need to reject any statements like those that maintain that we must send Arab immigrants back across the Mediterranean in their boats , and we must defend ourselves against those who want to put an end to our achievement of a Europe without borders and return once again to narrow-minded nationalism .
Let us express our deepest respect for all of the victims of expulsions and deportations , but let us be united in committing ourselves to continuing European unification as the only real guarantee against a policy that brought so much misery to the people of Europe and beyond during the last century .
We must never forget .
It must never happen again .
These were calls that were made immediately after the Second World War .
They are still just as valid today and the best response to them is a united Europe .
( Applause )
Mr President , the deportations of residents of the Baltic countries in 1941 was one of the most dramatic and tragic events of the 20th century .
This blow to Lithuania , Latvia and Estonia , their political communities , and civilised life in general , isolated these nations and countries for five decades .
It was equally a major blow to European solidarity and European togetherness .
This isolation only ended in 1991 when it finally became possible to talk about the watershed in the history of the Baltic nations .
However , it was 2004 - the year of the Baltic countries ' accession to the European Union - that really marked the end of the division of Europe .
The deliberate deportation of innocent civilians , usually the most educated and advanced , was an inseparable part of social engineering of the Stalin era and the struggle against individuals and nations , their memory and dignity .
Despite this , we can end on an optimistic note .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the fact that , today , we can mention the 70th anniversary of the deportation of innocent people in the Baltic countries , and that we recognise this , gives Europe back its dignity , solidarity and our collective political memory .
Mr President , although the deportations in the Baltic states on 14 June 1941 and the second wave of deportations in March 1949 led to the subjugation of thousands of innocent people to many years of humiliation in Siberia and in death camps , Europe and world public opinion have not yet , to this day , recognised this fact .
More than 65 years have passed since the Second World War .
The evil crimes against humanity that were perpetrated by Hitler 's totalitarian regime were long ago identified and prosecuted .
However , the Stalinist regime 's genocide in occupied Eastern European countries , as well as in Russia itself , are still , in some modern political circles , considered to be a theme best not discussed , and even the European Union has not completely evaluated this issue .
The crimes of the Communist regime have left a lasting negative effect on the psychology of the people of the Baltic States .
The Communist system , to borrow the words of Alexander Solzhenitsyn , was based on lies and terror , and was a crippled system that was unacceptable to human nature .
It destroyed people 's moral values , traditions , solidarity , and self-confidence .
Why do my compatriots still need to listen to Moscow 's story that there really was no occupation of the Baltic countries , that the Baltic countries were not occupied as a result of the Hitler ( Molotov-Ribbentrop ) pact , and that it was the socialist choice of the Baltic countries in the summer of 1940 ?
Why do I , and why do my compatriots , still need to listen to the story of ' liberation ' from these deportees , who were the most educated , and the best people in the Baltic States ?
Therefore , I call on the European Commission to provide all possible support to proper research into the Communist regime 's crimes , which has been called for by the Ministers of Justice of several Member States , including all the Baltic States , and finish this uncompleted task of evaluating the crimes of all totalitarian regimes .
Thank you .
( DE ) Mr President , in the German-Soviet Non-Aggression Pact , Hitler and Stalin laid down their spheres of interest in Central Europe , and the consequences , for the Baltic States , in particular , were devastating .
Just as they did in Belarus , the Soviets soon planned the deportation of the leading sections of society in the Baltic States , and the first mass deportations took place during the night of 13 to 14 June .
Without prior warning and without charge , people were taken from their homes .
In 2002 , the Estonian Parliament declared the deportations to be a crime against humanity .
In Estonia , 14 June is a national day of commemoration .
The day is one of remembrance and mourning , but it is also a sign of appreciation of the current democratic and independent Estonia .
In Europe and around the world , 14 June draws attention to the often forgotten suffering of small states and peoples , particularly in the former Soviet Union .
The debate is closed .
European environmental economic accounts ( debate )
The next item is the report by Mr Leinen , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety , on the proposal for a regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council on European environmental economic accounts - C7-0092 / 2010 - .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , today we are debating , and tomorrow we will adopt , European legislation that , on first impression , seems rather unremarkable , but with this law on European environmental economic accounts , we are probably opening a new chapter in the measurement of progress and prosperity .
We have known for a long time that gross national product is inadequate .
The purely quantitative view of economic activity says nothing about the environmental balance sheet , nor about the social balance sheet , and therefore it is high time that we measured whether , year on year , we are doing well or badly in terms of our measures and efforts .
We have monthly statistics relating to our labour market figures and we have annual statistics relating to our economic figures .
We therefore know exactly what is happening in these areas .
However , we have an incomplete patchwork of data on the environmental impact .
This law on environmental economic accounts is intended to help us to draw up an accurate balance sheet in the 27 Member States and to establish whether we are making progress or , as is often the case , whether we are going backwards .
As long ago as 2002 , Parliament called for reliable information to be collected on the state of the environment and the most important trends in , influences on , and causes of , environmental change , and for the public to be informed of these things .
We want a scientifically sound concept for measuring the consumption of resources to enable appropriate political decisions to be taken .
We are pleased that the Commission took this legislative initiative in April 2010 , but in our opinion , it was much too tentative in the way it went about it .
We in Parliament and all of the groups have called for this to be done much more quickly , because the Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development ( OECD ) and the United Nations have already been discussing these matters for 15 years .
This is taking far too long .
We have therefore made considerable progress in the negotiations with the Council .
It was a very difficult situation in the Council , because some Member States do not produce an environmental balance sheet and we first need to create a foundation in all 27 Member States .
The Commission proposed the inclusion of three modules .
These modules are air emissions - in this regard , we are very well aware of which gases are emitted into the air .
Then there is the financial expenditure arising from environmental taxes and environmental charges .
Thirdly , there are the year-on-year national material flows , the input and output , measured in purely quantitative terms .
This is a start , perhaps , but it is too simple a start , and Parliament has called for us also to produce water , energy and waste balance sheets and to find out about the status of our forests .
These are the modules that we urgently want to see in the very near future .
There was disagreement about whether statistics can also be produced for the marine environment , in other words , statistics on the status of fish stocks .
In this regard , our methodology is probably still in need of improvement .
Thus , we have achieved improvements in this area .
In two years ' time - by 2013 at the latest - the Commission is to present a report and , where possible , also propose a revision of this directive .
I hope that , at the end of this decade , we will have a green national product in addition to the gross national product .
That is our goal .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , as the rapporteur , Jo Leinen , said , the purpose of the Commission proposal is indeed to establish a common legal framework for the collection , compilation , transmission and evaluation of European environmental economic accounts in order to facilitate more balanced decision making with the goal of sustainable development .
With the presentation of this proposal , the Commission has delivered its first item on the ' Beyond GDP ' road map .
At a time when we are striving , in Europe , to achieve a resource-efficient and sustainable economy , this data will allow us to link environmental factors to economic ones and thus offers the possibility of more comprehensive and better-informed policy making .
Following very fruitful cooperation between the three institutions , I believe we have reached our common objective , namely , the establishment of this framework regulation on European environmental economic accounts with its first set of three modules , which cover air emissions accounts , environmentally-related taxes or levies and material flow accounts .
Currently , this data is collected on a voluntary basis by the majority of Member States .
For the most part , therefore , the collection of the relevant data will not impose any additional burden on respondents , as the Member States concerned should be able to compile the data by using existing data sources .
With this regulation , we have established an important basis for statistical information about the interplay between the economy and the environment , which we hope to expand with further modules in the future as included in the report and the draft resolution .
As the various other possible modules are at different stages of methodological maturity , including , for instance , timber and fish as well as unused extraction , a modular structure has been adopted for the regulation with a view to possibly introducing new modules as annexes to the core text in the future .
As agreed , the Commission will report to Parliament and the Council every three years on the development of new modules and , if appropriate , the Commission may also put forward new legislative proposals for the new modules .
Let me conclude by thanking the rapporteur , Jo Leinen , the shadow rapporteur , Mr Martin , and all the members of the Committee on the Environment and the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs for their constructive approach and their very valuable contributions .

Mr President , when Mr Leinen and I come back to political positions of the last millennium , we are mostly in agreement , and that is also the case with this report .
This is something good , sensible and important .
After all , statistics can be sexy , particularly at a time when the European Union has a huge credibility problem where European citizens are concerned .
I would say that that is largely unjustified if we look at the major issues and not at the other matters on which Mr Leinen and I are divided .
I think it is very good to be able to stand here , not only as a non-attached Member , but as someone who , with this opinion on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs - it was not a shadow report , but a supplementary opinion that is even more comprehensive than that of the lead committee , the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety - is able to represent these positions that we have set out with a vote of 37 to 0 .
In specific terms , this means that we want - as I put it - to move towards a system of European sustainability statistics , nicely abbreviated to ESS .
That would give us something to work with , particularly where young people are concerned and those who know that we will need new agreements on common goals in the future in order to be able to bring Europe out of the shadows and to the forefront in this brutal competition with the United States , China and many other powers .
This clearly also means - as Mr Leinen has already mentioned - that we urgently need more modules .
In this regard , we can look back to the 1970s and 1980s , when all of this had already been worked out .
It would be very nice if the Commission could make swifter progress in this regard .
I think it is very good that there has been movement in Eurostat with regard to the collection of data , even if it is under difficult circumstances in relation to Greece .
With a vote of 37 to 0 to 0 , we are of the opinion that the Commission clearly needs more money in this area for an ESS , for this system of European sustainability statistics .
However , we can achieve that by reallocating funds : use the enlargement dividends at last .
Take the officials who were so busy with the enlargement phase for the large states and put them where we so urgently need them , where they can help with the functioning of a European project .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , when I read the first proposal from the Commission , I was very sceptical about the way it dealt with this matter .
However , what the rapporteur , the shadow rapporteurs and my predecessor , Mrs Joly , have now presented is something that we are able to accept and also support .
In most countries , environmental economic data - whether or not they relate to these three modules - are already collected on a voluntary basis .
We need a clear overview of the results that are achieved in the individual Member States with regard to air emissions , environmental taxes and material flows .
That is very important .
It can give us a better understanding of the relationship between the environment and the economy .
We can also examine how sustainable economic development in Europe is progressing and how we can refine our environmental policy .
That is a very important point that we should include here .
I would like to issue a word of warning , however : in our soapbox speeches , we are always talking about reducing bureaucracy .
I would like to appeal to the Commission not to create additional bureaucracy in this area .
That would be the wrong approach .
I would therefore like to ask the Commission whether it is planning to create new positions within the Commission for the collection of the data , or whether it will manage with its existing staff , because I think it is very important that the collection of this data does not result in new burdens .
Only once we have the first implementation report in 2013 can and should we decide what other modules should be included , because we need to see how this new system develops and what impact it has on legislation .
I was very shocked when I discovered that this was not intended to be debated here in Parliament today .
That would have been a big mistake , because , as the rapporteur said , this is the start of something completely new .
Mr President , I agree with the previous speakers .
It is incredibly important that we have a climate and environment policy that is based on facts .
We need access to clearer and more reliable indicators in this area .
The same conditions apply to environmental policy as to economic , redistribution , development and industrial policy .
We cannot take sensible decisions and bring about the necessary changes and adaptations in society if we do not have access to the facts .
We now have an opportunity to obtain these facts .
This is extremely important .
The GDP yardstick does not work as well in this particular area because it is too narrow .
We now have an opportunity to work with a broader perspective .
There is also considerable value in coordinating environmental statistics at European level .
It would make it easier to compare the effects of environmental policy between the Member States and it will give us a better picture of which policy measures actually work and which do not , and which ones may even be counterproductive .
Once we have taken this decision during this sitting , I hope we will also be able to ensure that it becomes an important part of the basis for the decisions that Parliament and the Member States will take in the future .
I hope that this method of determining the quality of a society is given high priority and that sufficient resources are earmarked to enable it to work properly and not to simply remain an unimplemented idea .
Mr President , my thanks to the rapporteur , Mr Leinen , for his report .
After many years of pushing and cajoling , we finally seem to be taking this step towards sustainable national accounts and that is highly necessary as - let us be entirely honest - the economic system that we have at the moment is simply not working .
At the moment , you can still damage nature and the environment practically free of charge .
The current system therefore does not work .
These costs that no one pays are diverted onto society instead .
Why is sustainable energy more expensive than conventional energy ?
The answer is that nobody pays the social costs of burning coal , gas and oil .
This report gives the impression of being entirely technical , but ultimately it is about really important matters .
You have to measure something to know , as we say in Dutch , and that is what we are talking about here .
These European environmental economic accounts are necessary for the switchover to a truly sustainable economy .
However , I call on both the Commission and the Member States to actually do something with the data that these accounts will provide .
You have to measure something to know about it , that is very important , but using the knowledge that we gain from doing so is even more important and that , surely , is the essential next step .
I sincerely hope that this , for example , will lead to the removal of the hundreds of billions in subsidies that have a deleterious effect on the environment and nature that we still have in this world .
Let me just offer my sincere thanks to the Commission and our rapporteur once again .
This , however , is just the beginning .
Let us also follow up on this by truly taking the steps that the knowledge provided by this measure makes possible .
Mr President , it goes without saying , both from what we have heard today and from the report , that we need a substantiated evaluation of European environmental policy , based on reliable data .
The collection of such data should therefore be compulsory and harmonised .
However , conventional national accounts focus mainly on market transactions and on indicators that reflect important factors in creating prosperity , but do not measure prosperity itself .
However , there are new shortages of natural resources .
We need other incentives to boost productivity and quality .
There is a charge on the physical recipients .
By failing to provide accounts on the private and social cost of the use of natural resources and on the damage to the environment , conventional accounts may send the wrong progress message to the decision makers and this may put society on the road to non-sustainable growth .
The introduction of environmental economic accounts is fundamentally important , but is no substitute for the creation of alternative indicators to GDP which cover the various environmental and social dimensions .
The Commission should table proposals , before the start of the new Multiannual Financial Framework , so that a limited package of compound indicators can be adopted and used to supplement GDP in policy making .
They should include a monetised indicator , such as adjusted net disbursements , and a physical indicator , such as an ecological or carbon footprint , for the environmental dimension , and social indicators which incorporate the social dimension , such as an inequality evaluation ( for example , the Gini coefficient ) and a social integration and human prosperity index , such as the Human Poverty Index .
The initial proposal for an EU regulation only makes provision for data to be collected and collated on atmospheric emissions , the environmental terms imposed on various economic activities and macroeconomic material flow accounting .
A series of proposals and amendments has been tabled and I believe that these will allow us to adopt an integrated report and to achieve progress on the question of environmental policy .
on behalf of the EFD Group . - Mr President , a regulation on the European environmental economic accounts sounds very boring but , in my experience , that makes it the most dangerous kind of EU legislation , because you think that the taxpayer and the media will not bother to read it .
Let us be frank .
This is about - and I quote - ' air emissions and environmental taxes ' , just as the last speaker said .
So the Sovietisation of the EU continues .
The men with clipboards and the statistical spies from Eurostat want more data and - let us be honest - you want this data to tax and control , which explains your thirst for ever more statistics .
The worst thing of all is that this is a regulation , not a directive .
Regulations are far worse than directives because they pass into UK law and bypass the UK Parliament .
This is very dangerous and , my friends , this is the way democracy dies .
( The speaker agreed to take a blue-card question under Rule 149 ( 8 ) )
( DE ) We have been elected as Members of the European Parliament .
If you only see yourself as a UK parliamentarian , you will perhaps only be able to answer my question from a UK perspective .
With regard to statistics , you talked of Sovietisation .
Is this really how you see it ?
Do statistics mean Sovietisation to you ?
Are you not in favour of specific figures on living standards and inflation - even if this relates to the control of the banks - being provided by means of statistics , and citizens and decision makers also having access to such information that will then enable appropriate decisions to be taken ?
Or , as far as you are concerned , does that also fall within the realm of Sovietisation in the United Kingdom ?
Mr President , let me make the first point .
The fact of the matter is that this place likes to control things from the centre .
Let us also make another point , that none of the Commissioners are actually elected by the people .
Democracy matters for the whole of Europe so , yes , I do believe that we are seeing a Sovietisation of Europe .
The fact of the matter is that these decisions should be taken at Member State level .
The fact that regulations can bypass my own parliament , can bypass the people who were elected by the British people , is an absolute disgrace and , yes , it is the Sovietisation of Europe .
( DE ) Mr President , Mr Nuttall is complaining about something that the United Kingdom , like many other States , has been doing since 2006 .
This process that we will conclude tomorrow at parliamentary level - Mr Leinen has done an excellent job in this regard - will enshrine in law something that has already been practised for a long time .
Why do we need these data ?
It has nothing to do with Sovietisation .
Data are only as good as their comparability , and this comparability is the key element .
That is why we have this European economic accounting and why we have used this system globally since the 1930s - including in the United Kingdom .
It is such a good system because it is based on uniform standards and therefore , we can compare the prosperity of individual states and their economic and social success .
The US dollar is usually used as the currency for comparison .
Here we have a major opportunity to elevate the euro to the status of a comparison currency .
I believe that is the second element .
However , we also know that there are many gaps in these economic accounts .
Consider Fukushima .
Fukushima will now have a positive effect on the Japanese gross domestic product because a lot of investments are being made in this regard .
They are flow accounts rather than stock accounts .
We need to compensate for these things , and therefore the Commission subsequently put forward its ' GDP and beyond ' proposal .
These sustainability accounts that we will be adopting today and tomorrow will be the first step .
Why is that ?
It is because investing in energy efficiency and consuming less energy , for example , will have a negative effect on the gross domestic product .
Even someone like Mr Nuttall cannot disagree with that .
This is not so much about big policies ; it is simply about us wanting to make our policies testable : what taxes are levied in this area , how much material are we using .
Thus , we want to improve the legislative process , and if you were not in the Union , you would have to use the same system , otherwise your data would be worthless .
Therefore , I would say that this is a positive first step .
I would like to thank the Commission and the rapporteur .
( EL ) Mr President , Commissioner , I should like to congratulate Jo Leinen on his excellent report .
We really do need to proceed with environmental economic accounts .
We can no longer consider the economy and the environment separately .
The dual crisis hitting us - both environmental and economic - leaves us no such margin .
The paralogisms of the past must stop .
Mr Seeber quoted the example of Fukushima .
Another , simpler , daily example is that of fires .
A fire which destroys a forest and the biodiversity and eco-systemic services provided by the forest , by which I mean clean water , clear air and the framework for reproducing food , which destroys the cultural heritage of a place , which destroys agricultural production , is measured positively in terms of GDP , because investments are made to restore the damage , despite the fact that the country , the region , the area , will have sustained long-term damage .
In the long term , it will be poorer than it was before .
The environmental economic accounts we are calling for today are not perfect .
However , they are an important step in the right direction .
They are a step towards better policies based on a more complete , more objective view of reality .
They are a step that will allow us to ensure that our policies are consistent , that will allow us to achieve international commitments and the objective of a greener European economy .
( FI ) Mr President , Commissioner , first of all , I wish to congratulate Mr Leinen for the excellent and important work that he has done with respect to this report .
This regulation on environmental economic accounts is very important , as has been said here more than once , because at last it establishes a statutory basis for a system of accounts integrating environmental and economic statistics that is crucial for environmental policy , and , in the broader context , social policy .
As for its scope , it is very important that , during the first phase , the focus should specifically be on air emissions , material flows and environmental taxes .
There are good reasons for this .
Furthermore , it is probably a very realistic approach , considering the capacity that the Member States have , to start a system of accounts in these areas .
Of course we need to realise that , among our various countries , we are at different levels with respect to statistics systems , and it is important that this does not create any additional red tape , as the Commissioner said .
As far as new modules are concerned , it is important that they strongly emphasise themes that support the implementation of the Europe 2020 strategy .
( IT ) Mr President , this regulation forms part of the framework of measures designed to establish more comprehensive indicators to supplement GDP .
European environmental economic accounts should contribute to the evaluation of policies , providing data about the interaction between environmental and economic factors .
The Commission 's proposal is commendable , although new and complex bureaucratic procedures are being created in order to be able to monitor the environmental policies that Member States actually develop .
For this reason , we will abstain during the vote .
We are against the report , however , insofar as the rapporteur wishes to add further accounting modules .
A first-reading agreement was reached with the Council on the basis that the introduction of the new modules proposed by the rapporteur would be subject to evaluation under the review clause so that , where appropriate , changes or improvements can be made to the quality of the data and the methods by which it is gathered .
In our view , all this represents a new and costly form of bureaucracy being imposed on Member States .
( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , as I see it , politics is about finding the best possible solutions to the problems that exist .
How can this be achieved , however , if the problems and the potential solutions are not fully understood ?
This is a fundamental issue , and it does not only concern environmental policy .
Political decision makers must therefore have at their disposal data that is both reliable and as exhaustive as possible on the modern world and the environmental situation .
That was the conclusion reached by the European Council in June 2006 , when it called on the European Union and its Member States to extend the national accounts to key aspects of sustainable development .
I welcome this initiative and the European Commission 's proposal , as it will help improve our knowledge of air emissions , environmental taxes and material flows in the economy .
However , this proposal will have to be amended during tomorrow 's vote so as to ensure that the data collected are reliable and conducive to debate , and also , and above all , to ensure that all the Member States are involved in this approach .
Indeed , how can we draft European policies if we do not have data on the situation in each Member State ?
Lastly , I should like to voice my support for two powerful ideas upheld by the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) : the power conferred on the European Commission to adopt delegated acts should be reviewed every five years , and a verification clause should be introduced - the verification clause being the second powerful idea in this regulation .
We will need new data in a few years , but everything in its own time .
This draft regulation is a real step forward : let us continue in this direction .
( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I , too , would like to offer my sincere thanks to Mr Leinen for a long overdue regulation .
Before we were elected to the European Parliament , many of us simply assumed that the decisions this Parliament took , these decisions that determine the future , were , in fact , based on these data , and we have discovered with a certain amount of dismay that , although these statistics and data exist in most Member States , in reality , they have not yet been brought together into a common framework , and this has therefore given rise to a certain lack of credibility in the eyes of the general public .
From the media , we always get the impression that the economy and the environment are diametrically opposed .
These data would help us to consider whether something benefits the environment , whether something benefits the environment and , at the same time , benefits the economy , or whether something benefits the economy and , at the same time , benefits the environment , and hence also our social environment .
That is the main task that we as politicians should set ourselves .
We want to establish and improve quality of life , not only in the workplace , but also in our environment .
I can only agree with the desire expressed by Mr Leinen today when he said that , by the end of this decade , we should have moved away from gross domestic product and towards a green domestic product .
By doing so , we will have taken the first crucial decision .
I am very confident that we will succeed in strengthening the credibility of Europe and of matters relating to the environment and to the economy as a result of these environmental economic accounts .
Thank you very much .
Please continue with this good work .

( DE ) Mr President , Mr Rehn , ladies and gentlemen , sound statistics , efficient data collection and evaluation - that is the basis on which to shape the future .
It is obvious that we need to harmonise the Member States ' existing statistics in order to take the right decisions for the future for the whole of Europe on the basis of the same data .
Equivalent , comparable data from all of the Member States is the goal .
The question arises as to what we can actually discover from this data .
What additional conclusions can we draw in order for Europe to develop in a balanced way in terms of its social , economic and environment policy ?
The Commission wants to extend the economic accounts to key aspects of sustainable development .
To this end , it proposes three modules in order to collect data on economic activities that result in air emissions , on environmental tax revenue and on material flows .
Products of plant origin , for example , cereals , leguminous crops , vegetables , fruit and wood , are also included in this .
I wonder about the usefulness of such calculations - what will they actually tell us ?
I am not as optimistic as the rapporteur and my fellow Members .
Wanting something is one thing ; putting it into practice is quite another .
I have doubts about the efficiency of the red tape and I question the objectivity of the intention to produce environmental economic accounts , to record material flows and to evaluate individual products , including plants , in terms of CO2 emissions .
Both the production of oxygen as well as the emission of CO2 during production and transport must be included in such calculations with regard to plants , for example .
I welcome the fact that , in the compromise that has now been reached , it is clarified that additional data requirements may only be introduced following a flexibility assessment and that the competence of the Member States must not be encroached upon .
Such programmes must also be developed without additional financial expenditure and bureaucracy .
( HU ) Mr President , my colleague , Jo Leinen , has prepared an excellent report , which is important from the point of view of the national economy , environmental protection , society , agriculture and other aspects as well .
As a member of the STOA panel , a project aimed at more efficient management of natural resources , I consider it very important to compile a reliable statistical database .
How can we measure the use of water and energy efficiency in the Member States of the European Union if we do not have reliable statistical information ?
As a member of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , I consider it very important to have a clear picture , at last , of the real social benefits of the environmental public goods produced by farmers , in relation to the reform of the common agricultural policy ( CAP ) .
Without statistical data , we cannot determine how much farmers contribute with their agricultural activities to the protection of air , agricultural landscape , arable land and the environment , and how farmers produce environmental public goods that are not yet paid for by the market , nor by the CAP .
Therefore , the current statistical report is very progressive and forward-looking from the point of view of environmental protection and agriculture .
( DE ) Mr President , when it comes to statistics , there is always a lot of debate and disagreement .
Above all , they must not be decoded , because data protection is also clearly justified .
On the other hand , we need transparency and comparability .
I think that is important .
We therefore need to collect the data in a fully automated manner using random samples , so that they are then comparable .
We are aware of imaging processes , for example , that will also play a major role in this regard in future .
Accordingly , automation of the process will simplify our political decision making in future .
( DE ) Mr President , European environmental economic accounts will provide us with important data to enable us to bring environmental aspects into all kinds of political decisions and , as a result , to have these aspects taken into consideration in a whole range of issues .
The collected and analysed data will be crucial for providing effective countermeasures against the environmental effects of economic activities .
The conscious need for sustainable policies in order to be able to deal with challenges such as climate change , loss of biodiversity , increasing environmental pollution and the impending exhaustion of our natural resources is strongly supported today .
Reliable data and the resulting predictions with regard to the use of natural resources will not only enable us to clearly measure the success of a sustainable economic policy , but will also provide very important added value for the Member States .
( EL ) Mr President , I , too , should like to take my turn in congratulating Mr Leinen on his exceptional report .
I believe that Europe has now reached a point at which we rarely encounter clashes between development and environmental protection .
On the contrary , we have entered an interactive phase .
Europeans now have an environmental conscience .
This report will help even more in ensuring that we have a better picture of what is happening to the environment in Europe .

I should like to emphasise three elements : firstly , we need precise information on the state of the environment in the Member States ; secondly , we need a procedure for renewing that information every five years ; and , thirdly , we need to carry out a joint progress evaluation of all environmental actions undertaken in the European Union .
( DE ) Madam President , if we want to preserve our environment for future generations , we must not consider economic and environmental aspects separately .
It therefore makes sense to supplement economic accounts with environmental factors , and the basis of any sound balance sheet is adequate and reliable data .
However , when the EU calls for key data from the Member States , it should not baulk at sensitive issues .
I am thinking here of nuclear policy , genetic engineering , adequate origin labelling of foodstuffs and , not least , an investigation with regard to the recent EHEC cucumber scandal .
Interactions between the economy and the environment are clearly evident here .
Here , too , it is clear where - unfortunately - the weight lies in the EU , namely with big business and the lobbyists .
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , many thanks for a very substantive and responsible debate .
I think we all agree on the importance of this proposal and of environmental economic accounts .
We also agree that we need to take the next steps to define policies using the data , to keep us on the path to a more sustainable economy .
Let me make a few points in response to a number of remarks .
This is the first regulation , with three modules .
It is the beginning in terms of legislation .
The second batch of modules is now in preparation for a second , amending regulation towards the end of 2012 .
We are also already planning the third batch , so the work is ongoing and will be continued .
Concerning the issue of red tape , this will not create a new burden for enterprises because we are using existing administrative and statistical data .
In fact , the United Kingdom is a leader in environmental accounting , which is also worth noting .
Moreover , concerning the statistics , and referring to what was said by Mr Leinen , Mr Martin and many others , we have made significant progress in improving the European statistical system over the past year and a half .
For instance , the present Commission made the very first legislative proposal on 10 February 2010 - the day after you had voted in favour of setting up the present Commission - when we adopted a regulation on audit powers for Eurostat , which gives Eurostat the possibility of checking and verifying the quality of statistics at the source , which is very important .
We have already started to use this , for instance , in the case of Greece .
Secondly , the action plan for Greece is being implemented and within a year , it has brought a very profound overhaul of the statistical system in Greece .
As a result , the quality of the statistics on the excessive deficit procedure has greatly improved already , and in the latest round , Eurostat could validate the data for Greece .
Finally , on resources , although we do not need resources for this particular subject of environmental economic accounts , I agree with Mr Martin that we need sufficient resources .
In fact , I took advantage of this part-session week to stop by in Luxembourg to meet Walter Radermacher , the Director General of Eurostat , to discuss resources just a few hours ago .
We are on the way to redeploying and improving our resources in Eurostat in order to focus on our key priorities .
But I would not take resources from enlargement , as Mr Martin suggested , and especially not from the Western Balkans .
Stability , democracy and peace in that region continue to be a key priority for the European Union , for the Commission and , I trust , for Parliament as well .
Please remember that without our soft power , and without EU enlargement policy , Ratko Mladić would not be in The Hague now .
Please remember that as well .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , thank you for the debate .
I see broad support for the creation of environmental balance sheets in the European Union .
With a few exceptions , this has found favour here .
I also agree with Mrs Kadenbach 's statement .
Many of us thought that this was already in place , and we were surprised to find that a lot of data does not exist at all , and that in the statements we make with regard to the state of the environment in the European Union , we are therefore actually completely blind .
One Member , Mr Gerbrandy , said that measurement brings knowledge .
We then know something , and knowledge is the basis for taking measures and for all of our programmes .
We quite simply need a better basis for the decisions that we take .
These environmental accounts can help us in this regard .
Of course , we have the EU 2020 strategy , in which sustainability is a planning goal .
I hope that in the next few years , we will also have this basis so that in 2020 , we will be able to see whether we were successful or not .
We know that gross domestic product provides no information on the state of the natural world and the environment , on resources that we have used , or on the whole sustainability problem .
That is why this is now necessary .
We are also tackling this in stages .
Mrs Klaß , we are not making excessive demands ; rather , the modules are to be expanded gradually .
After all , as the Commissioner said , the individual pieces of legislation - the water legislation , waste legislation and clean air legislation - already contain the requirement to collect this data .
Europe is also under a global obligation , Mr Nuttall .
If we sign the Convention on Biological Diversity , the Convention on Climate Change or any other convention , we must be able to tell the rest of the world whether we have done well or badly .
Thus , all in all , I would like to thank the shadow rapporteurs and also Eurostat , which will subsequently have to carry out the work .
I hope that the necessary resources will be available in Luxembourg , because without funds , without resources , this balance sheet cannot , of course , be produced .
Parliament should also help out in this regard .
Thank you very much .
This is an important political matter - as some people have rightly recognised - and it is a new chapter in the consideration of what we do in Europe year in year out .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 : 00 .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
I would like to thank the rapporteur , Mr Leinen , for the report he has submitted .
I agree with its assessment of the Commission 's proposal , and I would like to make a few observations on the importance of such activities .
Measuring quality of life through indicators such as gross domestic product does not tell the whole story .
Although experts have been in agreement on this for quite some time , the message has only recently got through to the political sphere , after considerable time and effort .
In this respect , I very much applaud the Commission 's proposal for European environmental economic accounts , because there is no need for the wholesale rejection of misleading indicators .
Rather than assessing quality of life and the environment on the basis of impressions , we need to come up with better data and better methods of data collection and aggregation so that they deliver an improved service in gauging , for example , the environmental impact made by policies and economic activities .
I join the rapporteur in calling for a greater emphasis in the Commission 's proposal on monitoring and evaluation issues .
Finally , I would like to note how very important it is for the Commission 's proposal to incorporate and rely even more fully on the strategy document ' GDP and beyond : measuring progress in a changing world ' .
A consistent , systematic approach will perhaps be more crucial than anything else in efforts to improve the way quality of life is measured .
in writing . - Recycling and prevention of waste , air emissions and climatic change and sustainable consumption and production could be monitored much more effectively if high-quality data were available regarding the interaction between environmental and economic factors .
The relevant data collection , which has been made on a voluntary basis until today at EU level , should therefore become mandatory .
Moreover , environmental data currently available should be expanded in the medium term to facilitate the necessary policy assessment of European environmental policy .
The proposed regulation establishes in this respect a common framework for the collection , compilation , transmission and evaluation of European environmental economic accounts by providing common European-wide methodology , common standards , definitions , classifications and accounting rules for compiling these accounts .
The regulation concerns the collection and compilation of data regarding air emissions , environmental taxes applicable to various economic sectors and macroeconomic material flow accounting .
Accurate and adequate statistical data on energy and resource consumption are fundamental if we want to get indicators for progress and well-being beyond the GDP .
Moreover , a sound assessment of the European environmental policy is only possible if reliable data is available .
Selection process of a new Managing Director for the IMF and external representation of the euro ( debate )
The next item is the Commission statement on the selection process of a new Managing Director for the IMF and external representation of the euro .
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , honourable Members , many thanks for your very pertinent questions .
The Commission welcomes the decision of the Executive Board of the IMF on 20 May this year , which clarifies the selection process for the next Managing Director of the IMF .
The Commission agrees that the selection process has to be open , transparent and merit-based .
This will enable candidates from all IMF member countries to compete on the basis of their merits , taking into account all relevant aspects .
The EU Member States have agreed that they will back the best qualified candidate who is able to meet the high standards required to fulfil the responsibilities attached to this very important position .
Such a candidate will , in particular , need to have demonstrated strong capabilities , a commitment to multilateral coordination , and a great knowledge of international economic , financial and monetary affairs .
The Commission supports this agreement .
The Commission fully supports the candidacy of Minister Christine Lagarde .
She is a competent and experienced candidate , who has gained the respect of our partners in the international community .
She not only has a very good knowledge of the European economy and EU decision making , which is a merit in these times , but also very strong experience in global economic governance - through her successful management of the G20 Presidency , for instance .
Let me also add that last year , an agreement was reached at the G20 summit in Seoul in Korea to reduce European representation in relative terms on the IMF Board by two seats , so as to increase the voice and representation of emerging market economies .
The issue of the external representation of the euro area , while related to the general reform of the International Monetary Fund , is not directly linked to the selection of the Managing Director of the IMF .
The Commission is of the view that it is in the common interest of Europe , the Union and its Member States , to move progressively towards a single seat for the European Union , or at least the euro area , in the IMF .
Gradually and progressively .
Mr President , honourable Members , as you know , I am fully committed to the reform and reinforcement of EU economic governance , both internally and externally .
In achieving this , I prefer to apply the tested method of Jean Monnet : Europe is built through concrete progress in real life , one step at a time , taking larger and smaller steps .
Therefore , let us first conclude the reform of our internal governance , which is urgently needed and which will be a huge step forward once implemented .
Then let us tackle the challenge of external representation which will be another major step forward once agreed and implemented .
One big step at a time .
Madam President , when the former Managing Director of the International Monetary Fund ( IMF ) came into office , there were major question marks against the relevance and effectiveness of the IMF .
We now know better , after finding out the hard way during the crisis just how interlinked we are internationally .
It is precisely in such times of crisis that you also learn to better seek each other out , and we experienced just how crucial the role and the expertise of the IMF are , even for us here in Europe .
It is thus also important that , in the coming years , the IMF should play a key role in terms of global governance and better financial and monetary stability in the world .
Sadly , in this euro crisis , we have learned from experience in a very painful way .
You can tell where I am going with this .
Today , we are discussing the new candidate for the future position of Managing Director of the IMF .
You quite rightly say that this must be an open process , but we do not need to hide under a bushel the fact that we , Europe , have an outstanding candidate .
I am happy that we , in Parliament , are also able , through this debate , to give our express support to that candidate .
In a time of crisis , it is important to have an outstandingly qualified woman in this top role as , in a crisis , female qualities could provide real added value , topped off with quality .
Mrs Lagarde also has experience on both sides of the Atlantic and in multilateral governance .
Viewed from this angle , too , she is an outstanding candidate .
I hope that , with this backing , we are able to give you a little extra push to put forward Mrs Lagarde 's case as the next occupant of the role of Managing Director of the IMF .
Madam President , Commissioner , basically , I am wondering why you wanted to make that statement .
Indeed , you ended your speech by saying : ' All our time is essentially taken up today by the reform of economic governance ; the issue of the external representation of the euro area will be discussed at a later date ' .
Please forgive me if I disagree with your approach , because one of the main problems in the European Union today is the issue of the external representation of the euro area .
It is clear today how the currency war could easily destroy all the efforts that citizens in the euro area are being asked to make in the name of austerity and of an improved sovereign debt situation .
Therefore , Europeans cannot be completely demanding internally and , at the same time , fail to show any interest in how their currency , tossed about as it is by the markets on the international stage , is faring externally .
There will be no internal protection without external protection .
Please forgive me , then , if I disagree with your approach on this point .
I know that the task is a difficult one , but the European Parliament has , for several years now , supported the idea of moving towards an external representation of the euro area , especially within the International Monetary Fund ( IMF ) .
We must admit that , when Dominique Strauss-Kahn was appointed as the Managing Director of the IMF , the situation was very different : there was talk of people taking it in turns to manage the organisation .
Mr Strauss-Kahn himself said that he may be the last European to head the IMF .
Since then , however , the situation has changed considerably .
The region in which IMF intervention is crucial today is Europe .
We can see that , behind the IMF 's intervention , the intervention of the large US investment banks has a significant role to play .
We can also see that , sooner or later , the issue of the US economic situation could be raised and could legitimately be debated within the IMF .
All that paints a much more complex picture than simply deciding whether this person or that person should preside over the future of the IMF .
Of course Europeans should be represented - they should rightly play a part in what is one of the major institutions - but , more fundamentally , what I want to know from you is : what kind of policy do we want to conduct on the international stage ?
What kind of mandate should a European carry out on the international stage , given the efforts we are making internally , given the influence of the markets outside the European Union and the impact they have on investment , speculation and employment in Europe ?
We also think that whoever manages the IMF in the future will face a huge task : he or she must not destroy the progress made by Dominique Strauss-Kahn when he shifted ever so slightly the boundaries of what was the Washington Consensus .
We can already see a hardening of attitudes today within the institution ; we think that this is the wrong approach .
Finally , the issue of the IMF 's place within the United Nations system will also have to be raised , and if the Europeans do put forward a candidate , they must ensure that the mandate that they give to that person is structured in such a way as to enable him or her to push for a form of global governance that rises to the post-crisis challenges that we face .
Madam President , thank you for your response , Mr Rehn .
By the end of June , we are expecting a new Managing Director to have been appointed for the International Monetary Fund ( IMF ) to succeed Dominique Strauss-Kahn , who has , as we all know , been accused of a very serious crime that , unfortunately , has probably also damaged the reputation of the IMF .
Now , in these turbulent times , a new competent Managing Director must therefore be appointed for an important global institution such as this and the process must be open .
Like my fellow Members , I welcome the candidacy of France 's finance minister , Christine Lagarde .
I believe we have all found her to be a very competent person .
She also has the support of several Member States and the European Commission .
However , why have we not been able to agree on a common nomination procedure ?
It would have increased Europe 's influence .
That is something that we lack .
If we had had a common procedure and if the Commission had taken overall responsibility , it would also have strengthened the reputation of the EU , the euro and Europe .
Article 138 of the Treaty of Lisbon states that the euro 's place in the international monetary system must be strengthened .
Why , therefore , has this opportunity not been taken ?
The Commissioner spoke of taking one step at a time , but sometimes we may have to make a little leap forward in order to strengthen our position , particularly in turbulent times .
I also think it is important to point out that the IMF is in need of extensive reform , something that Mrs Berès also makes clear in her report .
The work on this reform has begun .
However , the EU 's representation in the IMF also needs to be discussed and strengthened .
We need a stronger IMF that operates as a global lender .
To summarise : we need a stronger and more representative IMF in our new global world and we need a stronger EU with a clearer voice .
Finally , Mr Rehn , sometimes we need to make a leap forward .
on behalf of the ECR Group . - Madam President , in today 's uncertain economic climate , it is more important than ever that the global institutions set up to ensure financial and economic stability , which many countries around the world are dependent upon , are not used to make symbolic political statements .
The IMF is not a symbol but a working institution that needs someone at the head of it who has a strong understanding of the financial markets , the necessary skills gained from managing a large economy and the ability to communicate tough decisions to the general public .
The strength of Christine Lagarde 's candidacy is not that she is a European , but that she is a hugely competent individual who has shown remarkable leadership qualities throughout the financial crisis .
As the primary role of the IMF is to work on conditional structural reform packages to accompany the distribution of funds to members when they are in dire straits , I believe that Ms Lagarde has shown that she is well able to broker complex agreements on controversial issues , successfully bringing together disparate parties to reach a beneficial solution .
We must not get caught up in the prism of today 's eurozone crisis but look to what problems the IMF may face in the future .
I believe that Ms Lagarde has the necessary skills and track record to lead the IMF during this period of economic turbulence and to steer a path of reform at the IMF to ensure its continued relevance for generations to come .
Turning to the matter of eurozone representation on international bodies , as financial markets do not respect national boundaries , it is hugely important that global institutions work effectively to coordinate national policy .
While I am in favour of more coordination , efficiency and the linking up of policies to avoid regulatory gaps , I believe that the EU must not lose its diverse set of voices in international institutions .
The crisis has shown the huge differences between the economies of the EU even within the eurozone , let alone the differences between non-eurozone countries as well .
All of our countries have been affected in different ways in the current crisis and we have different experiences .
A single voice is not as strong as a multitude of voices singing in harmony .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I have four comments that I should like to make .
Firstly , I should like to come back to Mr Schmidt 's speech so as to discuss the process again .
Given that a role as important as the Managing Director of the International Monetary Fund is at stake , I think that , compared to the energy that is at times put into recruiting third-level managers in companies , the way in which this process is being handled shows a lack of professionalism .
Instead of a relatively open , transparent and criteria-based process , what do we have ?
A series of caucuses bringing together Heads of State or Government who say to each other , ' I would definitely put forward such and such a person ' .
That does nothing to enhance the European Union 's credibility .
The fact is , after the Dominique Strauss-Kahn episode , Europe cannot afford to cut corners when deciding who its candidate is going to be .
This is a missed opportunity as far as I am concerned .
I do not hold you responsible for this - you are not the one calling the shots on this issue - but we would most certainly benefit from taking a much more organised , concerted and professional approach .
Secondly , I should like to respond to Mrs Swinburne .
It is time to respond frankly to those who , like you , Mrs Swinburne , and you , Mr Farage , continue to peddle the mistaken idea that we Europeans will be able to influence world affairs - which affect us too - by speaking with a multitude of voices .
Mrs Swinburne , it is all well and good talking about voices singing in harmony , but you know very well that it does not work like that .
If , at some point , we have something other than a democratic federation , the voices will not sing in harmony , because everyone will look after the interests of his or her electorate .
That is how it works .
Furthermore , if you think , Mr Farage and Mrs Swinburne , that you are going to defend the so-called sovereignty of the United Kingdom - and that applies to all the Member States , be they small States like my own , or large States such as Germany , France and the United Kingdom - if you think that , alone , you will still be able to exert some influence in the world , then I think you are sadly mistaken .
My third comment concerns the IMF 's attitude during the crisis , when compared to that of the European Union .
On this issue , Commissioner , I do hold you responsible .
After all , we recall that , in all the discussions held by the Troikas travelling to the various Member States that we are trying to help , ultimately , it is the IMF - and it almost pains me to say this after everything that we Greens said about the IMF in the 1980s and 1990s - that is the most reasonable today , while the Commission and the Central Bank are the ones setting the toughest conditions .
We cannot permit this state of affairs as Europeans .
I cannot understand why you are trying to act like a bigger Catholic than the Pope - I am not sure whether I can say that to a Finn but , there , I have said it anyway !
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , this is not so much about individual people ; it is , first and foremost , about a selection process .
Surprisingly , anyone who searches for information on the selection process for the Managing Director of the International Monetary Fund ( IMF ) on the Internet will essentially only discover that the United States and Europe share the two leading positions .
That means that the economically strongest nations , as a minority , share control of the global economy among themselves , so to speak .
That is feudalism and has nothing to do with democracy , and that is why we cannot accept this .
In our view , Dominique Strauss-Kahn stepping down presents a major opportunity to make fundamental changes at this point to the nomination and selection process and to make it an open , transparent and , above all , merit- and qualification-based selection process , as some NGOs have been calling for recently .
This should also include a combination of majority votes from the members of the IMF and a majority of voting shares in the IMF .
Up to now , only the voting shares in the IMF have been taken into account , which ensures a structural majority for the economically strong nations .
This sort of reform and change to the selection process would correspond to the reform of the IMF , which would also correspond to the changes in global economic relations and would give the developing countries a chance to bring their experience with the IMF to bear in the further development of the IMF .
In closing , I would just like to say that the IMF must be placed under an obligation to work in the interests of reducing global imbalances and poverty .
on behalf of the EFD Group . - Madam President , I would like to say to Commissioner Rehn that I have been looking at the IMF Charter .
There is nothing here that will surprise you ; it is there to promote balance , growth , exchange rate stability , to lessen disequilibrium and to help countries that are in trouble .
The classic method uses is to shore up the finances and organise a competitive devaluation .
Nowhere in here does it say that the IMF is there to support political experiments and , in so many ways , that is what Dominique Strauss-Kahn did .
He used the IMF to help bail out the failing euro project and , as such , he was a very poor choice of candidate .
Now you want to compound that by approving Christine Lagarde - another member of the European political elite , another euro fanatic , somebody else who believes in propping up this euro project - and I would have thought that , as she has got a vested interest , she is , in fact , a highly unsuitable candidate .
It is as if the EU has hijacked the IMF , that it is now there as part of the support mechanism for the euro , so that it is not just the taxpayers of the eurozone and the non-eurozone EU members , but the whole world that now has to help prop up the euro as the Greek problem compounds by the day .
Well , I suppose in some ways , you may well need Mrs Lagarde because not only is Greece going bust , not only are we heading for the fourth bail-out , but as I have warned before in this Assembly , the validity of the European Central Bank itself will very shortly be called into question .
I have warned that you cannot go on buying your own bad debt , but we have reached the point where , within weeks , we may well see that the ECB itself is not solvent , so perhaps your friend Mrs Lagarde can help bail that out as well .
I would have thought this is a very poor choice .
The international community at some point will tell you where to get off - perhaps not just quite yet .
( FR ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I rise on behalf of Mrs Lulling and Mr Langen , too ; they had their own speaking time , but I assure you that I will not use it all up .


I would just like to point out , as every one of you has done here , that the process of selecting a new Managing Director of the IMF has begun .
It is important for the European Union to express a unanimous and strong position that is conveyed not only by the various Member States , but also by the Commission , and you have pledged to do that , Commissioner .
Many of us in this House , with the exception of Mr Farage , are very keen to see the balance - a popular one until now - between the United States and Europe maintained during the process of appointing the Managing Director of the IMF and the President of the World Bank .
We fully understand that emerging countries - particularly the largest ones - would like more of a say in the IMF 's decision making .
It is important , therefore , to continue the reforms under way regarding the governance of that international institution , and particularly the ones that you also mentioned , Commissioner .
However , it is definitely too soon for any radical changes to the balance achieved as a result of the Member States ' respective financial contributions to the Fund .
Only one European candidate has launched a proper campaign by making contact with the various Member States .
That candidate - who , by the way , is a woman - has the qualities required .
Her skills , political experience , moral authority and perfect command of English , coupled with her experience of working across the globe , make her the ideal candidate for the post of Managing Director of the IMF .
As has been said , the Managing Director must be someone who seeks consensus and is effective at a time when the institution has a vital role to play in helping to redress the economic and financial balance with a great sense of purpose .
Our Union must therefore do whatever it takes to secure Christine Lagarde 's appointment .
( FR ) Madam President , I believe there is , nonetheless , a great paradox in this debate .
Basically , it is vital that nothing changes between the World Bank and the IMF .
We Europeans are the ones who stand to gain from multilateralism working , but multilateralism will not work if emerging countries are involved only to a limited extent , at the G20 or elsewhere .
We really must approach this issue dynamically and with a sense of perspective .
Furthermore , I find it rather paradoxical that , now that we are launching an urgent campaign to see a European appointed as the head of the IMF , we are not setting an example as Europeans by saying , Commissioner , that this is a step in the direction of the external representation of the euro area .
What explains your great impatience and determination to see a European appointed if not your desire to take this step , which you tell us is not urgent and can keep for another day ?
If we want to make a go of multilateralism , then we ourselves need to set an example , be consistent and show how well it can work in the future , because the IMF has an absolutely crucial role to play in the field of global governance , a role that transcends the issue of European debt and of the sovereign debt situations of the European countries that are struggling .
This is a crucial task , but the IMF 's role , beyond stabilising the markets , is also to help correct the global imbalances that caused this crisis .
It is clear today that you are not taking this absolutely crucial governance issue into account in the way in which you promote , or otherwise , a given candidate .
Yet this is what interests us socialists : seeing the IMF play a part in global governance so as to correct the imbalances that caused this crisis .
( FR ) Madam President , Commissioner , like everyone else in this House , I am not disregarding the method used to select the future Managing Director of the International Monetary Fund , but what matters most to the people is knowing what new role that international institution plans to carry out in order to help end today 's serious economic , financial , budgetary and monetary crises .
The International Monetary Fund needs to become much more democratic and focused on human development , education and employment .
The United States ' blocking minority should , in my view , be lifted .
The voting rights of emerging countries should be significantly increased .
The IMF should be a tool against speculation , which is suffocating populations today , an effective tool for stabilising agricultural and commodities markets , in order to combat the tax havens that people often talk about .
Instead of a currency war , the IMF should launch a major new project : that of a common world currency for cooperation instead of a war of economics and competition .
That is what we should be discussing as a matter of priority , so that people 's quality of life improves and bankers stop enriching themselves by plundering nations .
( PL ) Madam President , it is unfortunate that the IMF has recently been discussed only in the context of the affair concerning its former head , Dominique Strauss-Kahn .
It is not only the prestige of this important position and the whole institution which has suffered , but also the prestige of a European politician occupying such an important position .
I think that if , as a result of this , we finally stop tolerating behaviour which everyone knew about and which is far too widely accepted , this would be the one positive thing to come out of the whole terrible affair .
However , now we have to fight to rebuild the reputation of this position and the institution of the IMF .
For this to happen , we need to propose a competent person for this position who will be able to maintain calm on the markets , in the media and in general public opinion in what is , today , a very difficult situation .
It is important that the candidate should be credible , and Christine Lagarde has been acknowledged by the Financial Times as being the best Minister for Finance in the euro area in 2009 .
The Commissioner has already mentioned how well she led the presidency at the G20 .
She is a person whose credibility cannot be called into question .
We cannot underestimate the role of the IMF , particularly now when there is a financial and economic crisis which is affecting many countries in Europe .
European thinking should therefore be present in this institution .
We need someone in this position who understands the significance of the present crisis .
While dealing with global finances at the IMF and using the skills and international experience she gained in the European Union , I know that Christine Lagarde will not lose sight of European interests .
She said herself that if she were to be chosen for the post , she would bring all her experience as a lawyer , managing director , minister and woman to the Fund .
Let us pay particular attention to the final element , which is very important in this situation .
( PT ) Madam President , the process of replacing the Managing Director of the International Monetary Fund ( IMF ) is inseparable from the difficulties and contradictions which the capitalist system is facing today in the light of its worsening crisis .
The ongoing change to one of the institutions at the system 's apex is inextricably linked to the disputes between the various factions of big capital , where conflicts are emerging between the major powers .
It is also inseparable from the unresolved issue of reforming the monetary system and , with it , the currency war over the dollar 's hegemony at global level .
This is a war whose consequences are dumped onto the backs of the workers and peoples of the periphery , as we can see in the European Union .
Without hiding for one moment the enormous extent to which the centre left and its longstanding ties with neoliberalism are responsible for this process , it is also inseparable from the conflict between those who have been accepting the need to restructure debts within the euro area and those who are pushing to rush blindly on ahead towards new means of institutionalised and openly colonial intervention .
In any case , both seem committed to taking the exploitation and oppression of the workers and peoples to new levels .
( EL ) Madam President , Commissioner , it would appear that the 21st century will be remembered for the war between political power and the power of the financial institutions .
There are countries on the planet which are literally governed by anonymous financial institutions and the citizens of those countries are led hither and thither and their fate is determined by what the markets are doing .
I believe that Mrs Lagarde will be a worthy and able representative of the European Union ; she is well qualified for the job thanks to the experience which she acquired during this stormy period of economic crisis and I believe that she will be a worthy representative of the European economy within the framework of global economic governance .
( DE ) Madam President , I think it is important that Mrs Lagarde is appointed to this leading role .
In France , she has proven that she understands the economy , that she also promotes small and medium-sized enterprises , in particular , and that she has regard for those who actually work and make a contribution .
It is surely also a principle of the International Monetary Fund to work to improve people 's standard of living .
Redistribution is only possible if there is actually something produced to be redistributed .
Therefore , the reform of the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank is an absolutely priority .
We must ensure that those countries with financial problems receive the necessary instruction and that the appropriate knowledge is passed on with regard to the way that we are trying hard to solve these problems in the European Union .
( PT ) Madam President , the debate we are having here is ducking the most important issues .
In other words , it is not tackling the serious problem posed by international capitalism : the problem of the financial markets that are controlling our economies ; that are trying to impose their rules on countries themselves ; that are continuing to exacerbate inequality , discrimination , and attacks on workers ' rights and essential public services ; and that are contributing to an increase in poverty and social exclusion , not only internationally , in less developed countries , but also here in the European Union and in many of our Member States .
Therefore , what was needed was for the Commission to adopt a strong position in order to change the situation ; to bring an end to tax havens ; to control the financial markets ; and to prevent the exacerbation of inequality and exploitation .
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , honourable Members , let me first thank you for a very substantive debate .
I believe that there is a broad consensus in this House - not a full but a broad consensus - on the selection process of the next Managing Director of the IMF .
It has to be open , transparent and merit-based .
I also sense that there is broad support - maybe not full but broad support - for Mrs Lagarde , who has already been endorsed by the EU Member States and by the Commission as their candidate for Managing Director of the IMF .
I want to make three points to respond to some of the views expressed in the course of the debate .
First , the IMF has played a key role , in cooperation with the European Union , in overcoming the sovereign debt crisis in Europe , for which Dominique Strauss-Kahn made a major contribution as the Managing Director of the International Monetary Fund .
While we still face considerable turbulence in some segments of the sovereign debt markets of certain countries , we have been able to contain the sovereign debt crisis and protect the ongoing economic recovery in Europe .
Of course the work has to go on , and we still have difficult decisions ahead of us , not least in the coming weeks in June .
But let us recall that there has been no Lehman Brothers catastrophe on European soil , and we have to make sure that there will not be .
That would be detrimental to economic growth and improving employment in Europe .
Secondly , we have had very good cooperation between the Commission , the ECB and the IMF , which was not self-evident when we started about a year and a half ago in terms of fire-fighting the financial turmoil .
Each of these three institutions has its own rules , its own philosophy and its own independence , and it was not self-evident that they could work together in order to overcome these challenges .
However , I dare to say that a pragmatic sense of crisis-awareness has prevailed and helped us to cooperate in order to contain the sovereign debt crisis and protect economic recovery .
Thirdly , I do agree that we need to reform our external representation .
As I said in my opening remarks , we now have a huge task , firstly to conclude the internal economic governance reform .
We are just about to do this , and I count on you to enable us to do it in the course of June , before the summer break .
This is extremely important for the credibility of the European Union in these times of crisis .
So let us all do our best in order to ensure that we will complete this indispensable reform of EU economic governance .
In the long term , our goal is a single seat , at least for the euro area .
In the short term , we need better practical and pragmatic policy coordination among the EU Member States that are represented in the G20 or G7 or in the IMF .
I must say that I have seen plenty of concrete improvement in that regard , so that the EU Member States that are represented in the G20 , or in the IMF or in the G7 , mostly share common goals and are mostly working together as an orchestra and not with different voices .
Yes , we have plenty of room for improvement and we have to discuss this thoroughly .
But , as I said , let us first conclude the internal governance reform and then we can come back to the issue of how to improve our external representation .
The rights of the emerging economies mean that it is in the fundamental interest of the European Union , its citizens and its Member States for us to be more united and thus more effective in advancing our causes and our interests on the global scene .
The debate is closed .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
in writing . - Whoever the next Managing Director of the IMF is , he or she will have a huge task .
The coming years are likely to be dominated by major international financial and economic governance reforms . There are many excellent candidates , and I hope the selection is based on merit , not politics .
The reality is that the EU punches below its weight at global level , be it at the G20 , IMF or WTO .
It does not speak with one coherent voice , but with many voices .
This is a serious shortcoming that particularly affects smaller Member States , who lack the diplomatic muscle of the larger nations .
Provided policy positions were agreed transparently and democratically , we would benefit from the EU playing a more active role in reshaping the international monetary and financial system .
The Committee on Economic Affairs is currently working on a report on global economic governance , which I hope will lead to Commission proposals on improvements to the EU 's external representation in this field .
The EU is an economic bloc representing over 450 million people , with a currency that is the world 's second international reserve currency .
But if we do not take it seriously , neither will the rest of the world .
Seventh EU programme for research , technological development and demonstration ( debate )
Τhe next item is the report by Mr Audy , on behalf of the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy , on the mid-term review of the Seventh Framework Programme of the European Union for research , technological development and demonstration activities ( Α7-0160 / 2011 ) .
Madam President , Mrs Geoghegan-Quinn , ladies and gentlemen , we are gathered here to evaluate the Seventh Framework Programme for research ( 2007-2013 ) , which has a budget of EUR 51 billion .

It is the biggest programme in the world , and this amount should be compared to the EUR 17 billion for the 2000-2006 programme , which covered five years , whereas this one covers seven .
The negotiations on the Seventh Framework Programme took place in 2006 and cover - I repeat - the period 2007-2013 .
Following those negotiations , we now have three new elements , which require us to turn our attention to the evaluation of the programme .
Firstly , the European Union is getting over the failure of the Lisbon strategy , which was devised by the European Council in 2000 with a view to making the European Union the world 's knowledge-based economy by 2010 .
We now have the Europe 2020 strategy .
The second new element : the failure of the constitutional treaty .
Today , the Treaty of Lisbon is in force and brings with it new powers .
The third new element : the financial crisis that reached us from the United States in 2008 .
In view of those three new elements , we must give thought to the years 2011-2013 .
We are living in extremely fragile post-crisis years and , in these times of scarce public resources , the sums at stake are substantial .
EUR 26 billion has been programmed for the first three years .
We have EUR 28.5 billion left to programme in 2011 , 2012 and 2013 .
We must therefore think carefully about the messages that we want to send to the European Commission so that it adapts its research policy to the major challenges of the day .
Other speakers will expand on what I have said , but I should like to emphasise two points : the first is simplification and the second is the response to the major challenges we face .
As regards simplification , my colleague , Mrs Carvalho , is going to discuss in detail her excellent report and , Commissioner , we welcome the Commission decision of 24 January 2011 on the creation of the Unique Registration Facility , but we must go further .
We need to simplify the future and put the past behind us .
You are well acquainted with all these issues as a former Member of the European Court of Auditors .
The three-year reform of the Financial Regulation will enable us to establish the legal basis for this simplification , but I do not think that tinkering with the tolerable risk of error is the right way to go .
We need to simplify our regulations , and it is through simplification that we will reduce the number of errors .
In the event of a disagreement between the Commission 's auditors and the bodies being audited , I propose that the option of conducting independent counter audits be permitted , and that a mediator be allowed to intervene so that we do not have to ask the Court of Justice to settle any disputes that may arise between the audited bodies and the Commission .
We really must settle this issue , Commissioner .
Next , we have the major challenges .
We must involve the industrial sector more in this Europe 2020 industrial policy , particularly with the European patent , and we must increase the participation of SMEs - small and medium-sized enterprises - and women .
Infrastructure should be cofinanced by the framework programme , the European Investment Bank , the Structural Funds and national policies .
We must encourage excellence as well as ensure a harmonious distribution of research infrastructure throughout the European Union .
We do not know today which countries will be awarded the Nobel prizes in five years ' time .
We must also honour our international commitments , such as ITER .
Lastly , for the future , we propose in this report to double the amount of research funding in order to create this European research area , with the help of the European Research Council .
This is the key to the growth we need in order to fund our social ambitions and honour our environmental commitments .
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , honourable Members , I would like to thank you for this opportunity to address all of you before the final vote on the FP7 interim evaluation report in plenary tomorrow morning .
The implementation of the Seventh Framework Programme and , in turn , the progression towards what is proposed as a common strategic framework for research and innovation , is marked by a long series of individual , but nonetheless significant , steps .
I believe that this debate today marks one of those significant steps .
Leading up to the discussions today are the months of painstaking work by Mr Audy , the shadow rapporteurs , the other members of the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy , as well as the members of the Committee on Budgets .
Evaluation is nothing if the results are not presented , discussed , questioned , and indeed either accepted or sometimes rejected , by the very stakeholders that it aims to serve , and , of course , Parliament plays a vital role in this process , not only bringing to bear a broad cross-section of experience from political and public life but , just as importantly , from the many fields of deep knowledge held by Members .
Let me make a few brief introductory remarks on the report itself .
First , this is a rich and comprehensive report that deals in a constructive way with the key issues raised in the FP7 interim evaluation .
It is most encouraging to see that the interim evaluation report triggered very substantive responses from the institutions and that these responses , although putting the emphasis sometimes on different issues , basically agree with the main findings and recommendations made by the independent evaluation experts .
The Commission is pleased to see that the quality of this evaluation work is acknowledged by Parliament .
The Commission notes that the main points raised in the present report coincide with the key issues addressed in the Commission 's response to the evaluation report .
Even though there might not be full agreement on every detail , it is important to note that there exists a core common understanding on the big ticketed items , notably , the need for a comprehensive strategy to boost research and innovation in the context of the Europe 2020 strategy , the need to make the programme more accessible to the wide range of possible contributors throughout Europe , and the need to further simplify procedures to allow all participants to focus on creativity rather than bureaucracy .
The Commission underlines its intention to take concrete measures in the remaining years of the FP7 to implement a maximum number of the concise suggestions made by the evaluators .
As an example , as Mr Audy reminded us , we have already implemented three concrete simplification measures for FP7 : more use of average personnel costs , easier procedures for owner-managers of SMEs , and a clearing committee to ensure a common interpretation of the rules .
At the same time , the recommendations and views expressed in this interim evaluation are , of course , of paramount importance for the preparation of future activities in the field of research and innovation .
This will include the necessary quantum leap in simplification , which will be made possible by a common strategic framework , new rules for participation and - with your help - a revised user-friendly Financial Regulation .
The Commission looks forward to continuing this debate through the forthcoming discussions .
Against this background , your comments today and the questions that you raise will help to sharpen our understanding still further .
Madam President , I would like to thank our wonderful Commissioner for her strong commitment to research , and I would also like to thank the rapporteur .
I have the privilege of acting as rapporteur for the Committee on Budgets on matters relating to research and I have a few brief comments from our committee .
I would like to start with a point of criticism , and that is that it would be good if evaluations of this kind could arrive in good time .
That would make our work easier , but in all other respects , the evaluation is a good one .
The Committee on Budgets thinks it is important in future to strengthen the link between research and industry in a better way so as to actually utilise the potential of new innovations and ideas in practice .
We would also like to emphasise the fact that we need to have the courage to take risks .
Without risks , we will not achieve the good results that we want .
Something else that the Commissioner herself mentioned was the question of simplifying the processes and cutting back on existing bureaucracy .
That is extremely important .
Last but not least , I would like to remind you that we need to be able to implement the Europe 2020 strategy within the Seventh Framework Programme for research ; we cannot wait until the next one .
Madam President , let me begin by congratulating the rapporteur on an excellent report and also for the way in which he conducted the work .
The current framework programme is strategically important for competitiveness and employability within Europe .
Of its funding , 50 % is yet to be spent .
As such , the mid-term review of the current framework programme is crucial so that throughout the second half of its existence , it can contribute effectively to the European economy 's recovery .
In terms of the principal recommendations for the review , I would like to highlight the importance of simplifying access to funds , and adapting thematic priorities and the suitability of rules to new challenges .
Simplifying access to research funds will allow the rules and processes to be made simpler , clearer and more transparent .
As such , any recommendations in the report which concern simplification but do not require the financial regulations to be revised should still be included in the Seventh Framework Programme .
I would like to congratulate the Commission on the measures which have already been implemented .
Secondly , I would like to highlight the need for greater emphasis to be placed on thematic areas crucial for the future of Europe , such as energy security , the environment and health care .
Thirdly , the adaptation of rules for participating in new challenges will enable , for instance , greater participation by small and medium-sized enterprises ( SMEs ) , and by young researchers in research projects .
Finally , I welcome the guidelines for the next framework programme .
I would particularly stress the recommendation to substantially increase the budget for science and innovation in the EU 's next financial framework .
Only in this way will Europe become more competitive and prosperous .



Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , first of all , I would like to thank Mr Audy for his excellent cooperation on the review of the framework programme for research .
The EU is facing a huge challenge , which is coming from the likes of China , India and Brazil .
These countries are experiencing massive economic development .
We therefore need to be even better at creating growth and jobs through research and innovation - otherwise the EU will be left out of the knowledge race .
The Seventh Framework Programme has been successful , but there is room for improvement .
I have three priorities when we negotiate the Eighth Framework Programme .
We must simplify the application and reporting procedures .
We simply have to deal with the bureaucracy .
Secondly , we must have the courage to aim for freedom and flexibility .
Researchers themselves must have the freedom to select the most important areas of research , and , in particular , the programme must be flexible enough to be able to deal with the challenges of tomorrow .
That will create better results .
We must also become better at being able to work and think in an interdisciplinary manner .

Madam President , the Seventh Framework Programme for research is the largest research programme in the world : it has a budget of EUR 54.6 billion for the current period 2007-2013 and has funded over 9 000 projects to date .
The question is whether its results are worthy of this major investment .
Judging from the previous speeches , I think that to ask the question is partly to answer it .

Europe is struggling to do as well as it might , and we know the main reasons for this , as they have been pointed out : there is , broadly speaking , a North-South divide in Europe where research and development are concerned ; Europe is also lagging behind in terms of research and development spending by businesses ; and researchers and SMEs have difficulty in accessing the various programmes , as our rapporteur mentioned .
There is room for optimism , and fortunately so , because the Council , Parliament and the Commission are fully in agreement on this issue and are aware of this need to shift the focus of European research and innovation on to the major social and economic challenges that exist .
I am , of course , thinking of climate change - an issue already discussed - but I am also thinking of energy security , the post-Fukushima period , which will have to be managed , and food safety , rocked by the E. Coli bacterium .
It is also vital to avoid doing too much at once - in this respect , I obviously share Mr Audy 's desire to set clearly defined priorities for the Europe of research .
That is the idea expressed in paragraph 9 of the report .
Europe must give itself the means to achieve specific major objectives .
The rapporteur also mentioned the EUR 28 billion still to be spread over the remaining three years .
Since we are talking about specific priorities and areas , I shall conclude by specifically mentioning one such area - nanotechnologies - in which I believe more investment is needed , given the many sectors in which they can potentially be used : medicine , agri-food production , electronics , new materials and new energies .
Yes , it is up to our experts to start this revolution , but the European Union - I am about to finish - must take the lead and conquer this territory of the infinitely small .
on behalf of the ECR Group . - Madam President , research and innovation are key to delivering growth and to meeting our biggest challenges .
I have seen much excellent research funded by European grants , both in collaborative projects with industry and across borders , and in individual grants to expert scientists .
However , Europe 's framework programme has a reputation for being the most bureaucratic in the world .
Commissioner , I still think you can do more for simplification .
Money is tight and funds must get rapidly to the scientists in the lab , and not just to those who fill in the forms and check the accounts .
Not every bid can be financed , and in the world of research , added value is , of course , difficult to measure , but I do not believe that a common European system for evaluating performance is the only way forward .
We need scientists who compete with the best in the world and they should be evaluated on the world stage .
We also must not compromise that principle of excellence .
The European Research Council , for example , has done much to support individual scientists .
If their mandate is changed to support team-based projects , this must not be to the detriment of supporting individuals of excellence .
I would like to see more money for research but there is no bottomless bank account .
I , and my group , cannot support doubling the EU budget in one area without a commitment to showing where that money can come from elsewhere .
We would instead like to see public money work more intelligently , both alongside private investment and through better public procurement .

Madam President , first and foremost , I would like to begin by thanking Mr Audy for the work he has done and for the excellent way he has collaborated with all of us , in all the groups , and for the openness that he has shown throughout the process .
I think that the review of this Seventh Framework Programme is absolutely crucial .
I cannot stress enough the importance of issues like transparency , simplification and redistribution , which are essential , and are clearly outlined in this report and in the positions Parliament has been adopting .
I think research and innovation are fundamental contributions to a fairer , more redistributive and more sustainable development model , so we cannot let some factors fall by the wayside .
Since many have already been mentioned here , I will mention factors that are often forgotten .
Firstly , the review has made clear that the distribution of research funds continues to be too concentrated , and we cannot afford to lose sight of this .
Some countries , research units and centres , and large industries are able to access research funds far more easily than others .
We cannot agree with this model .
We have to achieve an increase in participation by the new Member States and the countries of the south , which , incidentally , happen to have the greatest need for access to funding .
Secondly , I believe that the participation of actual participants and civil society organisations should also be increased .
Small and medium-sized enterprises ( SMEs ) continue to present an important challenge .
Thirdly , a note on the precariousness of research work : research that is high quality or excellent will not be possible if we continue to allow researchers in certain parts of Europe to be subjected to working conditions which are not worthy of that name .
That said , I would , above all , like to express my thanks for the work that has been done .
I think this is an important step for Parliament .
on behalf of the EFD Group . - Madam President , I would like to thank Mr Audy for his excellent report .
The FP7 is one of the largest research programmes in the world , and it is good for us to do the mid-term evaluation .
First of all , I am delighted to see that there is a unanimous call for simplification measures for our rules on financing methods .
Secondly , it is important that we focus on the inadequate participation of SMEs in the programme and that we call for measures to improve this , especially since future growth and job creation in the EU depend on them .
Thirdly , I strongly support the Marie Curie Actions .
I would also like to add that it would be vital in the medium term to develop a mechanism to evaluate and assess the progress and the measurable impact of innovation policies and programmes in the EU .
To conclude , I must say that the level of financing of FP7 must be maintained , as we realise that investing in R & D is key to achieving the objectives of the Europe 2020 strategy .
( DE ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , firstly , I would like to thank Mr Audy and all my fellow Members who have worked on this .
A review of this kind is , of course , an important prerequisite for the conclusions that we then need to draw .
We would surely all agree that the question of investment in research is central to the future of Europe .
However , whether we then have the courage to draw the right conclusions from this remains to be seen when we go into the next round .
Do we have the courage to ensure that we do , and will we manage to make adequate financial resources available ?
Everyone says that we will , but it will be difficult .
How will we manage to use the existing resources more efficiently ?
I am very grateful for the fact that , in this debate , we have attached a great deal of importance to the question of simplification , including in connection with Mrs Carvalho 's report .
How are we going to do things more simply , faster and more effectively , and how are we going to achieve better results with the existing resources ?
Alongside the question of adequate funding , that is another key issue .
Thirdly , we must ensure - and in this regard I would contradict some of my fellow Members - that we do not distribute the funds according to the principle that ' everyone should get a bit ' .
That is not the principle we should use for research funds .
Research funds can only be allocated according to the principle of excellence .
The result - regrettably - is that the funds are not distributed equally to all Member States .
That means that we face an enormous task , namely that of ensuring that improvements are made in precisely those Member States that do not yet meet the excellence criteria .
For this , we clearly need other instruments , because this issue has not yet been resolved .
In future , we will need an array of instruments , not to ensure that the funds are evenly distributed , but so that other funds with other instruments are used in order to place the emphasis on particular aspects .
Last but not least , we must fund fewer projects .
We cannot avoid taking a decision as regards which elementary aspects we want to focus on .
If everyone introduces a new subject , it will not benefit research funding in the long run .
We need to have the courage to look and see what is particularly good and what , in particular , we want to continue to fund .
( ES ) Madam President , Commissioner , to what extent have the weaknesses detected in our R & D system become strengths with the Seventh Framework Programme ?
There was a need to stimulate basic research and the European Research Council was fittingly created , which will be required to perform better at combining excellence and cohesion in the future .
There was a need for more researchers and the Marie Curie Actions were introduced , which still require an even greater effort .
A greater degree of participation was sought by small and medium-sized enterprises ( SMEs ) , and we have successfully attained a figure close to 15 % , which could be further improved with increased simplification .
There was also a need for more funding , particularly private funding , which still remains a weakness , not only due to the crisis , but because certain instruments such as Joint Technological Initiatives ( JTIs ) frankly leave room for improvement .
Nonetheless , Mr Audy , I have no doubt that , thanks to the lessons learnt in this mid-term review , the framework programme will reach an even greater degree of excellence .
Congratulations on your report .

Madam President , first of all , I would like to thank the experts from the Commission and the rapporteur , Mr Audy , for their work .
This mid-term retrospection is crucial .
The EU has a lack of reactivity , which has prevented it from achieving the Lisbon strategy targets .
Nevertheless , in terms of research and innovation , there are a few points where the EU still has the leadership and can be proud .
The EU faces many challenges that are not necessarily faced by its competitors , yet it manages to stay in the competition .
I am referring to the lack of natural presence of energy sources on European soil , which is definitely an obstacle to development and innovation .
I am also referring to the ageing of the European population , which is another challenge which characterises the EU .
But in spite of this , the EU has the most ambitious and the most binding regulations in terms of environmental protection .
It also has the highest social standards and respects workers at work .
I think we can be proud of this fact .
We live on a continent where certain values are still a core concern and are not too greatly affected by globalisation .
In my opinion , you could not become the most sustainable knowledge-based economy in the world without having respect for the values which characterise European society .
I believe this will pay dividends in the future .
( PL ) Madam President , an increase in innovation in the European Union is one of the key elements of economic development , especially in times of crisis .
The rapporteur correctly placed great emphasis on this aspect .
Unfortunately , it seems to me that some key questions were presented in too general a manner .
First of all , however , it is worth mentioning the relatively small amount of money earmarked for innovation in the new EU Member States .
You could almost say that the huge difference and disproportion between the countries of the old Union and the new EU Member States are striking in this instance .
This was mentioned in merely one sentence in the report .
Their modest participation is negatively perceived , and has a negative impact on the sustainable development of the Union , as well as on its cohesion .
It is worth mentioning here that in spite of the EUR 86 billion earmarked for research during the funding period 2007-2013 , there is no sign of any change in this state of affairs , so the funds awarded under the Cohesion Fund for innovation in the next financial perspective should take greater account of the factor of balanced management of funds for the old and the new EU Member States .
After all , this innovation represents an opportunity for these new European countries , and their science and new technologies should also be developed for the general good of Europe , in a cohesive way .
It should also be stressed that research funding problems primarily affect small and medium-sized enterprises .
In view of the tightening of monetary policy due to the financial and economic crisis , loans , which are essential for long-term investments linked to innovation , are being restricted .
This state of affairs must be taken into account in order to make it easier for small and medium-sized enterprises to be awarded loans for such purposes .
It is also worth mentioning that administrative procedures in this regard need to be simplified .

( IT ) Madam President , I , too , should like to thank Mr Audy and the entire Committee on Industry , Research and Energy for the excellent work they have carried out and for the useful debate that has developed around this incredibly important topic .
I think that there is just one point that has not yet been made here today and that is the need to acknowledge that Europe is now some way behind in terms of research and innovation .
We are quick to boast of the results we have achieved but we would do equally well to recognise that , in some areas , we are lagging behind not only our traditional competitor , the United States , but also very strong competitors such as China and other countries .
I therefore think that if Europe does not want to fall in on itself and die , it must decide to invest more heavily in research and innovation .
This is not , however , a decision that we need to make this evening during this debate but rather in the context of a broader debate that relates to the financial perspective and the whole question of how to use the resources that we have at our disposal .
In short , this is definitely the number one issue !
That said , I believe that the issues addressed by Mr Audy and Mrs Carvalho - on which I will focus in other speeches - are all worthy of note .
They cover simplification , the need to coordinate funding , the attempt to develop Europe 2020 , excellence and innovation , while reflecting the fact that there are two main strands to all this : the first is small and medium-sized enterprises , the beating heart of Europe , where we must promote innovation and promote it through simplification ; and the second is large research centres , which we really ought to have more of .


( FR ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , this very fine report by our fellow Member , Mr Audy , summarises all our discussions with the operators in the sector .
I am not going to go over their assessment of our Seventh Framework Programme : that it is indispensable but too complicated and too bureaucratic .
I would just like to emphasise two points .
Firstly , innovation .
Parliament has pledged to promote it , but it must not do so at the expense of fundamental research .
As we well know , the main result of research is knowledge , followed by the opportunity to enhance that result in the economic sector , or indeed the industrial sector .
A clear distinction must be made , then , between the manipulation and the enhancement of fundamental research .
Secondly , financing .
We all agree that the budget should match our ambitions .
I would go so far as to say that , on this issue , we should be innovative by being consistent .
It is pointless bringing in more instruments ; let us make the existing ones more effective .
In this respect , the risk-sharing finance facility is a real success , but it must take a more inclusive approach to SMEs and research infrastructure .
I therefore call on the Commission to do everything in its power to solve the disputes as quickly as possible and to take into account the courses of action proposed in this report .
( SL ) Madam President , the Seventh Framework Programme came into force in 2007 after enlargement of the EU by 12 new Member States .
Obviously , these two major enlargements have increased diversity in the European Union .
This is where the question arises : does the Seventh Framework Programme adequately take into account that diversity , i.e. has it been designed so as to promote research excellence uniformly throughout the European Union .
The review has identified certain patterns , of which I note two in particular .
Firstly , uneven geographical participation and poor participation in projects by researchers from certain parts of the Union , especially those from the less developed regions and from the countries which joined the EU in 2004 or later .
Secondly , researchers from the smaller Member States are very poorly represented as project coordinators .
The explanation I have so far been given for this situation is that research excellence is the main criterion for selection to the Seventh Framework Programme .
This leads to the conclusion that the quality of research in the regions which are very poorly represented in the projects is low .
You could wonder , though , if that actually is the real reason .
Such pronouncements should not be made arbitrarily .
I therefore call on the Commission to look into the causes of this rather uneven geographical distribution of projects and coordinators .
After all , it is in the interests of the Member States which are lagging behind EU research excellence to take advantage of resources from the European Structural Funds to strengthen their scientific and research sectors .
This opportunity should also be available in the next financial perspective .
However , structural funds should be used only within the Member States to which they have been allocated .
The idea that such funds should flow from the less developed countries to the more developed ones in order for the latter to build their research infrastructure , for example , is unacceptable , because the gap between regions would only increase .
I hope that the Commission will be able to dispel doubts with regard to equal opportunities for researchers and coordinators from various regions and countries of the Union , provided , obviously , that they meet the scientific excellence requirement .
( PT ) Madam President , I would like to begin by congratulating Mr Audy on his excellent report .
Although it was overdue , the mid-term review pointed out the most critical aspects of the Seventh Framework Programme : its excessive bureaucracy , industry 's lack of interest , the sheer number and complexity of its new instruments , and the slow pace of payments .
There is also an increased risk of large transfers of funds from the current framework programme to large-scale programmes which offer questionable added value .
However , the report was also able to point to positive elements , such as stronger international cooperation between scientific groups working on common projects , certain success stories , like the European Research Council , and a better gender balance .
There are certain elements that need to be prioritised : firstly , the simplification of the programme , and secondly , the promotion of scientific excellence , not only in some countries but throughout Europe , a stronger connection between the framework programme and innovation , and with instruments directed at small and medium-sized enterprises ( SMEs ) and entrepreneurship .
The Eurostar programme is the most successful example of this and should be developed further .
( DE ) Madam President , what we need to do , quite simply , is to strengthen the research community and thus the economic power of Europe amidst international competition .
We therefore need to examine what own resources could be available to us in the Eighth Framework Programme for research .
I would like to call on the Commissioner to make use of the revenue generated through the emissions trading system in order to actually resolve the CO2 problem .
That would be a significant starting point .
We would have tens of billions of euro available to us that we could use for the ' intelligent energy ' programme , for our wide range of battery platforms , and for the many ways of providing ourselves with a sustainable environment .
That could be discussed with Commissioner Lewandowski and , of course , with the finance ministers .
We also need to enhance the Competition and Innovation Programme ( CIP ) .
I believe that , in the CIP in particular , information and communications technology should be used to provide the necessary equipment and hardware to allow researchers to communicate faster , better and more efficiently using the latest technology .
Integrating optical fibre connections in satellite equipment and forming corresponding clusters would be a sensational undertaking , as would the establishment of the European Institute for Technology .
In this regard , we simply need to introduce the content of the research carried out in the Seventh Framework Programme for research and the CIP and the various other programmes to our educational establishments , namely , to professors , teachers and nursery school teachers .
We quite simply need pupils and students to have access to the most up-to-date knowledge of our time .
Last but not least , the European Research Council does an excellent job , and the work that it funds should be made widely available to the public as quickly as possible .
I would like to expressly thank Mr Audy once again for supporting small and medium-sized enterprises , and as Mr Correia De Campos also said , the ' Eurostars ' programme could become one of the major projects of the future .

( RO ) Madam President , first of all , I , too , need to congratulate Mr Audy for all his efforts on this report .
Our capacity to unite and coordinate our efforts on research determines our economic competitiveness .
I support the idea that better coordination , coherence and synergy between the Seventh Framework Programme and the Structural and Cohesion Funds may also improve the participation of currently under-represented Member States .
Collaborative transnational research must remain a priority .
Member States must cooperate rather than compete with each other .
The success rate , which has been modest so far , can be improved by simplifying administrative and financial regulations .
To conclude in English : earlier this year , Commissioner Quinn stated that ' we need to send red tape to the shredder .
We need simple and clear rules , consistently and rigorously applied ' .
Today I ask you , Commissioner , to help us to move from words to action . Thank you .
( NL ) Madam President , Commissioner , rapporteur , sometimes it is good to take a look back , especially in the midst of a period like this one , and just before establishing the financial framework and the legislative programme of this House .
What becomes clear is that scientific research in Europe is top quality .
The problem is how to turn that research into products and how to organise the whole chain .
Clearly , there is not all that much sense in us generating very large numbers of patents that are sold all over the world if the resultant added value then ends up in other parts of the world .
Thus , we need to capture the interest of our people and get them involved in such a way - we need to train them in such a way - that the whole process takes place here .
I have a second comment to make .
This is all about excellence , but excellence must stand on its own two feet rather than simply being free floating intelligence .
Excellence must take root in the regions and the cities .
It must not be allowed to be the case that this high degree of added value is only found in the metropolitan regions .
As Parliament , it is our job to bring about the combination of what the research produces and what can be done with that in terms of innovation .
You have formulated your own Innovation Union , with very good initiatives , and then there are also the various other funds , such as the structural funds , for example , which we can use for this purpose .
Over the coming years , we need to make use of the conditionality .
In this sense , we need to also ensure that regions that are lagging a little behind invest in specialisation .
This can also take place with the Member States ' own money , not just through European funding .
In that way , you create a common agenda , and instruments such as joint programming are also of great importance in this regard .
I have two more brief points to make .
First of all , we need to persist with facilities that bear risks .
This initiative , the European Investment Bank 's risk-sharing finance facility , has worked exceedingly well .
Secondly , Mrs Carvalho , of course , you have done very well .
There is less red tape .
Now let go of the reins on these joint technology initiatives ( JTIs ) , where industry plays a 50 % role , yet we carry on as if they were public sector organisations !
That simply cannot work .
You have my thanks for this interim report .
It is very important , and when the new regulations are laid down , we will translate it into new prospects .
( PL ) Madam President , I would like to thank the rapporteur for the work he has done .
The most important issue which I would like to highlight is the simplification of current rules and procedures for programmes supporting research and innovation activities , and the need to identify the reasons for the under-representation of the new EU Member States .
A future framework programme must meet current needs in such a way that each country is able to develop a research area , research activities and innovation with the help of common financial instruments , which , if they are well managed , would make it possible for measures to be focused on social and market needs .
Making it possible for associations , for enterprises , especially micro-enterprises in the form of clusters , and for national or regional networks of technological platforms to participate in a future framework programme is an essential task .
At the same time , I would like to stress that maintaining the diversity of the European Union 's regions in the field of innovation requires particular attention to be paid to the formulation of a common strategic financial framework for scientific research and innovation .
It is also worth paying attention to the synergy of actions taken at European , national and regional level , with the additional introduction of common administrative and financial regulations , and a compulsory harmonisation of rules and conditions governing participation in various programmes , creating a common and transparent system .
I hope that the conclusions drawn during the evaluation process for the Seventh Framework Programme will form the basis for further work on the next one , the Eighth .
Madam President , first of all , I would like to congratulate the rapporteur for his eminent report on this mid-term review .
I think there are three things that should be underlined .
The first point is simplification - less bureaucracy - and we stated that when we started the Seventh Framework Programme .
It did become less bureaucratic , and I think researchers and others dealing with these projects are aware of that , but there is much more to do .
And I think that in some ways , we can put greater trust in the universities that have existed for centuries .
They will not run away with the money .
The second point is excellence .
The whole value of our joint and common effort is that we are trying to add a special European value , providing excellence .
We have all the Member States financing their research and science and we also have , as has been mentioned , the Structural Funds .
With regard to this framework programme , if we do not aim for excellence , we will lose the competitive edge that we need to have in the future .
The third point is mobility .
I think one of the striking things we have experienced is that the mobility we can achieve via the framework programme is creating the special climate and the special preconditions for excellence .
And I am happy that the rapporteur has made the proposal for a research voucher , trying to secure that we have a spontaneous process for excellence between researchers in Europe by creating and increasing their mobility .
So once again , my thanks to the rapporteur .
( GA ) Madam President , we are not often unanimous on a subject in this Chamber and it was clear today that the Commission and the various Members of Parliament were unanimous on this subject and especially on how we should move forward .
Great praise is due to the rapporteur , Mr Audy .
As the Commissioner said , ' He brought forward a rich and comprehensive report ' .
He brought forward a rich and comprehensive report and I am delighted that the emphasis has been on a few simple things .
The first one is simple itself : simplification .
The need for simplification is absolutely vital .
I was pleased to hear the Commissioner saying that we are moving to a user-friendly financial regulation .
We have got to simplify , trust the researchers and ensure that we have the very best researchers .
If we have that , then we will get results .
Finally , we have failed with the Lisbon strategy .
This situation cannot be repeated .
It is through research , demonstration and delivery that we can achieve the competitiveness that Europe so badly needs .
( RO ) Madam President , in the current climate , and with a view to meeting the EU 2020 objectives , the Seventh Framework Programme needs to respond to the current challenges .
Making it simpler for SMEs to access funding affords them an opportunity to develop new types of services and products .
The level of financial contribution , the documentation which needs to be produced , the provision of access to information and specialist advice must be realistic because , otherwise , we will not be able to create the framework facilitating SMEs ' access to this programme , regardless of the objectives .
I also think it is vital that greater importance is attached to the development of research at regional level by encouraging multi-level partnerships and supporting the drafting of methodological guides or guidelines for this purpose .
We cannot meet objectives without clearly establishing the procedures and encouraging or supporting the development of useful tools .
Madam President , I , too , would like to thank the rapporteur and the Commissioner .
As they both said , research and innovation is important for the future of the European economy .
I certainly know that there are many universities in Wales , for example , which will take advantage of European funding .
Therefore , I think that it is important that we all support adequate funding for research and innovation in the EU budget ; we should not say we support it in this meeting and vote against it in the budget meetings .
On the key issues raised this afternoon , of course we would all support simplification , such as a common set of rules .
I am aware , however , of some concerns about always using flat rates and lump sums , so I believe we should be looking for some flexibility and discretion in those areas .
I would also argue that we should focus on performance .
But while performance is important , research and innovation does mean we also have to accept some risk- taking as well , and we cannot rule that out .
Finally , I would also support the proposal to create better links between universities and businesses so that we can take advantage of all the research and development undertaken .
( RO ) Madam President , competitiveness is not an option for the European Union .
The European Union must be globally competitive , which is why we need to invest in research and innovation .
Unfortunately , the beneficiaries of the research programmes use a number of national and EU sources of funding .
However , all these sources of funding very often have different procedures and rules , which makes it difficult to access EU funds and complicates matters for the beneficiaries , given the different rules which need to be learnt .
We also think that research and innovation in the European Union can only be developed by cutting red tape , simplifying and converging procedures , developing applied research and making it easier for small and medium-sized enterprises to access funding .
We deplore the fact that , due to the economic and financial crisis , Member States have reduced their education and research budgets and we call on them to invest in education as a priority during this crisis period , as the quality of research and innovation also depends on this .
I wish to thank the rapporteur , Mr Audy , for accepting the amendment I tabled asking the Commission to introduce more money in the Seventh Framework Programme for research into , and development of , GNSS applications and services .
Madam President , I believe that this report will have broad agreement across all groups in Parliament .
The key element of this report is that the Union must stay at the forefront in the area of research , innovation and science .
This is important because without research , we cannot become the innovators of tomorrow .
We need research if we are to create jobs , and we need research , of course , to maintain employment in the EU and to remain competitive against the emerging economies .
We also need the public sector and , indeed , the private sector , which I believe is the engine of growth in the economy , to work together in a spirit of partnership .
Efforts to encourage greater participation by SMEs must also be encouraged at the highest level and we must ensure that bureaucracy is kept to the minimum .
The EU Heads of State or Government endorsed the ' Innovation Union ' flagship initiative when they met on 4 February , but endorsement is not sufficient .
Now we need action , and I know full well that Commissioner Geoghegan-Quinn is a Commissioner of action and will follow through .
Research and innovation are the key tools .
They are the tools at our disposal to help Europe through the economic crisis that we currently face .
( DE ) Madam President , the review of the Seventh Framework Programme for research and technological development ( FP7 ) should be based on the advantages and disadvantages that the projects bring for citizens .
I am thinking , for example , of the INDECT project , which was funded by the FP7 .
The intended benefit of combating terrorism has to be weighed against citizens ' freedom and data protection .
With any project , we must therefore ask the question : who will profit from it and whose rights will be inadmissibly curtailed ?
That also applies to the funding of research in the field of genetic engineering .
The ones who profit from this are the large food manufacturers , the lobbyists , but certainly not our citizens .
Yes , we must invest to a greater extent in research and development , but we also need better evaluation of the projects , which , at the end of day , are funded by taxpayers .
Madam President , thank you to the rapporteur for this report and my thanks also to the Commissioner who recently paid a visit to my constituency of Northern Ireland , where I know she saw some excellent examples of research and innovation .
The Northern Ireland economy is a small and medium-sized enterprise economy - 97 % of all businesses can be classified in this way - yet it is an economy that lags behind other regions of the United Kingdom and Europe in drawing down money from the framework programme .
Bureaucracy is cited as the main difficulty and many small businesses are simply more concerned about keeping open the door than they are about the long-term benefits of the research and innovation programme .
I believe that the example shown by the aerospace industry in Northern Ireland is a significant one - larger companies mentoring and helping smaller companies to actually access the programme - and I would use this opportunity to call upon the Commissioner to provide us with radical and new ways for small and medium-sized enterprises to benefit from this very important programme .
( DE ) Madam President , the Seventh Framework Programme for research is not just about research in general ; it is also about a specific field of research that ought to be of particular concern to all of us following the Fukushima disaster .
It is also about funds from the Euratom programme .
As we all know , it is the nuclear lobby that has succeeded in recent years in promoting nuclear power as a climate-friendly alternative .
It is particularly strong in some EU Member States .
We are also well aware that some Member States have gone in for nuclear power in such a way that it would not be easy for them to switch to alternatives .
What is the use of productive reactors if they buckle under water masses or in the event of earthquakes ?
What is the use of the most productive nuclear power station if a minor fault is enough to make not only the immediate surroundings , but the whole region uninhabitable for decades ?
It is therefore important for us to focus more strongly on nuclear safety and to push ahead with the development of alternatives .
Now that the Euratom research programme is shortly to be extended to 2012 and 2013 , Fukushima ought to be taken as an opportunity for a rethink .
( PL ) Madam President , listening to today 's debate on the Seventh Framework Programme , I would like to take the opportunity to draw your attention to the preparations for the following programme , the Eighth Framework Programme .
We already have a Green Paper about it which barely mentions the need for research in other areas , such as fisheries .
Unfortunately , direct funding of research in this sector is developing in a very worrying direction .
We started off with resources which gradually decreased in subsequent programmes , and these radical cuts led to the Seventh FP totally excluding marine research as a specific funding target .
In the next framework programme , this situation must change so that we will be able to fulfil the aims of the reformed common fisheries policy .
The fisheries sector is facing many problems , so research and scientific support work are powerful tools for the further sustainable development of this sector .
This is why it is so important to allocate appropriate funding for this aim . Thank you .
Madam President , I am very grateful for the valuable debate we have had here this evening and I would like to thank all the Members who participated in that valuable debate .
I will work closely with this House as we move forward and build a future programme for research and innovation with a genuine European added value .
By the end of the year - on 30 November in fact - we will put on the table our proposals for future funding programmes for research and innovation within the common strategic framework .
We have already set out some ideas in our Green Paper about how to achieve this by bringing together the different instruments at EU level under a single umbrella .
We can support the whole innovation chain , all the way from the basic research to market deployment .
In this way , I believe , we will get the maximum impact from our investments .
I look forward very much to hearing the outcome of your debates on our Green Paper , which I understand will be adopted in late summer .
I can assure you that the enriching inputs given by the Carvalho , Merkies , Audy and Matias reports will be duly taken into account when preparing the legislative proposals .
Finally , let me recall that on 10 June , we will organise the wrap-up event of the Green Paper consultation to which several Members of this Parliament have been invited , some of you as speakers .
I would like to inform the Members of the House that more than 1 300 responses to the online questionnaire were received .
There were also an unprecedented number of position papers .
We received over 700 such papers from national governments , from European-level associations , from businesses , from universities , and from regional and local organisations .
Replies came from all countries of the European Union and beyond .
I believe that this has shown the great interest that Europe attaches to research and innovation as policies for our future growth .
So let me thank you once again for the insight and the impetus that this House has given to the FP7 interim evaluation .
Madam President , I should like to thank the Presidency of Parliament for having allowed this debate to take place , as it was not on the agenda initially .
It is very helpful for all the political groups to be able to debate this important issue .
I should also like to say how grateful we are to you , Commissioner .
I speak on behalf of all those who hold you in high esteem .
You even have the support of the Irish members of the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) .
As you can see , on these issues , anyway , anything can happen .
Thank you for what you are doing .
We are really counting on you when it comes to simplification and to the important messages we are sending you , Commissioner .
I should like to thank the rapporteurs from all the political groups , my fellow Members who tabled numerous amendments , and the contributors to this report - and may I say a special thank you to those from the PPE Group .
Thank you for discussing the issue of simplification ; we have taken note of your comments .
The words ' industrial competitiveness ' raise expectations .
We must make the link between research and trade - that is , between research and innovation - via the European patent .
Research must be transformed into growth .
As Mr Reul said , we must , of course , encourage excellence .
We must become the best in the world , and it is excellence that will get us there .
As I said before , however , we do not know who the Nobel prizewinners will be in five or ten years ' time .
Therefore , we need to strike a balance between excellence and distribution across the EU .
Just as in sport , where we win with the world 's best players , we need to have the world 's best researchers .
Excellence is the key word .
Lastly , we have proposed to double the amount of funding , but not at the expense of agriculture or of the Structural Funds .
The aim is better coordination with the Member States .
The Heads of State or Government have told us that they will not be increasing the amount of public sector contributions .
Instead , we must improve the coordination of European funds , national funds and regional funds - some of which , incidentally , come from European funds - for the sake of consistency and good policy making .
My final point , Madam President , is this : I had proposed - the proposal was not taken up , but this is a subject that we shall have to address on a political level - that we adopt a European research plan for the defence industry .
The time has come for the European Union and the Member States , under Article 45 of the Treaty on European Union , to consider a major research programme in the field of defence equipment and , of course , dual use equipment .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 : 00 .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
The Seventh Framework Programme for research and technological development ( FP7 ) is the world 's most significant research support programme , which plays a key role in maintaining the competitiveness of Europe and the implementation of the Europe 2020 strategy .
FP7 demonstrates a significant added value in the field of European research and innovation .
However , the mid-term review revealed several areas that need to be developed .
In my opinion , two aspects are crucial for the future success of FP7 .
The first and most urgent task would be the simplification of bureaucratic burdens .
The overly complex administration is costly and provides a disincentive for SMEs to participate in FP7 .
Elimination of parallel structures , quicker transfer of funds , and harmonisation of FP7 with national priorities can all contribute to making the largest possible number of actors interested in research and innovation activities .
Secondly , I would like to emphasise the importance of an excellence-based approach , since the financial resources of FP7 can most effectively be used if the selection of research projects to be supported is based on excellence .
However , the mid-term review revealed that certain countries are under-represented in respect of the transfer of funds .
The main reason behind this is that these Member States do not have a research background infrastructure that would make it possible for them to meet the excellence-based criteria .
Thus , the synergies between FP7 and the Structural and Cohesion Funds need to be revised , which , in turn , could promote the development of infrastructures which are lagging behind .
In this way , we can provide a level playing field for all Member States where excellence-based assessment is concerned .
The Seventh Framework Programme for research , technological development and demonstration activities is an important instrument for achieving the Europe 2020 strategy targets .
Europe 's leading role in technological innovation and the Union 's future competitiveness are also very dependent on scientific research .
In this regard , what is required is greater focus on support for the programme , a stronger connection with business requirements and better coordination with the EU 's other financial instruments and with the Structural Funds .
Important factors contributing to the programme 's success also include providing access to information about the potential opportunities it offers to the widest number of stakeholders possible and simplifying the application procedures , which are excessively complicated at the moment .
I want to reiterate the need to promote widely the results of successfully completed projects so that more companies can access and , where possible , use them .
Science does not exist as an end in itself .
It should provide benefits for the economy and society .
Links between individual programmes need to be strengthened to ensure consistency when carrying out scientific and demonstration projects , as well as marketing testing and market replication projects .
This will enable us to achieve greater efficiency and higher European added value from FP7 funding .
An abiding problem in all reports on innovation is the lack of a clear and specific framework for R & D investment from EU funds .
This problem is apparent yet again in the Audy report and , what is more , it involves yet another unresolved issue , namely , the imbalance in EU funding .
The author barely mentions the lack of equality in absorption of funding between Western Europe and the new EU Member States .
The poor state of funding can be seen , inter alia , in the take-up of the risk-sharing finance facility ( RSFF ) .
Projects cofinanced under the facility have been implemented in only 18 out of 27 Member States .
Additionally , its greatest beneficiaries are applicants from the so-called old EU Member States : Germany ( 23.1 % of all those awarded funding ) , Spain ( 19.1 % ) , the United Kingdom ( 9.9 % ) and the Netherlands ( 8.3 % ) .
Today , around one third of research is funded under the facility .
It seems to me that it should be proportionally increased so that the entrepreneur 's own contribution should not exceed 10 to 15 % of the required amount ( currently , the amount required is 15 to 25 % of the amount allocated for research ) .
We should remember that one of the EU 's main tasks is to eliminate social and geographical imbalances through the distribution of benefits deriving from innovation throughout the EU .
We will not be able to achieve this goal if we neglect the new EU Member States in financial terms , thus supporting a further one-sided ' brain drain ' .
I welcome the emerging trend for increased funding for scientific research in the European Union .
At the same time , I believe that it is essential to combine our forces and expenditure in this area .
Reforms should be implemented at national level as soon as possible to enable the creation of centres that cooperate well and to avoid duplication of work on the same projects .
This would also contribute to an improved use of funds .
The European Union must remember the significance of research in terms of providing a competitive edge in today 's global world .
In particular , Member States should reform the way they carry out research on security , one of the key areas mentioned in the report , to ensure that it is optimised during times of financial crisis .
The attractive nature of the Seventh Framework Programme for research has not been fully demonstrated in the industrial sector .
In addition to the need for new funding , better coordination is also required between the European Union , Member States and regions on research , development and innovation ( RDI ) .
Firstly , the link between the Cohesion Funds and the Framework Programme for research must be improved .
I must stress the importance of the cohesion policy as it has become a major source of support in Europe for research and innovation .
Secondly , research and innovation policies must be tailored to the market 's specific needs .
The demand for innovative technologies on the EU market must be identified in order to sell the results of innovation .
I think that suitable financial instruments should be available to support the successful introduction of innovative technologies on the EU market .
Last but not least , I should mention that in the EU , there is an extreme imbalance in terms of financial allocation , with the results indicating that the old Member States absorb the majority of the financial resources .
This situation runs counter to the territorial cohesion objective whereby Member States are developed in a balanced manner from a geographical perspective , which is an objective stipulated in the Treaty of Lisbon .
I welcome the proposal to ensure that research supported under the Seventh Framework Programme is aimed at finding solutions to the EU 's problems in the areas set out in the Cooperation chapter of the Seventh Framework Programme .
This primarily involves health care , including clinical and preventive research and medical technologies .
Cancer is the second most common cause of death in Europe , and due to the fact that the population is ageing , it is expected that one man in three and one woman in four will have direct experience of this disease by the age of 75 .
Cancer research is on the brink of a number of breakthroughs , especially with regard to more accurate and less expensive methods , and also methods that are less distressing for patients , in relation to both preventative check-ups and actual treatments .
Funding cancer research can save people 's lives and cut treatment costs .
I applaud the political will in support of funding that has already been earmarked for cancer research under the programme .
This funding must not be reduced in the EU 's current economic situation ; on the contrary , we must provide more .
I would like to emphasise that if we can join forces to accomplish ambitious projects such as abolishing state borders or constructing space stations , we should be able to find a way to turn cancer into a disease that no one need fear .
In order to do so , we need support for , and coordination of , research into treatment methods and prevention .
The fight against cancer is a European issue which should be a priority for us , from the funding under the Seventh Framework Programme to the umbrella agency at European level .
EU-Canada trade relations ( debate )
The next item is the debate on the question to the Commission on EU-Canada trade relations , by Vital Moreira , on behalf of the Committee on International Trade - B7-0213 / 2011 ) .
Madam President , as Chair of Parliament 's Committee on International Trade , it falls to me to table an oral question to the Commission concerning the negotiation of an economic and trade agreement with Canada .
Two years after they started , in May 2009 , there are indications that these negotiations may be concluded in the course of the current year .
Given the progress of the negotiations , now is therefore an ideal moment to get information from the Commission concerning some of the most important points in these negotiations .
The text of the question adopted by my committee is well known and , to save me from reading it , Madam President , please allow me to assume there are copies .
As we know , since the Treaty of Lisbon , Parliament has had the right to be informed on all stages of negotiation for international agreements .
This obviously includes international trade agreements , which constitute an exclusive competence of Parliament , and for which parliamentary scrutiny is more justified .
It is important to mention that the Commissioner for Trade , Mr de Gucht , and the Directorate-General for Trade have fulfilled this duty of providing information to the parliamentary committee which I chair , in this and other cases .
It is nonetheless important to share information with Parliament and the public on the most important issues at stake , given the progress of the negotiations in this instance .
This includes matters which are very sensitive for Parliament and the European public such as , for example , the issue of the famous tar sands and Canadian opposition in the World Trade Organisation to the European ban on products made from seals .
We therefore believe this oral question and the developments that it may entail to be of particular importance .
It only remains to inform Parliament that this oral question is accompanied , as usual , by a resolution on the same issue which will be voted on this Wednesday .
Both initiatives are testament to the great importance that the Committee on International Trade and , in our view , Parliament , should place on this matter .
Madam President , Commissioner de Gucht is currently absent and has asked me to make the following statement in response to the parliamentary question from Vital Moreira .
Today 's plenary debate on the negotiations for a comprehensive economic and trade agreement with Canada is very welcome .
So far , these negotiations have run smoothly , and it should be possible to conclude the bulk of an agreement before the end of the year , with a formal conclusion early in 2012 .
However , we are also entering a stage of the negotiations where things are getting more difficult : in particular , because some of the outstanding issues are related to inherent differences in our economic structure or regulatory systems .
This is a tremendously beneficial agreement for both parties , with positive impacts on business , investors and consumers alike , thanks to the very broad scope envisaged .
In material terms , we calculate that this could bring an additional EUR 20 billion per year to both economies .
Where EU offensive interests , such as provincial government procurement , lie in areas of provincial competence , we have been assured that the provinces and territories of Canada will be committed to the negotiations and to the implementation of the agreement .
In relation to your particular concerns , EU Member States have now reached an understanding on the usage of the so-called ' negative list ' approach .
A key reason why a trading partner like Canada prefers a negative list is that it provides much greater transparency and legal security , because it makes very clear which services are excluded from market opening , including also where monopolies and exclusive rights may exist in the public sector .
Hence , the negative list approach in no way prejudices the ability of an EU Member State to continue to maintain the right to retain a monopoly in the future for a particular service .
It remains up to the EU and Canada to decide what commitments it is willing or not to undertake in each sector , including with regard to public services or other services where future policy flexibility is important .
EU governments will continue to have the option of imposing universal public service obligations on private operators and of subsidising public services as necessary .
Trade agreements do not impose privatisation or deregulation obligations , and it will be no different for this CETA , which will include provisions on sustainable development covering economic , environmental and social aspects .
Such provisions will be fully integrated within the trade agreement .
We note the concerns that have been expressed with regard to the WTO panel on the EU 's seals ban and on Canadian oil sands .
While we understand these concerns , we believe that there are good reasons to keep these processes separated from the CETA negotiations .
This being said , the negotiation - as in the case of any other trade negotiation - does not in any way impede the ability of the EU or its partner countries to draw up and implement environmental measures .
More specifically , as regards the Fuels Quality Directive , I want to make it absolutely clear that the negotiation and a future agreement does not and will not represent any negative interference with regard to the implementation of that directive .
Honourable Members , we are moving closer to an agreement which will help to provide a much-needed boost to the economies of the EU and Canada .
We are looking forward to hearing Parliament 's views during the debate today and the resolution that you will subsequently adopt .
Madam President , the resumption of negotiations , at Canada 's initiative , to upgrade bilateral cooperation under a comprehensive economic and trade agreement is a positive move , as the committee chair , Mr Moreira , pointed out .
However , there is one issue that concerns us , which has to do with the federal structure of Canada .
I refer to the need for the unimpeded and uniform application of the agreement by the individual provinces .
Within the framework of trade relations between the two partners , important offensive and defensive agricultural interests , among other things , are at risk .
On this point , I should like to voice the opinion of Mr Jeggle , who is absent today .
Priority is being sought for full protection for geographical indications , given the increasing counterfeiting of quality EU agricultural products .
Canada , like other states that protect geographical indications under trademarks , is , as we all know , opposed to the demands made by the EU on this point at the Doha Round negotiations .
The different legislation of the individual provinces is an additional problematic aspect .
As for the question of genetically modified organisms , I would remind the House that the Union and Canada have signed a mutually acceptable solution to resolve this difference .
Canada has agreed to resolve the difference in exchange for a bilateral regulatory dialogue on biotechnology issues .
I call on the Commission to defend the high level of protection provided by the European regulatory framework during the course of the negotiations under way .
Finally , I would like to mention the Canadian state trading companies in the agricultural sector which , as we all know , have broad competences and can act as monopolies .
Specific commitments need to be entered into on the Canadian side .
This , too , is a demand which was highlighted by the Union during WTO negotiations .
on behalf of the S & D Group . - Madam President , my group can see many benefits in an ambitious , comprehensive , economic trade agreement with Canada .
However , we have four red lines .
Firstly , on the extraction of oil sands , which damages local diversity , we insist on the EU 's right to use the Fuel Quality Directive to inhibit their use .
I was pleased to hear what the Commissioner had to say on that matter .
Secondly , we find it hard to imagine Parliament approving a trade deal with Canada while Canada pursues a challenge , through the WTO , on the EU 's trade ban .
Here I cannot accept the Commissioner 's point of view that we should keep the two matters separate .
I think they are linked in the eyes of the voters , and they are linked in my eyes .
I would certainly not vote for an agreement unless this dispute is settled before we reach the final stages of this deal .
Thirdly , we would not be able to accept any limitation on Canada 's ability to use the TRIPS flexibilities to export cheap generic medicines to developing countries .
This is an important source of generics for developing countries , and we should not bow to pressure from the pharmaceutical industry to make it more difficult for Canada to provide generic medicines .
Fourthly , we cannot accept a deal that does not address the different standards and preferences from local SMEs and state monopolies in Canada .
This was a point that Mr Papastamkos was making about the difference between provincial and federal regulations .
They must be dealt with before this agreement comes to conclusion .
That said , if we find that the final text deals with these issues and is ambitious in reducing tariffs on EU spirits , on EU machinery , on EU automobiles and other areas , we will be happy to back such a free trade agreement .
But we do insist that the four items I have mentioned are red lines and have to be dealt with properly in these negotiations .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the resolution tabled by the Committee on International Trade clearly expresses support for the ongoing negotiations with Canada on concluding the comprehensive economic and trade agreement .
Canada is one of our oldest and closest trading partners , currently the 11th biggest , and the potential benefits from deregulating bilateral trade are obvious , including from the study carried out by the Commission and the Canadian Government in October 2008 .
The private sector in the European Union and Canada has also expressed strong support for concluding such a comprehensive agreement , even though a number of challenges still remain , taking into account the lofty ambitions declared during the negotiations .
I believe that the first thing we need to do is to assess the impact , which will shed some light on the pros and cons of such an agreement .
Secondly , how realistic are the Commission 's expectations that negotiations will be concluded by the end of 2011 ?
Can the Commission also guarantee that the final agreement will include a chapter on sustainable development , in keeping with Parliament 's requirements ?
Will this chapter include labour standards , the obligations associated with multilateral environmental agreements , as well as an effective mechanism for enforcing them ?
Has a plan already been outlined enabling the Commission to resolve the issues relating to market access ?
Can the existing differences in terms of economic structures and regulatory systems be overcome in the near future ?
Does the Commission intend to accept the application of the principle of reciprocity as part of the existing legal protection methods when it comes to resolving trade disputes ?
Does the Commission think that , in the long run , the implementation of the ' negative list ' approach to deregulating services can set a precedent for other , future negotiations too ?
These are questions that naturally require answers , which I am counting on receiving .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - Madam President , as others have mentioned , Canada is indeed a solid trading partner for the EU .
The abolition of the tariffs now being negotiated in the CETA framework is , on the whole , acceptable to our group .
But sadly , CETA does come up with some other demands and political goals which we find deeply worrying .
I will mention two of the most troublesome , the first being the negative list in the negotiations on trade liberalisation .
Normally , in negotiating FTAs , you name the services that you are ready to liberalise .
But under these proposals , all services are open , except those specifically excluded at the outset .
As Greens , we think there are some services , particularly those dealing with the general public interest , which are too sensitive and too potentially vulnerable to be negotiated under this ' negative list ' approach .
We have lodged some amendments and we are looking forward to some support from fellow Members .
The other area of concern is around procurement .
We are concerned about the impact that CETA will have on procurement .
To give just one example , the Ontario Green Energy Act would be illegal under CETA .
That Act promotes the production and feeding of renewable energies and directs investments into local economies .
That is just one example of how CETA will interfere with domestic policy in Canada .
Although Canada is one of our oldest trading partners , we cannot deny that occasionally , we do have differences of opinion .
Canada is , for instance , opposed to the EU 's GMO policies .
It is starting WTO action against the EU import ban on seals , in addition to its barbaric annual seal cull , and do not forget that it is fighting the EU Fuel Quality Directive to protect its exports of tar sands to the EU .
I believe that it is important that we voice all these concerns and urge the Commission to remain firm in the principles and policies of this place .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - Madam President , the negotiations for the EU-Canada trade agreement have been driven by major European and Canadian multinationals who want market access to vital public services so that they can profit at the expense of workers and consumers .
This agreement would be a charter for privatisation , particularly in terms of water , telecommunications and electricity .
The investment chapter would , outrageously , give corporations the right to sue governments when social or environmental policies cut across their profiteering .
Canada 's tar sands have become a playground for big oil companies like BP , Total and Shell .
These oil deposits produce more than three times the carbon emissions of conventional oil and their exploitation is also extremely damaging to the local environment and a threat to the First Nations communities who live in the region .
This trade agreement , I understand , could potentially cut across moves to stop this oil being imported into Europe .
There is an urgent need now for united action by the European and Canadian trade union movement , with environmental and indigenous activists , to fight together and resist this proposed agreement .
on behalf of the EFD Group . - Madam President , for the Commission and Parliament here to seek to use a proposed trade agreement with Canada to influence that country 's internal affairs is simply wrong .
If the Canadian Government considers that it is environmentally acceptable and economically advantageous to develop their tar sands , that is entirely a matter for them .
Indeed , we should all welcome this enhancement and diversification of global energy .
As far as the British national interest is concerned , the coalition government consistently neglects trade relations with the Commonwealth , of which Canada is a founder member .
To paraphrase the commentator , Ruth Lea : because the Trade Commissioner negotiates trade deals for the whole of the EU , the brutal truth is that EU membership constrains Britain 's economic prospects .
( DE ) Madam President , we can be extremely pleased that our long-standing relations with Canada , one of our oldest and closest trading partners worldwide , have been defined by common roots and values .
As we know , in recent decades , a whole series of framework agreements for trade and economic relations have been concluded , from sectoral agreements right through to the most diverse trade initiatives .
The EU-Canada comprehensive economic and trade agreement ( CETA ) , with regard to which there are probably only the last few minor details that need to be worked out , will probably enter into force in the near future .
Although the predecessor to this agreement was never actually concluded , this time , everyone involved seems to be confident .
The Canadian chief negotiator even admitted at the start of the year that this agreement was a top priority for Canada .
As the second largest trading partner , the EU is clearly intended to be established as a counterbalance to the US market and , conversely , as far as Europe is concerned , Canada represents a gateway to the NAFTA economic area .
If the experts prove to be right , the conclusion of the CETA could increase bilateral trade between the European Union and Canada by 20 % by 2014 .
Those are extremely appealing prospects , particularly in economically strained times .
If we consider that , after Saudi Arabia , Canada has the largest oil reserves , this is probably also of strategic significance in the context of European efforts to achieve more energy security , and that is something that we should definitely bear in mind .
( SV ) Madam President , Canada is one of our most important trading partners .
Therefore , this is also one of the most important free trade agreements .
It brings considerable advantages , and all studies show that it could increase trade significantly .
Many fellow Members are choosing to focus on threats and risks and to make this into a problem , but I think it is important for us to take a step back and focus on why we want these negotiations .
The reason is that we can see the incredible potential that can be realised in growth , trade and development .
That is something that we all welcome .
I have very high hopes of this agreement , as it is so ambitious .
We often say that all of our free trade agreements should be ambitious , but this one really is .
This agreement has the potential to create more extensive free trade and more free borders between Europe and Canada than currently exist between Canada and the United States .
That is worth emphasising .
It would be an historic achievement if we succeeded in bridging the Atlantic with regard to free trade with Canada .
I would like to mention the trade in services in particular .
It is precisely this trade in services that several people have made out to be problematic , but this is clearly one of the most important strategic areas we have , particularly when it comes to financial services .
I would like to hear the Commission say something about how this part of the negotiations is going , as I know there has been a certain amount of resistance with regard to this area .
As I said , it is an important strategic area of interest for Europe .
Finally , I would like to urge the Commission not to let this process drag on .
We must ensure that we do not allow the negotiations to slow down .
That is what I see as the biggest threat , in other words , that conflicts concerning various side issues take the focus away from the main issue .
What is clearly important is to create more free trade .
When we started these free trade negotiations , there was a very positive attitude from everyone involved .
I therefore believe it is important for us to ensure that we finish in exactly the same spirit and that we do not allow the negotiations to drag on for far too long .
( FR ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the comprehensive economic and trade agreement negotiated with Canada will strengthen our links with a large and long-standing EU partner country .
We welcome this , but we must keep track of all its consequences , not just the benefits it will bring for certain economic sectors or certain major international investors .
In particular , the agreement must respect the social and environmental models of both parties - of the EU Member States and of Canada - and their capacity to continue to legislate in what are sensitive areas for our societies .
These are not mere details or points to be left for another day .
As regards public services , the Commission 's chosen ' negative list ' approach is dangerous .
It is far too broad and ill-defined , and we would not like to see it set a precedent .
Also , from a general point of view , the chapter on investment must respect both parties ' right to legislate in areas such as the environment , public health , employee and consumer rights , industrial policy and cultural diversity , among others .
We call on the Commission to exclude sectors such as culture , education and public health from the scope of the agreements .
In this respect , and as other Members have said , the intellectual property part should not call into question issues relating to generic medicine production .
As for the environment , we are concerned and call for investment .
As regards the impact of the agreement on oil sands drilling , the agreement must not have the effect of weakening European legislation on the application of the Fuel Quality Directive , nor must it limit the possibility for Canada to regulate drilling of its oil sands in the future under its environmental remit .
We also call on the Commission - we are asking the question , anyway - to monitor the impact on the fisheries sector in areas such as St Pierre and Miquelon .
These are areas of Europe that could be severely affected by the complete liberalisation of that sector .
Lastly , I echo Mr Kazak in saying that the sustainable development chapter must include social and environmental commitments and , in particular , social and environmental responsibility on the part of large multinationals .
( DE ) ( The speaker directs a blue-card question to Mr Fjellner under Rule 149 ( 8 ) )

Mr Fjellner has represented all this in a very positive light and he said that we should not allow this process to drag on .
In this context , my question is this : How can he have a positive view of the fact that in Canada , an area one eighth of the size of Austria is destroyed each year in connection with the exploitation of these tar sands and the entire livelihoods of the First Nations communities are being taken away ?
Does he really view this in such an incredibly positive light and is it not also part of Europe 's responsibility to impose appropriate conditions in this regard ?
( SV ) Madam President , I should like to respond to Mr Obermayr 's question .
I do not believe that I made any reference to tar sands in my speech , but I think it would be naive to imagine that the entire free trade agreement with Canada should simply revolve around this issue .
That would be to lose our sense of perspective .
It goes without saying that we should lay down clear environmental requirements in these free trade agreements .
That is something that we do in all of our free trade agreements , but we cannot allow the entire agreement with Canada to be reduced simply to negotiations on the issue of tar sands .

Madam President , it is the intention of the Commission to set default values for the use of tar sands - not just from Canada , but from any source , including Venezuela , for example - for the purpose of reducing the greenhouse gas intensity of fuels , as required by the Fuel Quality Directive .
There has been extensive lobbying by Canada to try to prevent us doing this .
I have met the Alberta Energy Minister , who has been doing the rounds , as I am sure others have too .
Canada has also been lobbying Member States , and there has been the threat that Canada will take us to the World Trade Organisation if such an arrangement is introduced .
We have to tell Canada to back off .
Canada is making a great deal of money out of exploiting its tar sands but it also made commitments under the Kyoto Protocol to reduce its CO2 emissions , and it has reneged on those commitments because of the financial benefits it is getting from tar sands .
We do not want a dispute with Canada but we have to insist that we will not shrink from facing inconvenient truths .
( NL ) Madam President , Commissioner , against the backdrop of the ongoing negotiations with Canada , the issue of seal hunting raises its head once again .
You even made reference to it yourself .
I was the rapporteur for the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety a few years back , but I remain an advocate of the ban on trading seal products .
I therefore emphatically call on my fellow Members and also the Commission to absolutely not take their eye off this issue .
Around two years ago , we , Parliament , approved a trading ban with an overwhelming majority , despite the immense pressure from Canada on Parliament and the other institutions to water down the legislation .
For us , the crucial factor , above all , was the voice of millions of European citizens , who have made known their opposition to this inhumane slaughter .
The ban has not been ineffective .
As a result of this piece of legislation , amongst other things , the market pretty much collapsed , as the number of animals killed fell from 217 000 in 2008 to 38 000 this year , while the price of fur also fell from USD 100 in 2006 to USD 15 in 2009 .
Canada is now trying to penetrate new markets , for example in China , but there , too , voices calling for a trading ban are to be heard .
It is thus also regrettable that Canada is still trying to fight this European legislation through the WTO .
That is why it is so important that Parliament should again send Canada a strong signal at this point .
We will not give up on this piece of legislation , which we worked for for so long , both within and outside the Union .
I hope that my fellow Members will tomorrow lend their support in large numbers to an amendment that I have tabled along with a number of other Members .
( DE ) Madam President , Commissioner , the negotiations with Canada are being conducted with a country that has a strong economy and a highly developed legal system .
It is therefore all the more incomprehensible that the Commission wants to integrate , if not conceal , an investment agreement in this agreement to give undertakings a direct right to take legal action before a special arbitration court .
Why ever should an ordinary court not decide on compensation in cases of doubt ?
Which courts do you , as the Commission , not have any trust in whatsoever ?
Is it the Canadian courts or those in the European Union ?
Do you not see that , with this part of the agreement , you would be discriminating against the local undertakings ?
As has already been mentioned by a few Members , my group is also strongly opposed to the Commission 's approach of using the agreement to force the liberalisation of services by means of a ' negative list ' .
This turns on its head the approach that has been taken up to now where the contracting partners define the areas that they actively want to open .
We want to retain public services .
I would also ask the Commission to provide an explanation for its rejection of Canada 's social and employment policy proposals , which ought to be seen in a positive light for the sustainability chapter .
The European Parliament is also calling for the protection of workers , payment of overtime , minimum wages and rejection of social dumping .
( PL ) Madam President , potential benefits for Canada as well as the European Union are obvious and backed up by research , as well as encouraging support from the private sector .
This should be commended and further cooperation should be encouraged .
However , since we are very aware of environmental issues in Europe , we should be tough and demand , as a matter of principle , that Canada fulfils our rigorous standards .
I am very pleased that the Commissioner mentioned this in her presentation .
However , we should not only focus on sustainable development but also consider the extraction of resources which pose a risk to life and health such as asbestos , the use and extraction of which is banned in Europe .
In addition , we should note the difference in regulations on genetically modified organisms .
This is a particularly sensitive topic in my country , but , of course , the whole chapter on agriculture is important for both sides .
It should also be noted that we have an obligation to reduce CO2 emissions .
The final issue , which is no less important , is trade in articles made from seals .
This is an area where we should be tough in demanding compliance with our bans .
Taking all of these important matters into account , I believe that our economic relations will achieve their full potential because they are supported by both sides .
Our Parliament should also encourage this .
( DE ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I had actually intended to address several points in my speech .
I am not going to do that now as I would like to say something else .
I simply do not understand the Commission .
It is supposed to be the guardian of European law , including the legislation that we have adopted , but when it comes to the trade agreement with Canada , it says that it is important that some people make a lot of money , but it is not important for European law to remain law .
I do not understand how the Commission can say that we do not need to discuss the import ban on seal products in connection with these matters .
We are talking about partners here and partners have mutual respect for each other 's values , views and interests and do not haul the other partner before a WTO court on account of that partner 's values .
As far as I am concerned , that is not what trading partners are about .
It is evident that if there is no mutual respect and the parties do not share each other 's views , then these parties will not be able to work well together in the area of trade .
If Canada does not stop its action against the import ban on seal products before the conclusion of this kind of agreement , then , in my opinion , we should not agree to this trade agreement .
As I said , good partners do not haul each other before WTO courts on account of their convictions .
Good partners work together .
( FR ) Madam President , during the negotiations on the Northwest Atlantic Fisheries Organisation ( NAFO ) agreements , in particular with Canada , the EU head of delegation promised to retrocede the French cod fishing quota to the fishermen of St Pierre and Miquelon .
That promise was not kept , and the fishermen , like St Pierre and Miquelon 's economy , are today suffering the consequences .
The negotiations currently taking place on an EU-Canada economic and trade agreement must not sacrifice what remains of St Pierre and Miquelon 's economy - again .
That is why I tabled an amendment on this subject .
I call on the Commission to ensure that the strategic commercial interests of St Pierre and Miquelon are protected at all times during the negotiations .
Commissioner , can you assure us of this ?

( IT ) Madam President , I feel bound to note that a sense of fear and a need to defend European interests still prevail among some Members in this Chamber : in other words , they are on the defensive .
As far as I am concerned , I believe that this agreement with a country with which we have a long-standing bond of friendship is important as long as it is entered into on the right basis , that of true reciprocity , and is a balanced and ambitious agreement .
It should not be limited to the elimination of tariff or non-tariff barriers but should represent an opportunity to take a qualitative leap in the elimination of environmental and health policy differences , and I refer , in particular , to the farming sector , the protection of animal species at risk of extinction and particular economic extractive activities that have a significant environmental impact , such as asbestos mining and oil sands drilling , or that restrict access to medicines for the poorest countries .
However , we must be positive in our attitude , not defensive like we were with Japan .
I would therefore emphasise the need to improve reciprocity in terms of the protection of intellectual property , including trademarks , geographical indications and policies for the reciprocal promotion of bilateral investment , aimed principally at innovation and technology and inspired by the positions already taken in this field by the European Parliament .
Madam President , I believe that the numerous bilateral agreements between Canada and the Member States are the best foundation on which to build a robust free trade agreement in the commercial arena , thanks to a friendship that we have already experienced in the UN , the G8 , NATO and the International Security Assistance Force in Afghanistan , a friendship based on the ideals of democracy and freedom that characterise Canada and the European Union .

( EL ) Madam President , I , too , should like to raise the issue of tar sands ; this is an important issue , because it is the reason why a similar agreement which we already have with Canada , an international agreement on commitments under the Kyoto Protocol , is not being respected .
We trust that Canada will take a different stand in the agreement being debated today .
In any event , Canada is fighting to secure free trade and a liberalised system of investments under this agreement for oil mined from tar sands .
The environmental impact study for this agreement , which we paid for , does not include an assessment of the impact that liberalisation will have on tar sands .
In other words , we have a trade agreement which refers to specific measures for trading oil mined from tar sands and we have an impact study for this agreement which does not include an assessment of the impact of this specific activity .
This makes it very difficult for Parliament to approve any agreement that ultimately transpires .
That is because we are talking about the Boreal forests , about a quarter of the world 's virgin forests , and this mining activity will put those forests and local biodiversity and first nations at risk .
( RO ) Madam President , I think that EU-Canada trade relations are at a crossroads at the moment .
Signature of the economic agreement is still under negotiation and the priorities of both parties must be included in the final document .
In this regard , I must highlight the differences in sanitary standards .
Achieving consensus would avoid an adverse impact on the European agricultural sector .
In addition , the agreement must also take into account the outcome of common agricultural policy reform .
Clarifications on the sustainable development chapter are important .
The EU has established its environmental standards in accordance with Member States ' requirements .
Verifying their compatibility with the standards proposed by Canada is vital to ensuring the effectiveness of the final agreement .
I think that close attention must also be paid to the impact of the drilling issue and oil surveys on the negotiations .
This is why the Commission needs to explain where the Fuel Quality Directive comes in this document .
Madam President , unlike the last discussion , which was virtually unanimous in its approach , this is the exact opposite .
Many people are very concerned about this proposed free trade agreement .
Now free trade agreements , bilateral agreements , are the norm at this point in time and I think we have much more in common with Canada than any differences .
They are a democracy .
They respect human rights .
They speak mainly English and French , European languages , and they are open to take in many people , even from my own country , who cannot find jobs in Ireland .
There are issues , largely concerning seals and tar sands .
Obviously , they are important but , at the end of the day , I think that some of the points made here would be refuted by the Canadians - because I am a member of the EU-Canadian delegation and these matters have been discussed and they would have a different perspective - and that is why it is important that we continue to negotiate with them on these issues .
But the bottom line is - and nobody referred to it other than the Commissioner - that there is a EUR 20 billion benefit to both economies here if we can work out a free trade agreement .
It is worth trying .
( GA ) Thank you , Madam President .
( DE ) Madam President , I would like to congratulate the Commission on conducting these negotiations so intensively .
At the end of the day , this is about trade relations , and I believe that environmental and social issues clearly also need to be regulated in separate agreements .
Kyoto is a good example of this , where the intention was to improve standards at an international level .
Therefore , we should be specific in our negotiations here .
Just as energy policy and the generation of energy is a matter for the Member States in Europe , we must also concede that it should be the Canadians and Canadian democracy that decide how energy is produced there and what environmental impact is ultimately to be taken into account .
We ought to strive to ensure that a research programme is set up in this regard to help to enable these resources to be used in a way that is as environmentally friendly and sustainable as possible .
Commissioner Geoghegan-Quinn , perhaps you could provide some impetus here to get a tar sands research programme put in place alongside this trade agreement .
( CS ) Madam President , Commissioner , I broadly support the reservations voiced by my colleagues from the Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection .
The question is whether they can be resolved in this agreement or , as Mr Rübig said , whether other agreements are necessary .
At this point , however , I would like to draw attention to a major problem , which is the ratification of this agreement .
For example , the Czech Parliament has already blocked the ratification of a transport agreement , due to the continuing dispute with Canada over the abolition of visa requirements for Czech citizens .
This is an extremely serious issue , and there is a risk that ratification of the agreement will be blocked until the Commission is able to resolve the issue properly .
I am asking you to take this issue seriously .
( RO ) Madam President , Canada is currently the European Union 's 11th biggest trade partner , with trade relations between the European Union and Canada accounting for 1.6 % of the EU 's total external trade in 2010 .
In 2010 , 26 % of the European Union 's imports from Canada and 37 % of the European Union 's exports to Canada related to trade in machinery and transport equipment .
I would like to know what impact this agreement is having on the European Union 's industrial policy strategy and on its strategy on raw materials and rare earths .
With regard to deregulating services , because it was mentioned here , I would like to ask you , Commissioner , what the link will be between this agreement and the agreement on civil aviation safety and the air transport agreement between the European Union and Canada .
The aim of both agreements is to make the European and Canadian markets competitive in this area , as they are extremely important for the air transport sector .
I would therefore like to ask what the trade agreement 's impact will be on other agreements already signed between the European Union and Canada .
( RO ) Madam President , I , too , wish to emphasise how important it is to conclude the negotiation of the European Union-Canada economic and trade agreement , thereby strengthening trade and economic links , which are already considerable , and yielding beneficial effects .
However , during the negotiations , the European executive must strive to encourage an ambitious trade agreement , which will support fair trade and contain legally binding social and environmental protection elements .
The agreement must not jeopardise the Union 's ability to review the Fuel Quality Directive and to refuse to import oil extracted from oil sands , the exploitation of which generates more carbon dioxide than the conventional oil extraction method , thereby entailing a major harmful environmental impact .
By refusing this kind of oil , the European Union would retain its credibility in terms of its desire to protect the environment and comply with the objectives of the Kyoto Protocol .
( RO ) Madam President , the CETA agreement marks an extremely important step towards a fruitful future for both the European Union and Canada .
I support this project and am very pleased with the progress made so far .
I think that we are on the right path to concluding the negotiations this year .
However , I should point out that there are two points among the several being debated which need to be resolved to avoid creating problems at the time of ratification by some Member States , if they remain unresolved .
These are the oil extractions from bituminous shale , which may pose a hazard to the environment and the local communities in the area , as well as the lack of reciprocity in the case of compulsory visa requirements for Bulgarian , Romanian and Czech citizens .
( PT ) Madam President , this is yet another piece of the edifice which is European Union trade policy , an edifice which is growing by the day , with consequences that affect the various Member States profoundly but differently .
The agreements that give concrete expression to this policy are essentially based on free trade , whose goals and effects are clearly demonstrated by the associated rhetoric : that of ' offensive interests ' , as if we were talking about a war .
They are agreements that lack democratic legitimacy , and increasingly so as they are almost always negotiated in the greatest secrecy , behind the public 's backs , seeking to cover up their economic , social and environmental impact , avoiding informed debate and clearing things up .
This is the case once again .
With negotiations at a stage said to be fairly advanced and their conclusion envisaged for 2011 , its impact on sectors and countries has yet to be fully debated .
Its content is nothing new : the opening up of markets , and the liberalisation of services , including increasingly commercialised public services at the mercy of multinationals , making it harder for Member States to exercise their social function in these areas .
The consequences are also well known : the domination of markets by a few , an impact on weaker production systems , and increasing pretexts for attacks on rights , and on working and living conditions .
( SK ) Madam President , the European Union engages in negotiations on trade and economic agreements with all influential countries , within the bounds of its competence .
Although Canada has a strong presence in international trade , and is one of the European Union 's oldest trading partners , we must proceed very sensitively and constructively as we finalise the comprehensive economic and trade agreement between the European Union and Canada .
Our divergent positions on areas such as drug policy , fisheries policy and the production of oil from tar sands need to be set out in the agreement in such a way as to represent European Union policy while respecting the views of our trading partner .
Reciprocity stands at the core of balanced trade and economic relations .
However , the comprehensive economic and trade agreement should by no means diminish Europe 's established and accepted certification parameters .
I would like to believe that , as we approach the finish line , the European Commission will be up to the challenge of finding appropriate solutions to the remaining problems .
( DE ) Madam President , Canada is - I would like to say this at the outset - a wonderful country .
Wonderful people , wonderful achievements - an important partner for the EU .
However , we must be able to ask questions of a good partner .
Many fellow Members are wrong to simply reduce this matter to sand and seals today .
The tar sands represent just one example of incredible environmental destruction .
Anyone who has seen Canada knows that environmental destruction is taking place there on a scale to match Brazil .
This environmental destruction also has an impact on the indigenous people , the First Nations .
Their environment is being destroyed .
Anyone who knows a bit about Canada , has visited British Columbia and knows how international corporations have used their influence here to make the indigenous peoples give up their ancestral areas and allow these areas to be bought up , cannot simply ignore this .
We talk a great deal about clear language and about protection of minorities in countries adjacent to the EU .
However , it is also important for us to speak out with regard to the protection of the minorities that are the aboriginal peoples of Canada .
Madam President , honourable Members , I would firstly like to thank all the Members who participated in this debate and Vital Moreira for putting the question to Parliament .
The Commission has taken careful note of the substance of your questions and I do hope that the answers address your possible underlying concerns .
As you know , the negotiations are making good progress .
The Commission wants to ensure a balanced , ambitious , high-quality agreement and it wants to be equally ambitious on sustainable development .
Canada is a highly developed , like-minded partner with strategic links going far beyond trade and investment .
The EU and Canada share the ambitious negotiation objectives that can be realised to our mutual benefit , creating the potential for new opportunities .
Let me emphasise two things in particular .
As regards the oil sands issues and your concerns in relation to this negotiation , for the Fuels Quality Directive to fall within the scope of CETA 's regulatory cooperation provisions , both parties would need to agree .
CETA 's regulatory cooperation provisions would not impose any obligation to hold such discussions .
Furthermore , the Commission does not propose entering into any commitment that would restrict the regulatory freedom of the EU , be it on environmental issues such as fuel quality , or on any other essential policy objective .
As I mentioned in the introduction , this agreement is hugely beneficial to our two economies and not just in material terms .
In both countries , opportunities will be created for business and the manufacturing sector , thanks to the elimination of substantially all imported tariffs and improved market access for services and investors .
Consumers will gain through more affordable purchases and enhanced access to high-quality services .
At the same time , increased flows of foreign direct investment would act as a catalyst to creating jobs and boosting wages .
The CETA will also cover regulatory barriers such as sanitary and phytosanitary measures , customs procedures and competition rules .
European intellectual property rights will gain increased protection .
Reciprocal access to both sides ' procurement markets would not only mean savings for public budgets but also provide huge business opportunities .
This is why the Commission is convinced that this will be a good and balanced agreement .
Our very debate tonight allows for important clarifications to be made .
In this context , the Commission takes careful note , welcomes the resolution to be adopted by Parliament on EU-Canada trade relations and is grateful for its general support .
My colleague , Commissioner De Gucht , will , of course , continue to keep you informed of further developments in the CETA process .
I have received one motion for a resolution tabled in accordance with Rule 115 ( 5 ) of the Rules of Procedure .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Wednesday at 12 : 00 .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
The European Union and Canada have had good , solid trade relations for many years .
Canada is even one of the EU 's oldest trading partners .
In the mid-1970s , the EU signed the first economic and trade agreement with Canada .
Further agreements followed in the livestock sector and with regard to wines and spirits .
The EU-Canada comprehensive economic and trade agreement ( CETA ) could be very advantageous for both trading partners .
However , there are still a few things that need to be taken into consideration and discussed .
Clearly , the aim of the agreement must be fair competition .
This can only be achieved if not only the tariff barriers but also the non-tariff and technical barriers to trade are removed .
The principle of reciprocity must be respected , because that is the only way to achieve a balanced outcome of the negotiations .
That also applies to elements that are specific to the country or culture of the individual partners .
Discussions of tricky subjects like extraction from tar sands and the associated environmental impact , ILO standards , as well as the recognition of technical standards and the traceability of food products , must also continue on equal terms in order to reach a consensus .
Of particular interest to me are the negotiations in the dairy sector and access to the Canadian market as well as origin labelling of Canadian slaughter cattle .
Can the Commission provide more information in these areas ?
What outcome can we expect in this regard ?
I am glad that Parliament is stating its views on the current EU-Canada trade negotiations and outlining its priorities in this regard .
Canada is undoubtedly a trade partner of the EU , but it is imperative that we in Parliament relay the concerns of our fellow citizens located both on European territory and in regions forming part of the European family , namely , the protection and defence of their interests .
By ' European family ' , I mean the overseas countries and territories ( OCT ) , which , although not strictly European territories , maintain a special relationship with the European Union , and , in particular , with the Member States of which they are part .
In the trade negotiations currently under way , it is the archipelago of St Pierre and Miquelon , next door to Canada , that is particularly affected .
I therefore call on the Commission , during the negotiations , to defend and protect the interests of that overseas country and territory situated in the North Atlantic Ocean .
Canada is one of Europe 's oldest trade partners .
It is only natural , therefore , that this relationship should be formalised via a comprehensive trade agreement .
I do wonder , however , about the content of several negotiating chapters .
Firstly , the EU and Canada have different rules of origin systems .
As Canada is a member of the North American Free Trade Agreement ( NAFTA ) , the Commission must undertake to find a satisfactory solution regarding both industrial products and agricultural or fisheries products , so that Canada does not become a gateway through which goods from other NAFTA members enter Europe .
The Commission will also have to negotiate a solution that can be applied to two different geographical indication systems : in Canada , ' geographical indication ' is a mere adjective ; in Europe , it is a bona fide trademark .
If European geographical indications are genuinely to be protected , the Canadian authorities will have to recognise the European concept .
Regarding the chapter on public works contracts , lastly , Canada must grant the EU the same access it granted the United States under their trade agreement ; in other words , European businesses must be able to tender for contracts in the provinces , regions and certain municipalities .
One-minute speeches ( Rule 150 )
The next item is one-minute speeches on matters of political importance .
( EL ) Madam President , for the last fortnight , tens , if not thousands of citizens have spontaneously gathered in the streets and squares of Athens and other cities .
The exasperated Greeks have taken the baton from the Spaniards .
In the midst of deep crisis , recession and unemployment , they are asking , peacefully but forcefully , for some prospect of a decent life for themselves , their families and their children .
The size of the crowd and its complaint are unprecedented , even for a country with Greece 's strong political way of life and tradition .
This is a very serious political development with unforeseeable dimensions and implications .
At a time when there are no watertight compartments between countries , we need to listen very carefully to the uproar of events .
We need to listen to Mr Reynders , the Belgian Minister for Finance , when he says that we should not go beyond the measures that society can bear in Greece , because that will destroy growth and the country will not recover .
No policy is viable if it is not backed or , at the very least , tolerated by society , especially a policy which can basically be summarised as a dilemma between exhausting austerity or bankruptcy .
This policy urgently needs serious change and correction , not only in order to make it fairer , but also if it is to be more effective , for the benefit of everyone .
( PL ) Madam President , the European Capital of Culture is one of the European Union 's most recognisable cultural initiatives .
According to studies carried out by the Commission , it is a reason for national pride and shared responsibility among the inhabitants of the nominated cities .
In 2016 , the nations hosting the contest will be Poland and Spain .
Two cities will be chosen from both of these countries to be the European Capital of Culture 2016 .
My home city of Gdańsk is in a small group leading the Polish contest , which will be decided this month .
I am a keen supporter of this candidacy whose motto is ' Cultural freedom - culture of freedom ' .
Gdańsk is , historically , a Hanseatic port and the birthplace of the Solidarity movement , which is synonymous with freedom .
Now we would like to create a modern programme based on these roots .
We stand for freedom of access to our cultural heritage and daily intergenerational and neighbourly solidarity .
I believe that my city has much to offer to European society , and victory in this prestigious contest would contribute to an even greater level of prosperity .
( RO ) Madam President , the drought which we are currently facing throughout the whole of Europe , along with the forecast for the period ahead , is fuelling concerns not only about a new hike in food prices , but also about food safety .
In these circumstances , I believe that the European Commission must pay EU subsidies in advance to support the farmers who need to use existing irrigation systems , thereby avoiding the total loss of this year 's harvests .
Solutions must also be taken into account , along with this measure , for supporting the implementation of irrigation systems where their use is necessary .
Thirty per cent of Romania 's area is irrigated land , while the lack of water and prevalence of drought are creating problems similar to those of the other Member States , but without being able to provide support to farmers with this life-saving measure , in the event of this situation .
Madam President , I wanted to speak about the role that sport can play in increasing economic prosperity in our regions .
In Wales , I see rugby and other major sporting events boosting the economy of Cardiff .
Another boost will come following the wonderful achievement of Swansea City Football Club - and I say this for the benefit of my colleague Richard Howitt - who have just deservedly reached the Premier Football League after a fantastic season .
I pay tribute to the manager , players , directors , staff and fans who have made promotion possible .
They will be a credit to the Premier League , to Wales , and will give a much needed boost to the local economy , as fans , tourists and , hopefully , businesses come to the region .
Finally , I hope the EU recognises the importance of sport , both economically and socially , and will provide funds to boost sport at all levels , particularly as , since the Lisbon Treaty , the EU now has competence in the field of sport for the first time .
( EL ) Madam President , I have consistently supported the programme to restructure my country .
I am therefore entitled to point out the weaknesses .
Firstly , the programme relies too heavily on taxation , instead of public spending cuts .
It is therefore throttling the Greek private sector , which is the only sector that can repay the massive debts .
Secondly , there is no rational plan at present to make use of Greek government property .
Thirdly , the programme is progressing very slowly and this , in conjunction with the specific messages to the Greek public coming out of Europe , is undermining political support for the reforms .
This is happening every single day .
We therefore need a bolder programme which calls for faster adjustment and which will provide serious development aid in the form of a European Marshall Plan .
Such a programme would have a greater chance of success and we all need that success .
( RO ) Madam President , I would like to raise for discussion the recent events in the world of football and , in particular , the election of Sepp Blatter as head of FIFA .
I think that his re-election is deplorable at a time when serious corruption charges have been levelled at FIFA , especially concerning the holding of the World Cup in 2022 in Qatar .
I think that Member State governments should call for FIFA to be reformed and for its activities to be regulated .
This might create greater transparency and help avoid such regrettable events , thereby restoring confidence in FIFA .
Football has become increasingly more like a business .
Lack of transparency and accusations of corruption are also affecting Romanian football .
Recently , Politehnica Timişoara , who finished runners-up in the Romanian league championship and were due to play in the Champions League , have been relegated to Romania 's third division based on a completely random decision .
This unjust decision will affect hundreds of thousands of the Timişoara team 's fans .
I also appeal from this Chamber to the football authorities in Romania to reverse this decision and allow Politehnica Timişoara to remain in top-flight Romanian and European football .
Madam President , 2 June 2011 marked the start of the historic Tallinn-Monte Carlo Electric Car Marathon , and today the cars will be reaching Copenhagen .
Gesine Meissner and I , as Liberal Members of the European Parliament , are sponsoring an electric car in the race in order to promote sustainable transportation .
With increasing consumption rates , the depletion of fossil fuels is becoming inevitable and we should therefore increase investment in further research and in the development of sustainable transportation .
Furthermore , increasing mobility is taking its toll in terms of people 's carbon footprint , and that could accelerate global climate change .
The European Union and its Member States have the opportunity of becoming pioneers in green transportation by introducing incentives to the users of sustainable means of transport , and encouraging the transition to a carbon-free Union .
( ES ) Madam President , the origin of the infection that caused twenty-one deaths in Germany last week is still unknown .
This further highlights the undue haste with which the German authorities acted .
The accusations are particularly serious , given that the German market is a key consumer of agricultural products , which is indeed the reason why it has received significant investments for the promotion of those products .
The European authorities therefore need to take action on two fronts .
In the short term , implementation of a mechanism to compensate the European farmers most affected must be guaranteed , while in the medium term , it will be necessary to reform the early warning system for unsafe food to prevent any more unfounded alarms in the future .
These measures will have to take into account the diversity of the European agricultural industry .
Hence , the Commission 's proposal to fund a recall mechanism using the vegetable producers organisations ' budget is unacceptable .
In many regions in Europe , such as Catalonia for example , such organisations do not exist , and therefore the system cannot be used to compensate farmers .
( PT ) Madam President , indifferent to the economic and social devastation caused by the structural changes approved by the International Monetary Fund ( IMF ) in countries like Greece , the leaders of the European Union are now stepping up their offensive and launching themselves on Portugal with the same approach and unbridled colonial arrogance .
In exchange for a EUR 78 billion loan , a country where the minimum wage is not even EUR 500 will face cuts in wages and pensions , and the closure of public services , as well as being forced to give up national companies and resources .
It also faces an increase in the prices of essential goods and services , and EUR 30 billion in interest , which equates to around 40 % of the total loan .
More than two-thirds of this interest will go to the European Union itself .
This is the meaning of the much-vaunted European solidarity .
Persisting in this course of action will inevitably lead to an intensification of the social struggle which has been raging throughout Europe , including Portugal .
We are , and will continue to be , here to support and encourage it , certain that only through such struggle can change be instigated , and an alternative that is needed increasingly urgently put in place in Europe .
( PT ) Madam President , after all the sound bites during the European Year for Combating Poverty and Social Exclusion , the European Commission continues to demonstrate complete indifference when faced with worsening poverty , particularly child poverty , unemployment and massive increases in the numbers of poor workers due to precarious and poorly paid work .
However , this is now not only limited to neoliberal tendencies , but has dire consequences for countries with weak economies , where it is imperative to strengthen public policies to support public services , create employment with rights , and eradicate poverty .
Memoranda like the one the troika of the International Monetary Fund ( IMF ) , the European Central Bank ( ECB ) and the Commission drew up with Portuguese officials demanded anti-social policies , including amendments to redundancy and privatisation laws , and attacks on public and universal social security which can only lead to social regression , condemning workers and the public to unemployment , poverty , underdevelopment and extreme dependency .
It will transform Portugal into a mere protectorate of the great powers of the EU .
All of this in exchange for a loan that the Portuguese have to repay , at high interest rates , to increase the profits of international financial capitalism , even though we know full well that such measures resolve nothing , as the case of Greece clearly demonstrates .
That is why I am protesting against such measures here , and this protest will continue both in Portugal and in the EU .
( ES ) Madam President , first of all , may I express my condolences for all the deaths caused by E. coli , but also my indignation at the extremely unfit way in which the German Administration has treated this issue , causing irreparable damage to all Spanish agricultural products .
I hope that , in tomorrow 's extraordinary meeting of European Union agriculture ministers , this damage caused to Spanish farmers will first of all be redressed with no exclusions , and secondly , that lessons will be learnt : namely , what should not be done in a situation that has indeed resulted in fatalities , but also concerning damage to the products of many countries including my own , Spain .
Lessons have to be learnt from this crisis .
Obviously , I hope that the outcome of tomorrow 's extraordinary meeting will be redress with no exclusions and a return to normality , so that products that are in perfect condition can circulate throughout the European Union and the world at large .

( SK ) Madam President , Friday 's announcement by European Union representatives that the International Monetary Fund would release a further tranche of EUR 12 billion in credit to Greece was given an encouraging reception by the markets .
Today , however , the Spanish newspaper El País reports that the autonomous region of Castilla-La Mancha has run out of money .
Not only does the regional government find itself unable to pay the wages of 76 000 employees , but it still owes roughly EUR 2 billion to its various suppliers .
We are faced with more bad news , then , this time from Spain , a country that has long struggled to maintain investor confidence .
Yet the policy of assisting governments by having the European Central Bank buy up their debts cannot go on for much longer , as it is reaching its limits .
The European Central Bank already has EUR 360 billion in financial instruments on its books that are not freely tradable and holds a further EUR 480 billion in poorly secured securities .
It is the pacemaker , then , for holders of bad financial assets .
If this continues , ladies and gentlemen , the euro area will soon have to rescue the European Central Bank , or simply fall apart .
( DE ) Madam President , I would like to make a few comments with regard to the European integration of Serbia , if I may .
For far too long , the former Yugoslavian states have , in my opinion , received unequal treatment .
For example , Slovenia was able to join the EU without a problem in 2004 , even though criticisms are still made regarding the residual Communist power structures in politics , the media and industry .
Moreover , Bulgaria and Romania would not be in the Union if we had applied the same stringent criteria to them that we are now applying to Croatia .
Double standards are also applied with regard to war crimes and restitution .
Brussels could not care less about Turkey 's Armenian genocide .
In contrast , Croatia and Serbia must first haul their war criminals before the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia in The Hague before the Copenhagen criteria can even come into play .
While the unlawful regulations of the Anti-Fascist Council of the People 's Liberation of Yugoslavia ( AVNOJ ) and Beneš do not constitute grounds for blocking EU accession , the Serbian restitution policy certainly has to comply with EU stipulations .
Serbia , which is characterised by a Christian tradition , has proven its good intentions again and again .
One barrier has been broken down with the extradition of Mladič , but Kosovo must not become the next one .
As soon as the outstanding reforms are complete , there should , in my view , be nothing more to stand in the way of Serbia 's accession to the EU .
( ES ) Madam President , I wish to join my fellow Members in expressing my condolences for the twenty-one victims of E. coli , but also my indignation beyond mere concern at the episodes of uncoordinated response that have caused significant financial damage to the producers and workers of sectors that are crucial to the agriculture of European Union Member States , particularly Spanish cucumber producers .
These episodes have also damaged the very notion of Europe , cohesion within Europe and cohesion among Europeans , to the extent that , once again , prejudice or insufficiently verified rumours have seriously impaired the cohesion needed to decide on a satisfactory , timely and appropriate response .
I therefore hope that the lessons that inescapably emerge will , in fact , be learnt .
I hope that the Council of Agriculture Ministers will be able not just to provide compensation for the injured parties , but also to establish a response protocol that takes on board the lessons extracted from this unfortunate experience .
Madam President , returning to sport , FIFA has been mentioned and I would like to mention it as well , in particular , the lack of proper governance and the lack of transparency at the higher levels of the organisation .
It is extraordinary that a 75-year-old man , Sepp Blatter , is going to be returned to power as President of one of the world 's leading sports organisations , having been in power now since 1998 , especially when you consider that the vast majority of the players - probably 99 % of them - are under 30 years of age .
There must be not just one generation gap , but several generation gaps between him and the players .
Secondly , it was not surprising last year that England got so little support for the awarding of the World Cup venue , despite its great infrastructure .
Qatar was awarded it and subsequently we saw people suspended for trying to sell their votes .
I wonder whether this is the tip of the iceberg .
There is also the matter of FIFA 's failure to introduce goal line technology when other sports have done so .
It is quite clear that a real reform is needed in the interests of the sport itself and FIFA .
( LV ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , we all know that drug taking is prohibited in sport .
Drug taking is prohibited because it confers unfair advantages on some sportspeople over others .
Nevertheless , ladies and gentlemen , in the European Union , we have a certain type of drug that is not intended for sportspeople but for farmers - in the form of uneven levels of support for them .
For example , Latvian farmers receive three times less support than German farmers , and as much as six times less than Greek farmers .
This unfair support makes for unfair competition .
Ladies and gentlemen , I call upon you , when you are considering and planning the next European financial perspective and period , that you eliminate these drugs , that you cut out this unfair support for farmers , so that all European farmers can become equally competitive . Thank you for your attention .
( EL ) Madam President , hundreds of thousands of Greek citizens of all ages and from all classes have been protesting peacefully - I repeat peacefully - over the past two weeks in town squares throughout the country .
I would like to make two points : firstly , we need to listen to them and to heed their concerns .
We need to do this not only at national level , but also at European level .
Our fellow citizens in towns throughout Greece are shouting to be heard in Brussels , in Strasbourg , everywhere .
Secondly , over and above any debate about the mistakes and misguided action of the Greek Government , we need to bear this in mind : in their evaluation of the policies being proposed and applied by Europe to deal with the crisis , our fellow citizens are saying to us : ' We have our limits .
Do not push us beyond our limits ' .
Clear and specific answers need to be given to these messages .
Only then will Europe 's help in dealing with the crisis create a vision and hope among our fellow citizens .
( HU ) Madam President , multiculturalism assumes that nations living side by side mutually know each other 's past , culture , and sometimes language , as well .
However , the fuss stirred up in Romania a few days ago can only be explained by the lack of this reciprocity .
Two Romanian counties opened a representative office in Brussels , but according to a journalist working in the capital , the problem with this is that the majority of the population of the counties concerned does not belong to the same ethnic group as the majority of the Romanian population .
Is this a problem in Europe today ?
The way of thinking that would forbid a neighbour to commemorate the day when he had lost his fortune , land , or perhaps even his relatives , is just as morbid .
We had an example of that in the past days as well , when we commemorated the Trianon Peace Treaty ending World War I on 4 June .
There is a remedy for the way of thinking that excludes and shuts up people , denies the past , and wants to impede the development and existence of a region : a strong Europe that is open and inclusive , that appreciates cultural values , and respects the rights of minorities .
( BG ) Madam President , the economic crisis and difficulties which all Member States are experiencing , although to varying degrees , has given impetus to nationalist and populist groups which are not only looking for greater public support , but are also constantly testing European citizens ' limits of tolerance by acting openly against the expansion of integration in Europe .
One recent example of this from Bulgaria are the events which took place on 20 May , when representatives of the nationalist party Attack became involved in clashes with Muslim worshippers outside the only mosque in Sofia .
These clashes were accompanied by the use of force and arson , and ended up with several people sustaining injuries , including police officers .
Since video recordings are available of the clashes , the test for the investigative agencies and justice system in Bulgaria will be to what extent the instigators and participants in this incident will be justly punished .
I would like to state very clearly in this Chamber that the dissemination of ethnic and religion intolerance is an action which blatantly contradicts European values and basic human rights , as well as the traditions of Bulgarian society .
We must all firmly oppose any attempt of this happening in Europe and clearly distance ourselves from the political forces in Europe which are behind such actions .
( RO ) Madam President , as part of publishing the global Press Freedom Index for 2010 , the organisation Reporters Without Borders drew attention to the decline in the freedom of expression in the European Union .
Romania is in 52nd position in the index , marking a drop of 10 places compared with 2007 .
This is a worrying situation and it raises question marks concerning the actual respect for the right of expression and information guaranteed by the Charter of Fundamental Rights in the European Union .
In Romania , the press has been included by the country 's president among the threats to national security .
In addition , policy makers are constantly making disparaging remarks about the media .
Such moves away from democratic principles tarnish the European Union 's image as a whole .
Due to internal shortcomings , we are at risk of losing our credibility as upholders of respect for human rights outside the EU .
This is why I urge genuine protection at EU level for the freedom of expression and press pluralism .
( RO ) Madam President , this is the second occasion that I am presenting before the European Parliament the disastrous situation in Romania 's health insurance system .
Unfortunately , at the moment , the negotiations between the GPs ' professional associations , the Ministry of Health and the National Health Insurance Office have reached deadlock .
As a result , the health system is being blocked and legal rights are being refused to patients who , although they are still paying their health insurance contributions , can no longer enjoy the relevant facilities .
This situation has resulted from the persistent refusal on the part of the National Health Insurance Office to conduct realistic negotiations with GPs with the aim of drafting an operating framework contract , beneficial to all the stakeholders .
If this situation carries on much longer , the health service in Romania , which has been weakened so much , is at risk of disintegrating .
I would like the relevant European bodies to take note of this situation , monitor it and take action to resolve it as soon as possible .
( RO ) Madam President , we talk every day in the European Parliament , from morning till night , about European integration , solidarity , a common culture and about everything which unites us and should continue to motivate us to build a common future for all 27 European Union Member States .
While we are debating European projects , a vice-president of the same European Parliament similarly discusses matters every day , from morning till night .
However , this is about segregation based on ethnic criteria , reducing the influence and undermining the authority of a state within its borders in favour of another neighbouring state , about breaking up territories belonging to one European Union Member State and annexing them to another Member State of the same European Union .
Not only on a personal note , but also on behalf of the Romanian Social Democrat MEPs , I call for László Tőkés to be dismissed from his position as Vice-President .
Madam President , I wish to express my deep concern regarding the medics who have been arrested in Bahrain .
Many of these medics have been accused of trying to overthrow the monarchy and face trial with military prosecutors and possible death sentences .
Yet these doctors and nurses had simply treated injured protestors who were brought to their hospitals .
Amnesty International and Médecins sans Frontières have also expressed extreme concern over the safety of those involved and indeed the motivation behind their arrests .
I fully support the Irish Nurses and Midwives Organisation and the International Council of Nurses , and indeed a number of Irish doctors , who are adding their voices in condemnation of these awful events .
In the last few days , I have received information from a number of sources which points to torture and inhumane treatment : some medics have been severely beaten and have been denied access to their families and legal advisers .
This kind of action is totally unacceptable .
I am calling publicly on our High Representative , Catherine Ashton .
I have already written to her to ask her to make every effort to intervene on behalf of those medics who simply did what medical personnel do - try to save lives .


Madam President , the new austerity package for Greece , which includes EUR 28 billion of cuts and taxes and the privatisation of an incredible EUR 50 billion worth of state assets , confirms again the role of the EU and the IMF as enforcers for anti-worker austerity policies .
Young people have been on the receiving end of their vicious attacks .
They are now fighting back with hundreds of thousands occupying squares across Europe , bravely facing down brutal repression .
They have correctly raised the call for true democracy .
In my opinion , that can only be truly achieved by breaking the dictatorship of the markets and building a democratic socialist society where people 's needs come before profits .
15 June promises to be an important day of struggle across Europe .
A general strike will take place in Greece and a major demonstration is planned in Barcelona .
Big protests should be organised right across Europe against austerity on that day .
To defeat the onslaught against workers and young people in Europe , the power of the organised working class must be mobilised .
A one-day general strike across Europe would send a very powerful message of opposition to the European establishment .
( EL ) Madam President , a week ago , Presidents Buzek , Barroso and Van Rompuy met religious representatives to discuss democratic rights and civil liberties .
I wish to congratulate President Barroso on taking the initiative in 2005 to inaugurate this dialogue with religious leaders ; I also wish to congratulate the Presidents of Parliament and of the Council for maintaining this dialogue on an annual basis .
At the same time , however , I wish to join forces with the religious representatives who called for the European Union to exert its influence in order to put a stop to the persecution of Christians in countries such as Egypt and Iraq and within Europe , in European Cyprus , where the occupying forces are denying Christians entry to their occupied churches and preventing priests and bishops from celebrating Holy Mass .
Show them , Madam President , that Christian refugees in Cyprus are entitled to celebrate mass in their churches .
( EL ) Madam President , immediately after the meeting in Luxembourg on 6 May , which was reported in an article in Der Spiegel , Greece was on the receiving end of a new wave of recommendations that it should leave the euro area and go back to the drachma .
Of course , the official position of the European Union was expressed by Commissioner Olli Rehn , who denied the rumours and the recommendations .
Over and above the views of economists to the contrary and the numerous views of fellow Members in this Chamber , it must be made clear that Greece cannot leave the euro for legal reasons .
Firstly , because the Treaties make no provision for voluntary or involuntary exit from the common currency .
Secondly , if we returned to the drachma without abolishing the euro area and the euro , there would be no legal facility for automatically converting deposits in euros in Greek banks , both inside and outside Greece , to drachmas without the depositor 's consent .
When Greece joined the euro area , it was possible to convert deposits in drachmas because the drachma was abolished as a currency and has not existed since .
Now , however , the euro continues to exist and has not been abolished .
Therefore , any rumours and any recommendations are legally incorrect .
( DE ) Madam President , whistleblowers are people who no longer wish to keep quiet about illegal acts or deplorable states of affairs , but want to expose them , mostly in the public interest .
Whistleblowers are also mostly providing added value .
For example , in 2005 , they returned a total of around USD 10 billion to the US Treasury through repayments .
Clear laws relating to the process of whistleblowing are essential in the fight against corruption .
In the European Union , Articles 22a and 22b of the Staff Regulations form the legal basis for whistleblowing , but unfortunately in a very fragmented way , leaving many gaps .
Fundamental elements are missing .
For example , we need a clear definition of whistleblowing , we need whistleblowers to have a right to be heard , we need independent points of contact that can provide information on rights , obligations and options , and not least we also need precise handling deadlines for the competent EU institutions .
The positive aspect here is that the EU Staff Regulations are about to be reformed .
The Commission is to send Parliament a first draft of this in the autumn .
I think this presents a unique opportunity to make improvements here .
I would ask my fellow Members to support this and to work to bring about a reform .
( RO ) Madam President , football is truly a religion , but it is a religion in which the devil is more than involved .
Why is this ?
This is because a great deal of money is at stake , which is a charge on boredom and loneliness for billions of the planet 's inhabitants .
During the current summer days , Romania is being engulfed in the drama involving a very popular football team , Politehnica Timişoara .
This team won the right , through its own , honest efforts , to take part in a European cup competition .
However , now we see that its victory on the pitch has turned into a loss through a random decision .
In specific terms , the mafia in charge of Romanian football has shaken hands with the mafia in charge of international football and decided to impose a drastic double penalty : to remove the team in question from the European cup competition and relegate it to a lower , amateur division .
No matter what financial and legal excuses are being given , this is a draconian penalty and hits hard not only a fine team but also a beautiful city with more than 300 000 inhabitants who do not have too many other sources of joy .
As a member of the European Parliament 's Committee on Culture and Education , I am sounding an alarm bell so as to put an end to this awful injustice which may have significant social consequences .
The debate is closed .
Credit rating agencies ( short presentation )
The next item is the report by Mr Klinz , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , on credit rating agencies : future perspectives .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , credit rating agencies certainly did not cause the global financial crisis , but , in my opinion , they were responsible to a significant extent for its severity .
When the so-called structured financial products were developed in America on the basis of the subprime mortgages , the credit rating agencies supported this process by rating dozens , if not hundreds , of products each day in an almost conveyor-belt fashion .
In so doing , they also accepted conflicts of interests , in that they supported the issuers with advice and help in designing these products .
They continued to claim that they were only expressing an opinion , although they knew very well that their ratings were , in fact , being used as a seal of approval .
My report deals with numerous deficiencies and puts forward proposals in the hope that the Commission will perhaps be able to include some of them in its legislative proposal that it will be tabling in the autumn .
I put forward five proposals .
The first is that the reliance on ratings must be reduced .
In practice , we have found that the regulatory environment has led to the use of ratings being absolutely essential , by banks , insurance companies , pension funds etc. which invest their money .
Basel II made this very clear and , in fact , the credit rating agencies have become regulatory certification bodies .
We need to make it possible once again for market operators , particularly institutional investors , which possess their own expertise to actually take responsibility themselves and not outsource the responsibility for investment decisions .
It needs to be made clear that investors should only invest if they actually understand the product and cannot use the excuse that they can , to a certain extent , automatically make a triple A product the goal of their investment strategy .
Secondly , we must ensure that the information on which credit rating agencies base their decisions is made publicly available , that it is understood , and that the models used are also known .
That will lead to transparency and will also make it easier for institutional investors seeking to invest to make their own decisions .
It will also help to enable unsolicited ratings to be given .
In this connection , we should also consider whether the proposal that the United States is considering is a sensible one , namely , that where only one credit rating agency is chosen by issuers , a second , independent body could be encouraged to give a rating and this second body could be allowed to work on the basis of the information that is publicly available .
Thirdly , we need more competition .
We have a de facto oligopoly .
The three credit rating agencies that exist and operate worldwide control 95 % of the global business .
They have a so-called monopoly income of 40 % return on turnover , and therefore I am proposing that we set up a European credit rating agency .
It should be based on a foundation model and the start-up financing should be provided by the finance sector by means of interest-bearing loans .
After five years , we will know whether it is working and then this credit rating foundation will also have to pay back the funds that it has received .
However , I am sure that there are also other options .
It would also make sense to perhaps allow national and regional credit rating agencies to operate in the form of a European network .
Fourthly , we still have an outstanding matter with regard to the payment model .
Currently , we have an issuer-pays model .
That is the model that essentially works throughout the world .
Thus , the issuer pays , but clearly there is a conflict of interests here that we could reduce if there was no more advising of issuers and if the staff of the supervisory bodies was genuinely independent .
Other possible models include a subscriber-pays model .
Here , there is obviously the risk of conflicts of interest as well as of this being an invitation to freeloaders .
Therefore , this needs consideration .
The third option would be a performance-based payment , in other words , an up-front payment and then the final payment only once it is clear how good the rating is .
The last , but important , point is that we must introduce liability .
Credit rating agencies must accept responsibility for what they actually do , and therefore I believe that we should make them liable , obviously not for the rating as such , but for failures and negligence in their work .
( RO ) Mr President , the credit rating industry has numerous shortcomings , the most important of which are the lack of competition and transparency , as well as the oligopolistic structures .
Competition would be enhanced by creating a regulatory environment which will promote market entry .
This would carry out an in-depth analysis of the current obstacles .
I should emphasis how important it is to monitor the progress of the Basel III system and the process relating to Chapter 4 of the Capital Requirements Directive .
There is a need to increase accountability and the powers for monitoring the internal models and imposing preventive measures .
All rating agencies must abide by the highest standards relating to the publication of information , transparency and management of conflicts of interest .
At the moment , Romania 's rating has a stable outlook .
This could improve if the pace of structural reforms and the stability of the financial sector are maintained .
( EL ) Mr President , the credit rating agencies lost their credibility a long time ago .
Our rapporteur is absolutely right on that point .
They upgrade and downgrade almost everything : countries , banks , municipalities , even public corporations , absolutely everything , but their ratings are based , for the most part , on undisclosed , unpublished and , hence , non-transparent information .
The issue of the lack of transparency and , hence , of the credibility of the data used by credit rating agencies raises an important question : is it fair , is it logical , is it morally correct for ratings that affect the economy and upset the lives of millions of our fellow citizens overnight to be non-transparent and possibly unreliable ?
Obviously it is not .
( SK ) Mr President , in the wake of the financial meltdown , the credit rating agencies , which assess financial product safety , were criticised for their unprofessional and self-serving ratings of financial products .
Doubts arose over the fairness and professionalism of their evaluations after the transparency of their operating mechanisms was found to be wanting , and it is therefore time we looked for ways to improve the system for the constant assessment and rating of financial products .
In this light , I consider the report submitted by the rapporteur to be very important , and I think that the processes he has outlined will enable us to modify the apparatus used to assess financial products so that the conclusions that are offered , either by rating agencies or by other mechanisms , will result in more objective ratings of financial products .
( PT ) Mr President , experience has clearly shown that credit rating agencies are not credible and that their activities continue to be detrimental to certain countries , whether to their economies or to their sovereign debt .
Today , this is particularly affecting countries that have relatively weak economies .
That is why the intervention of credit rating agencies , which continue to be extremely harmful despite having lost all of their credibility , must be properly controlled .
This control should not be limited to transparency rules , but should go further and exert complete control over the international financial system , while also putting an end to tax havens , properly regulating the financial sector with taxes on the movement of speculative capital , and preventing financial capital from continuing to ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
( EL ) Mr President , I absolutely agree with the rapporteur on all five points of his proposals on so-called rating agencies and the exaggerated impact which they have on the global economy and on the European economy .
These firms cannot , at the same time , engage in commercial activities which are similar or relate to their supervisory or rating role .
We are calling for controls on reports by these agencies , for certain basic principles to be adopted , and for liability for compensation to be introduced for losses caused to states which were poorly evaluated or misleadingly evaluated .
I also propose that basic accounting principles be introduced and applied in all the Member States of the European Union , so as to highlight the value , the official valuation of the property of these states , so that we have assets and liabilities and these states cannot be left prey to the whims of rating agencies and the parties they represent .
Vice-President of the Commission . - Mr President , Commissioner Barnier is currently in the United States meeting with his counterparts and he has asked me to convey to you the following statement in reply to Wolf Klinz 's own-initiative report on rating agencies , which was adopted by the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs in March .
The Commissioner agrees that shortcomings in the working methods of credit rating agencies are widely recognised today as having contributed to the financial crisis .
In order to address these concerns , and in accordance with G20 commitments , the EU reacted very quickly by adopting - already in 2009 - a regulation on credit rating agencies .
This introduces strict requirements with which agencies must comply in order to eliminate potential conflicts of interest and to improve the quality of rating and methodologies as well as the transparency of the ratings .
As a second step , following the establishment of the three new European financial supervisory agencies , the regulation of credit rating agencies will be strengthened by the introduction of centralised supervision by the European Supervisory Markets Authority .
The amending regulation became effective on 1 June 2011 .
We will pay very close attention to the correct application of this legislation .
Nowadays , the European regulatory framework is a model for other jurisdictions .
However , the developments in the European markets following the sovereign debt crisis in spring 2010 make it clear that further review and strengthening is required .
For this reason , the Commission undertook in June 2010 to analyse the topics in depth .
A public consultation was carried out , the Commission services have evaluated the responses and are working on an impact assessment with a view to issuing legislative proposals in the course of this year .
In this context , the Commission will examine measures to reduce excessive dependence on external ratings , improve transparency , promote competition , introduce the principle of liability and reduce the risk of potential conflicts of interest due to the issuer-pays payment model .
We know that these are very complex issues and we want to be sure that we address them correctly .
In this context , we have looked with great interest at Mr Klinz 's own-initiative report which covers the topics we are currently reviewing and makes a very big contribution to our legislative initiative .
Last but not least , at a global level , in October 2010 , the Financial Stability Board issued a number of principles aimed at reducing the dependency of financial institutions on credit ratings .
In accordance with these principles we intend to introduce measures against excessive dependence on ratings in our forthcoming legislative proposal for the banking sector , the so-called CRD4 .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Tuesday , 7 June at 12 : 00 .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
Prior to the Lehman Brothers investment bank going bankrupt , it was given the highest rating by the main credit rating agencies .
They also thought that Iceland 's three biggest commercial banks were sound a few days before they collapsed .
In addition , the downgrading of Greece 's rating has not taken into account the launch of its economic recovery programme .
The economic and financial crisis has highlighted credit rating agencies ' oligopolistic structure , as well as their lack of competition , transparency and accountability .
In a world dominated by three such institutions , greater diversity is needed , along with a new way of working .
I therefore support the notion of creating a public European credit rating agency as an alternative to the private institutions of this kind .
It would become compulsory to obtain a rating from the European agency , which would supplement the ratings offered by the traditional agencies , thereby boosting competition for the fairest rating .
Guaranteeing independent impact assessments ( short presentation )
The next item is the report by Mrs Niebler , on behalf of the Committee on Legal Affairs , on guaranteeing independent impact assessments .
Mr President , Mrs Reding , ladies and gentlemen , let me perhaps introduce the topic with a few examples .
Greece and other states are heavily in debt , although billions from the structural funds have been poured into these countries for many years .
How can we improve the use of these resources and how can the utilisation of these resources be better controlled ?
My second example relates to Eurobonds .
What effect do they have on the European budget ?
Thirdly , if we were to introduce a financial transaction tax in Europe , what would the consequences be ?
For all these questions , Parliament demands in its reports that a regulatory impact assessment be carried out .
After all , we need facts in order to be able to take politically sound decisions .
That is what my report on improving the guarantee of independent impact assessments is all about .
This is not a new issue .
It has occupied us , together with other issues concerning the improvement of legislation , for over ten years .
However , despite all the efforts of the Commission to improve its impact assessment as well as those that we have made in this regard in the European Parliament , the quality of the impact assessment is still in need of improvement .
My report puts forward proposals for how , with regard to the European Commission and the impact assessments that it carries out , as well as with regard to Parliament 's impact assessment studies , we can succeed in bringing about this improvement .
In terms of its content , the report is divided into four sections .
Firstly , there are general requirements for impact assessments at European level .
The second section contains proposals directed at the European Commission and it lists potential areas where improvements can be made .
In the third section , I discuss how we in the European Parliament can better optimise the regulatory impact assessment as an instrument .
In the last section , I then propose that we in Parliament create an autonomous impact assessment structure .
With regard to the general requirements for impact assessments at European level , it is important to note that we need to move away from pure cost analysis towards an examination of the economic , social and health-related impact of legislation at European level .
Secondly , I think it is important that we carry out an SME test in connection with all regulatory impact assessments and also examine the effect on industrial competitiveness in Europe .
Thirdly , in this report , we propose the early publication by the Commission of road maps of proposed legislation in order to give Parliament and the stakeholders the opportunity to express their opinions during the consultation period .
With regard to the European Commission , we call , in particular , for the members of the Impact Assessment Board that was set up a while ago in the Commission to be independent and for the parliamentary committees to be involved in the work at an early stage .
With regard to Parliament , we believe it is important for us actually to utilise the regulatory impact assessment as an instrument .
Up to now , a few committees have been using it , but I think we need to make much more extensive use of this instrument in our discussions in Parliament .
If we succeed in developing Parliament 's own resources and establishing an autonomous structure under the leadership of Members of this House in order to develop a method that allows us to carry out professional regulatory impact assessments within the European Parliament , then I believe we will have achieved a great deal with this report .
I hope it will receive your support tomorrow in the vote .
( FR ) Mr President , Baroness Ashton , impact assessments enable us to perform our role as legislator .
Their bad reputation is partly explained by the risk of manipulation .
We may request them in the light of public opinion .
They may be serious and scientifically correct .
Take , for example , the impact assessment that the Committee on Women 's Rights and Gender Equality commissioned for the purposes of the directive on maternity leave .
It was so unusable that we regretted having spent taxpayers ' money .
Thank you , Mrs Niebler , for the work you have put into preparing the resolution .
Your efforts help us to legislate better for the benefit of citizens in the Member States .
( CS ) Mr President , I am tabling a report on the external dimension of the European Union and on corporate social responsibility .
I took an extremely critical approach when drafting this report because it is very frequently the case that hypocritical positions are adopted during negotiations with countries which are not EU Member States .
If we want to demand that they respect the same principles that we respect within the European Union , then it is imperative that we do the same .
We cannot demand compliance with the International Labour Organisation 's fundamental conventions and then allow these conventions to be violated by certain Member States .
I also state in the report that ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
Mr President , I warmly thank our rapporteur , Mr Falbr , for his work , and despite his initial concerns , the report remains very strong .
Speaking on behalf of the Greens / EFA Group , I would emphasise once again that the International Labour Organisation 's role should be strengthened .
Voluntary corporate social responsibility is a good thing but the primary role in promoting and protecting human rights belongs to states and international organisations .
We do not think that legally binding standards should be avoided in the field of corporate responsibility : in Europe , we should create additional standards for company reporting .
On the other hand , the violation of fundamental principles and rights at work cannot be used as a legitimate comparative advantage .
Europe should promote its social model and improve , rather than reduce , social standards both internally and externally .
( DE ) Mr President , I apologise for taking the floor once again , but I believe that some confusion has arisen , because my fellow Members are not currently discussing my report , but the report on social responsibility , which will be debated later .
Perhaps we could first finish the debate on the subject of the impact assessment - I believe Mr Baldassarre had asked to speak on the subject of my report - and then we can move on to the next report .
Thank you , Mrs Niebler .
The problem gradually became clear to me , too .
We have a minor Internet problem .
I do not have the correct list of speakers , either .
The display board is also still showing the Klinz report .
That is presumably why some Members were a little irritated .
Thus , we are now debating the report by Mrs Niebler on guaranteeing independent impact assessments .
Mr President , yes I agree , it is very important that we have independent economic impact assessments of EU regulations .
These place a very significant cost on business , on the economy and , of course , on the pockets of ordinary citizens .
Now I recently published the latest addition of my periodic study , ' How Much Does the European Union Cost Britain ? ' , which is available on my website .
Just one element of these costs is , of course , EU over-regulation .
Now , using the government 's own figures - the UK Government 's own figures - the Open Europe think-tank calculates the cost of just the top 99 directives currently in force at over GBP 20 billion per annum .
In 2006 , Commissioner Günter Verheugen put the cost of EU regulation at an average of 3.5 % of GDP ; 3.5 % of the UK 's GDP is almost GBP 49 billion per annum .
This is a staggering burden on business and on consumers .
Independent impact assessment should , of course , be carried out at the national level but , outside of the European Union , Britain would be free to decide its own level of regulation and it would certainly not be GBP 49 billion per annum .
Mr President , I shall be very brief .
First of all , I think that this is an important proposal .
This impact assessment is important to us for two reasons .
One is to ensure that we are passing regulation that is necessary and effective , but also to stop blaming something called Brussels for everything that goes wrong .
National governments and parliaments take responsibility when everything goes right , but when it is wrong they blame Brussels .
I think these impact assessments should show just who is responsible and where the blame lies , because it is far too convenient to do that .
Furthermore , when you look back at what happened before we had the European Union , the cost of that was absolutely devastating .
Vice-President of the Commission . - Mr President , the Commission welcomes the report , as it supports our smart regulation agenda and aims to strengthen the shared responsibility of the EU institutions in this area .
The Commission also welcomes the fact that the report supports some of its suggestions addressed to the European Parliament through the Smart Regulation Communication , but we also know about the few highly problematic proposals .
The Commission has already made clear in its Smart Regulation Communication that it cannot and will not accept requests that would affect its autonomy in carrying out impact assessments - for instance , the externalisation of the Impact Assessment Board - or that would otherwise affect its right of initiative .
Let me recall that the European Court of Auditors , in a recent special report on impact assessments in the EU institutions , has confirmed that the Commission 's impact assessment system ' has been effective in supporting decision making within the EU institutions ' and in raising the quality of our proposals .
The Court of Auditors also found that the Commission has in place the structures needed for smart regulation and that the Impact Assessment Board clearly helps to raise the quality of our impact assessments .
The Commission will take a position on the report after the adoption of the resolution .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Tuesday , 7 June at 12 : 00 .
I would ask all Members for their forbearance with regard to the current discrepancies , as the display is not working .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
Impact assessments have a significant effect on legislative activities , which is why new developments are needed , with the establishment of a mechanism independent of those assessments .
Therefore , they should not justify a legislative proposal , but rather allow for an objective examination of the facts .
This also applies to the scientific opinions of the European Food Safety Authority ( EFSA ) , the methodology of which has been called into question on several occasions , and to public consultations , where the wording of the questions may lead one to expect answers that the Commission 's services want to hear .
In order to combat these abuses within the legislative process , we call for a clear methodology , an analysis of alternatives and the option not to take any action , as well as maximum transparency and the close involvement of Parliament .
External dimension of social policy ( short presentation )
The next item is the report by Mr Falbr , on behalf of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs , on the external dimension of social policy , promoting labour and social standards and European corporate social responsibility .
Mr President , as I said in my speech a short while ago , the external dimension of social policy covers EU measures and initiatives aimed at promoting employment standards and social standards in third countries .
Although the Lisbon strategy and the Europe 2020 initiative place a far greater emphasis on social policy than was ever the case before , competitiveness and economic factors are still the centre of attention .
I therefore took a very critical approach to the drafting of this report .
If we want the third countries with whom we negotiate agreements to respect the principles and the very basis of the European social model , we must respect this model within the European Union .
If we want the countries with which we negotiate international agreements to respect the International Labour Organisation 's fundamental conventions , then we must respect them ourselves .
It is plain to see , however , that ILO conventions are violated in some Member States .
As far as corporate social responsibility is concerned , it is undoubtedly a good idea , and has been under discussion since the early 1970s .
The problem is , however , that it cannot be enforced .
When we were debating the comments on this report and amendments to it , one of the views expressed was that a directive should be drafted , since some businesses simply do not behave in a socially responsible way .
More than 150 amendments were tabled to the report , but I think that it nevertheless still takes a critical approach .
The European Union needs to do more to support the International Labour Organisation , since it is absurd that , while we profess support , fewer and fewer countries are ratifying and respecting the conventions .
During the last parliamentary term , the Commission even presented proposals , for example , in respect of the Working Time Directive , which ran completely counter to ILO Convention No 1 on Hours of Work , adopted in 1919 , which laid down a working week of 48 hours .
I am very glad that Parliament rejected this directive .
That brings my explanatory statement to an end .
There is no need for me to say any more , since this is an issue which everyone understands .
What I want , above all , is respect for social rights , and respect for something we proclaim as a major achievement of the European Union .
( RO ) Mr President , according to European statistics , well over half of workers in the European Union , particularly immigrants , do not enjoy social protection .
This is why I think that when it comes to social protection for workers in the European Union , basic common standards need to be promoted , along with imposing penalties if current legislation is breached .
Ratification of the revised European Social Charter would encourage internal social reforms at EU Member State level , while also facilitating the process of harmonising national legislation with EU regulations .
It is important as a political commitment to promoting and guaranteeing social standards and to adapting the legal and institutional mechanisms to the specific standards and values of European democracies .
The social rights stipulated by this agreement comply with Community social law and the relevant standards in European Union Member States .
Mr President , as a shadow rapporteur on behalf of the Greens / EFA Group , I would like our position on this report to be quite clear .
First of all , while we appreciate that the final text may be improved by the votes tomorrow , it is strong enough , and we would simply underline that the role of the International Labour Organisation should be strengthened .
On this we agree with the rapporteur .
Voluntary corporate social responsibility is a good thing but the primary role in promoting and protecting human rights belongs to states and international organisations .
We do not think that legally binding standards should be avoided in the field of corporate responsibility .
Violation of fundamental principles and rights at work cannot be used as a legitimate comparative advantage and we must insist , in bilateral and multilateral relations with our partners , that decent work standards are properly complied with .
( PT ) Mr President , bearing in mind that the World Social Security Report 2010 of the International Labour Organisation ( ILO ) states that over 50 % of all workers have no social protection , it is easy to conclude that , in most cases , there is no corporate social responsibility .
Nonetheless , the Commission continues to negotiate free trade agreements that generally only serve the interests of big companies and financial institutions , do not give proper attention to labour rights , and fail to promote freedom of association and the right to collective bargaining .
They do not take the measures necessary for the effective elimination of discrimination in the workplace or profession , or for the elimination of forced labour or insecure or poorly paid work , including child labour .
This report should therefore denounce all of these issues , but it falls short of what is required , and we hope that the Commission will go further tomorrow in consolidating its approach to these issues ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
( SK ) Mr President , it is true that social protection for workers is often a lot weaker than it should be , even within the European Union .
This is particularly true for migrant groups in the population , who travel abroad to work in places where they are often unfamiliar with the language and the local regulations , and are subsequently , of course , unable to keep up professionally with local workers .
Despite this , I do think it is important for the European Union to seek the application of the International Labour Organisation 's rules and agreements in international treaties with third countries , because it seems to me , as we learn more about the labour market and working conditions in Asia , Africa and other corners of the world , that we must strive to ensure that significant improvements are made in the status of workers in these regions and areas too .
Therefore , I personally support Mr Falbr and his report .
I am certain that it will also lead to improvements in these rules in Europe as well .
( RO ) Mr President , I , too , want to congratulate the rapporteur , while also calling on the European Commission to adopt the necessary measures so that European companies adhere to European principles and values even when they are operating in other countries .
The European Union must promote the European social model .
This is why it is of paramount importance to adhere to the European Union 's principles and values .
We regret that the European Union does not have a homogenous formula for a social clause to be inserted in all bilateral trade agreements .
I want to point out , Commissioner , that a horizontal civil aviation agreement between the European Union and Canada was voted on recently .
It is the most ambitious agreement of its kind signed by the European Union , even though it does not provide any social clauses .
Both sides have committed to work and develop things in this area .
Unfortunately , however , I should emphasise that we regret that the European Union does not have a homogenous formula for a social clause to be inserted into international agreements .
Mr President , I congratulate Richard Falbr on the comprehensive approach to international labour standards in his report .
I have been pleased to contribute to his work on the specific question of corporate social responsibility .
Tonight , this gives us a chance to influence the Commission in advance of its CSR communication by asking it firstly to maintain the open definition of CSR latterly adopted by it in the Multi-Stakeholder Forum ; to return to the principle of convergence in private and voluntary CSR initiatives , which was its former policy ; to make concrete proposals for implementing global CSR standards , specifically the updated OECD guidelines on Multinational Enterprises and the new Ruggie framework on business and human rights ; to commit to the principle of integrated financial , environmental , social and human rights reporting by business - indeed paving the way towards the possibility of future legislation in this area ; and to advance the responsibility of European businesses in their global supply chain , responding to the governance gaps identified in the Commission 's own recent Edinburgh study .
Parliament always likes to help the Commission , Ms Reding .
I hope these suggestions help tonight .
Vice-President of the Commission . - Mr President , on behalf of my colleague , László Andor , I would like to welcome the fact that the motion for a resolution for discussion today addresses so many crucial aspects of social policy 's external dimension .
The Commission firmly supports closer cooperation at global level , with employment and social objectives going hand in hand with economic objectives .
In particular , we support the continuation of discussion and the coordination of efforts within the G20 .
In this connection , the preparations for a G20 Labour and Employment Ministers meeting provide a good example of the increased cohesion emerging at world level .
The Commission also supports close cooperation with and among international organisations , which - and I am quoting the OECD and the International Labour Organisation - is vital for achieving a level playing field internationally and , in particular , for setting international labour standards .
The 100th session of the ILO began last week : it will focus on a new ILO convention on domestic workers , an issue which this House discussed recently .
Social protection , including the development of the Social Protection Floor initiative , is another area of interest for this year 's ILO conference .
We will closely follow the discussions on implementation of the labour standards enshrined in the ILO Convention , and I would point out that the Commission welcomes the emphasis in today 's motion for a resolution on the need for the EU to promote the ILO core labour standards and the decent work agenda worldwide , including gender equality and non-discrimination policy as a cross-cutting issue .
The Commission will also continue to promote sustainable development , decent work , labour standards and corporate social responsibility in other policy areas , such as trade and development policy .
In 2011 , the Commission intends to present a communication on corporate social responsibility outlining proposals for further action at international level , including promoting cooperate social responsibility in relations with partner countries .
In our view , the involvement of enterprises is also essential in order to address issues such as youth employment , training , workforce skills , health and diversity , responsible restructuring and local development , especially given the current economic and social difficulties facing Europe .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Tuesday , 7 June at 12 : 00 .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
I attach a lot of importance to the activities and initiatives associated with the external dimension of the European Union 's social policy , the aim of which is to promote social standards in third countries in order to prevent , among other things , the present-day slavery in which people are treated purely as ' production machines ' , rather than valuable individuals .
As a result of the prevalent and increasing economic competition in the world , conditions for workers are deteriorating further , with workers ' pay being the main victim of cuts and the working age being extended , in an attempt to make profits .
Therefore , in order to change the current trend , we must move from words to deeds and implement the International Labour Organisation 's ( ILO ) Decent Work Agenda and the relevant conventions .
If necessary , we must also apply extreme measures - various economic sanctions and restrictions - against countries and companies which consistently ignore them .
Of course , the relevant sanctions should not be implemented lightly or based on the desire to eliminate economic competition .
Violations of labour norms by third countries also contribute to excessively high duties in developed countries and in the European Union 's Single Market , so we must not fail to follow the ILO 's conditions if we want to be competitive .
The European Union should not point the finger here ; instead , it should put forward its own solutions and compromises in order to improve the situation .
I welcome the increase in companies ' social responsibility and respectful attitudes towards their own workers .
Yet we cannot accept a situation where the obligations of countries and local governments are shifted onto companies .
This is more the kind of policy associated with the former Soviet Union and present-day CIS countries , where the authorities essentially channel the money of the businesses .
I would like to congratulate Mr Falbr for his excellent work on the report on the external dimension of social policy , promoting labour and social standards and European corporate social responsibility .
A politically and economically integrated EU also needs a social dimension more urgently than ever .
It is important to guarantee the existence of basic services , basic security and decent working conditions for all EU citizens , especially now during this economic crisis .
As the rapporteur says , the approach to social policy that Europe chooses should also be adopted in our relations with third countries .
The Union must insist more strongly that a condition of future trade and investment agreements should be that international agreements are ratified , implemented and monitored .
Furthermore , European companies , too , should be required to be more open with respect to their accounts and subcontracting chains , so that the European Union 's strong socio-political values do not remain merely illusory .
Financing instrument for development cooperation ( short presentation )
The next item is the report by Mr Mitchell , on behalf of the Committee on Development , on Regulation ( EC ) No 1905 / 2006 establishing a financing instrument for development cooperation : lessons learned and perspectives for the future .
rapporteur . - Mr President , the DCI , the European Union 's Development Cooperation Instrument , is a powerful tool .
Covering the period between 2007 and 2013 , the EU has at its disposal a budget of almost EUR 17 billion to combat poverty , to help achieve the Millennium Development Goals and to promote democratic governance in developing countries .
Parliament has closely followed the functioning and impact of the instrument to ensure that the money is spent in accordance with these objectives .
At the end of this year , the Commission is going to present its proposals for the next generation of financing instruments for external action , to cover the post-2013 Multiannual Financial Framework .
Therefore , the Committee on Development has taken the initiative to analyse the lessons learnt with the DCI and to define our expectations for the future instrument .
The Committee on Development was unanimous in supporting the following key principles .
We need a financing instrument which is exclusively targeted at the objectives of poverty eradication as defined in the Lisbon Treaty and which only covers developing countries .
The new instrument must primarily fund measures which fulfil the criteria for ODA ( Official Development Assistance ) as defined by the OECD Development Assistance Committee .
The ODA quota must be even stricter than in the current DCI .
Let me be clear that we do not question the importance of non-ODA cooperation with developing countries , in particular , the emerging markets and strategic middle-income countries , but this form of cooperation should be channelled through separate instruments to enhance transparency and protect the specific nature of development cooperation .
Funding to improve people 's access to basic health and education must be ring-fenced by including a clear benchmark .
At least 20 % of funding under the geographical programmes should go into these life-saving sectors of basic health and basic education .
The future instrument must ensure better integration of environmental and climate change issues in developing cooperation .
Assisting developing countries in setting up fair and effective tax systems is another issue to be strengthened .
In particular for the middle-income countries , the mobilisation of domestic revenue is crucial for reducing poverty and aid dependency .
The new instrument must be sufficiently funded .
The EU development budget in the next financial framework should increase in real terms and thus contribute to reaching the collective target of spending 0.7 % of GNI on ODA .
The scarce development resources must be used in the most effective and efficient manner .
Closer coordination between the Commission and Member States is needed and Parliament therefore supports the development of joint strategy papers .
The Commission itself has said that this could bring about savings of greater impact , of approximately EUR 6 billion per annum .
Think of what that could do in the developing world .
Finally , a word on procedure .
When the Commission adopts strategic programme decisions on the new instrument , Parliament must have a say on an equal footing with the Council .
This is the requirement of Article 290 of the Lisbon Treaty , which must be fully respected .
The resolution we are going to vote on this week will provide the guiding line for upcoming negotiations on the next-generation development instrument .
I hope that this House will give broad support to the proposals from the Committee on Development which have been carried out in quiet disquisition but based on our experience of the negotiations we went into - and I remind the House that we merged 14 regulations into one in the DCI .
We want to make sure that the DCI works and that its successor will work in achieving these objectives .
( RO ) Mr President , the eradication of poverty is a key international objective of the EU .
Implementation of this instrument helps define the European Union 's presence in the UN and achieve the Millennium Development Goals .
In addition , now that the Treaty of Lisbon has come into force , the EU has the necessary external powers for meeting this target .
In future , the new fund 's geographic and thematic priorities will need to be clarified to make it operate more efficiently .
This means that vulnerable social groups , developing and emerging countries have to be included on the list of financed development objectives .
The strengthening of the SME sector and domestic private sector will be encouraged with the aim of raising the living standard in the countries included in this programme .
This will help reduce dependence on external aid and boost domestic economic growth .
( RO ) Mr President , the European Union can help developing countries in their efforts to tackle poverty .
In order to achieve the Millennium Development Goals , I think that it is vitally important also to take actions which help developing countries combat climate change .
The European Union has taken actions in this respect , targeted at agriculture , adapting to climate change , forestation , the management of marine resources and coastal areas , as well as water management .
The Global Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy Fund was set up in 2006 with the aim of mobilising private investment for projects supporting energy efficiency and promoting renewable energy sources in developing countries and in countries with economies in transition .
The ' Energy and Climate Change ' package also envisages the introduction of the Clean Development Mechanism , which allows Member States to make energy-efficient investments and use the carbon credits in developing countries .
( FR ) Mr President , Baroness Ashton , our colleague , Mr Mitchell , is a recognised expert in the Committee on Development .
That is why his report is so well drafted , and I thank him .
I would just like to emphasise one small point : respect for the principle of subsidiarity .
The greatest gift that we can give is not money .
It is widely known that the Union uses its budget to impose its Western values and standards on developing countries .
We have a duty to demand respect for human rights , but the future depends on respect for the right of nations to self-determination .
We in the West need to respect their values and cultures while providing financial assistance .
( RO ) Mr President , just as the rapporteur has also emphasised , the eradication of poverty is one of the main objectives of the financing instrument for development cooperation , launched by the European Union to provide support to developing countries .
At the moment , another challenge needs to be included on the agenda for the debate on the Development Cooperation Instrument , namely , the food price crisis , triggered by the drought and speculation on the global food market .
This requires the European Union to respond flexibly and quickly not only in order to address the sudden changes in terms of requirements and priorities , but also to ensure consistency with the new international objectives due to be defined .
The European Parliament must continue , as part of this process , to support the Commission 's efforts in programming development cooperation policies and to enhance its role in the democratic and budgetary control procedure .
Vice-President of the Commission . - Mr President , the Commission welcomes Parliament 's remarks and suggestions .
I am pleased to see that we agree on the majority of issues .
Most of all , the Commission appreciates that the continuing dialogue in the context of democratic scrutiny has produced very good results .
We only regret that Parliament does not feel that some of its resolutions on programming were respected in every detail , although the Commission has taken full account of Parliament 's view wherever possible .
Regarding cooperation on global public goods , the Commission would point out that , in general , this may meet the criteria of official development assistance ( ODA ) and the EU should therefore continue financing ODA-related cooperation on global public goods under the Development Cooperation Instrument ( DCI ) .
Nevertheless , a separate partnership instrument will concentrate on cooperation of EU interest and will be complemented by a thematic programme addressing civil society organisations and local authorities .
Likewise , projects financed under the thematic programme for migration and asylum generally count as ODA .
Thematic cooperation programmes such as ' Investing in People ' will continue to address all the millennium development goals , as we must not neglect the interrelationship between them .
While budgetisation of the European Development Fund does not currently seem feasible , the Commission nevertheless intends to pursue the issue with Member States , taking into account , primarily , the objectives and principles of the Cotonou Agreement .
With regard to the use of delegated acts , the Commission refers to President Barroso 's letter of 7 March 2011 , indicating that a new architecture will reflect the new institutional context .
One important element will be flexibility in the programming process , so that funding and priorities can adapt to today 's rapidly changing world .
This could be done by the introduction of significant elements of the delegated acts procedure , fully respecting the criteria established in Article 290 .
In conclusion , the Commission welcomes Parliament 's report .
It constitutes useful input in the preparation of the follow-up instrument to the DCI under the next Multiannual Financial Framework .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Tuesday , 7 June at 12 : 00 .
Progress towards a European contract law for consumers and businesses ( short presentation )
The next item is the report by Mrs Wallis , on behalf of the Committee on Legal Affairs , on policy options for progress towards a European contract law for consumers and businesses .

rapporteur . - Mr President , we have been talking about European contract law for over a decade ; now is the time for action , and if ever there was a time when the Internal Market needed a boost in terms of additional transactions , it is now .
The Committee on Legal Affairs favours an optional instrument , a second EU contract law for all citizens and enterprises .
We believe it could help .
But we have said that there will be tough criteria for the next step .
There must be a high level of consumer protection , higher than in many of our Member States .
It must be easy and user-friendly for SMEs ; it must give them a badge of honour to conduct their business under this optional contract and there must be no detriment to national law .
The process must be evidence-based , impact-assessed and with full parliamentary involvement , and on that basis , as I have said , the time for talking is over and we need to move forward .
There are those who are nervous and say , well , let us just use the idea of a toolbox .
Can I say to those who have that idea , be very careful , because I have a suspicion that a toolbox without an optional instrument is potentially actually more invasive of national law than a toolbox with an optional instrument that is voluntary , that respects the autonomy of the parties and is not detrimental to national law .
Let us see something , as we move forward , that offers preventative justice for EU citizens and small businesses ; that really gives us an instrument which means justice for growth .
Enough talking , now let us move on .
( IT ) Mr President , Commissioner , first of all , my congratulations to the rapporteur , Mrs Wallis , for her work and the contents of her report , with which I am in complete agreement .
I believe that only an optional instrument to be adopted by means of a regulation can adequately fulfil the objectives of the whole reform of European contract law .
Moreover , an optional instrument should neither harmonise nor replace national contract laws but rather work alongside them as an alternative instrument that offers freedom of choice to contracting parties .
Therefore , I do not agree with the proposals put forward by those who would prefer to limit the scope of this instrument so that it applies only to e-commerce contracts , as this would create an artificial and , above all , unnecessary distinction between online and face to face transactions .
Our task as legislators is not to limit the legal nature of the regulation on the basis of speculation or market projections but rather to ensure legal certainty and to lay the foundations for a common legal language in the field of commerce .
( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner Reding , the vision of European contract law is clearly a wonderful one .
However , at the end of the day , it has to provide something positive for European citizens , otherwise the idea of European contract law is simply art for art 's sake .
Why does the report start with the most vulnerable parties here , the consumers ?
The key element of Mrs Wallis 's report , the recommendation of the optional instrument , is an unreasonable demand for consumers , to put it mildly .
It is confusing for them , and in practical terms , it will never be the consumers themselves that are able to decide which state 's contract law they ultimately utilise , but rather their counterparts in the matter , in particular , big businesses .
In any case , now is not the time to say that the optional instrument is the last word on the matter , but instead we should look more closely at the other options , too - the toolbox that was mentioned and the contract models .
( SK ) Mr President , I would like to thank Mrs Wallis for her bold move .
While I have no idea how it will progress , we obviously need to try to ensure that European citizens , European retailers and European consumers benefit from what I would call equal rules , so that they can buy , sell and hence engage in business on the basis of these same rules .
In view of the complexity of the machinery of European law and national legislation , a single optional system that could be rolled out across the European Union is an appealing prospect , but is probably a Sisyphean task , as we will clearly be hampered by diverse legal systems , protests from the legal profession , and jurisdiction issues .
I fear that it would be very difficult to establish , but let us give it a shot and see what happens .
( CS ) Mr President , Commissioner , although voluntary contract legislation may give rise to legal problems regarding its implementation , it represents one way of getting rid of the different systems of contract law , which are one reason for the high failure rate of cross-border purchases by consumers , which is estimated at 60 % .
Unfortunately , entrepreneurs face a series of other pitfalls .
It is not only contract law which is not fully harmonised , but also consumer law .
There are significant differences in tax regimes and accounting standards .
Payments often attract extra bank charges , and the cross-border use of digital content is frequently blocked for licensing reasons .
Moreover , consumers in 10 Member States were unable to find domestic offers for at least half of 100 products tested , while consumers in 13 Member States found cross-border price offers that were at least 10 % lower than in their own country .
I therefore support the proposal to issue legally binding standardised voluntary contracts translated into all the languages .
At the same time , I would like to call on the Commission to play a more active role in resolving the outstanding urgent issues , in order to put an end to the fragmentation of the Internal Market .
Vice-President of the Commission . - Mr President , I would also like to thank the rapporteur , Mrs Diana Wallis , together with Hans-Peter Mayer and Sirpa Pietikäinen , for the excellent work on this dossier .
It is very clear that , in the wake of the global economic crisis , the Internal Market needs to be boosted .
We need the Internal Market if we want to have growth , job creation and innovation .
What is the current situation ?
Only one in four businesses trade across borders and those who trade limit their operations to only a few Member States .
That means they miss out on the possibility of utilising the Internal Market .
What are the consequences for consumers ?
Well , they do not reap the benefits of the Internal Market either .
Many cross-border orders - as many as 61 % of the orders on the online market - fail to be completed for this reason .
That means that we have here a non-functioning of the Internal Market both for businesses and for consumers .
That is the reason why the Commission has launched a consultation on policy options in the field of contract law , in response to which Parliament is giving its opinion today .
We have seen that Internal Market failures are due , in part , to the differences in national contract law .
We agree that there are other reasons for failure , but our recent Eurobarometer surveys show that contract-law related obstacles rank first out of eleven obstacles to business-to-consumer transactions .
That is why we need to get rid of those obstacles , one by one , starting now with contract law .
By the way , this Parliament has been discussing this for ten years , but the experts outside have been discussing it for 30 years .
So all the work done to analyse and make proposals is there on the table .
We have never taken advantage of this .
That is why I agree with the rapporteur that it is time to act now and to see what positive action we can take .
I have taken note of the assessment of the report on the policy options presented in the Green Paper and the support for the innovative solution of an optional instrument , which means no harmonisation but giving consumers and businesses a choice of having a Europe-wide system .
I have also seen the support for an instrument applicable in both B2C and B2B transactions , which favours a material scope covering sales contracts , contracts for the supply of digital content and some service contracts .
I have taken very good note of what has been said by Parliament , namely , that any future instrument , whatever it looks like , should give consumers a high level of protection in order not to deprive them of the protection they would otherwise enjoy under national law .
That is a conditio sine qua non .
If we do not have that , we will fail in all of our activities .
Where do we stand at the moment ?
On 3 May 2011 , the Commission published the results of a feasibility study by the Expert Group on European contract law and we invited all stakeholders to comment .
The Commission is analysing the results of the public consultation and then it will prepare a detailed impact assessment to see what should be the next step that , in times of crisis , will be good for giving a boost to the Internal Market and creating growth and jobs in the Internal Market by expanding the markets , mostly for SMEs , and giving consumers the possibility of better choice and better deals .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Wednesday , 8 June at 12 : 00 .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
Even though we have an Internal Market , businesses and consumers do not take sufficient advantage of the opportunities it offers , as the proportion of cross-border transactions remains fairly low .
The Internal Market can be revitalised by encouraging cross-border transactions and I believe that this report will help achieve this objective .
We must obviously respect differences between Member States ' legal systems and the principle of subsidiarity , which is why I do not regard total harmonisation as the most suitable option .
On the other hand , I feel that the optional application of common rules for cross-border contracts is a viable alternative .
In addition , I believe that if a Member State would like to extend the scope of application of European law to domestic transactions as well , it should be free to do so .
It is very true to say that this is not the solution to every problem .
There are also other obstacles preventing cross-border transactions , in addition to these contract law differences , relating to areas such as tax matters , intellectual property or the availability of electronic payment methods .
However , I think that this optional instrument deserves a try as it may get rid of some of the administrative burden which is currently preventing SMEs from expanding their businesses in Member States other than their own .
Cooperation in vocational education and training to support the Europe 2020 strategy ( short presentation )
The next item is the report by Mrs Hirsch , on behalf of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs , on European cooperation in vocational education and training to support the Europe 2020 strategy .
Mr President , Commissioner , tomorrow , we will vote on the role of vocational education and training in the Europe 2020 strategy .
In this connection , it is worth taking a brief look at the position we are starting from .
We currently have a level of youth unemployment of 21 % , in other words , almost double the normal average .
We have an EU-wide school drop-out rate of over 14 % .
The participation of women in gainful employment is still very low .
Many people with disabilities , as well as migrants , are without jobs .
The goal of the Europe 2020 strategy is precisely to tap this potential in terms of workers and to bring them into the workplace so that the EU , too , can deal with globalisation .
Thus , it is also our job to ensure that initial vocational education in particular is of high quality .
The discussion began in connection with the Copenhagen process , followed by the Bruges Communiqué , and now it is up to us to see to what extent this area can also be incorporated into the Europe 2020 strategy .
An absolutely key element is the fact that young people must have the opportunity , not only in their studies , but also in their vocational training , to undertake part of their training in another EU Member State .
It is a key element because someone who has already worked in another Member State will also take the opportunity later on to regard the European labour market as his or her labour market , with all the opportunities that that offers .
It is therefore an absolutely key aspect that we must pursue .
The second major area is , of course , that of further training .
On account of demographic change , people are having to work for longer and longer - or they can work for longer , but everyone has to take that decision for themselves .
People are living until they are much older and will continue with their careers for much longer , and in order to be able to carry on in skilled work until they are older , they will also need to undertake further training .
There is currently a very low level of participation in further training initiatives .
Here , too , it must be ensured that the willingness of both employers and workers exists and increases when it comes to taking advantage of further training and continuing to gain education by means of lifelong learning .
For this , of course , the options on offer also need to be flexible .
We must take everyone into consideration .
Further training must fit in with other elements of people 's lives and it must be possible to do it alongside work and family life .
For that reason , we clearly need to create flexible opportunities in future .
The area of universities has received a great deal of attention - in connection with the Bologna Process , for example - and a similar situation faces us in the area of vocational training , including with regard to mobility .
We could almost say that no one has noticed this .
Nevertheless , alongside the universities , the area of vocational education and training is particularly important and we therefore must not ignore it .
For that reason , I would like at this point to thank my fellow Members from the other groups once again for their very committed cooperation .
( EL ) Mr President , as shadow rapporteur , I welcome the Hirsch report , because it highlights how important it is to always have the capacity to learn and work , alongside mobility and flexibility , in the modern and demanding international labour environment .
It is true that the economic crisis has brought unemployment and insecurity to everyone , especially young people , women and the disabled .
In order to achieve the objectives of the EU 2020 strategy , we need constant and proper vocational education and training both in the European Union and in the Member States .
We need targeted policies and strategies to reduce the percentage of early school leavers , proper programming of people 's needs for training , and closer ties between the education provided and the needs of the labour market .
I am certain that the European Qualifications Framework , the European system of academic units for vocational education and training , transparency and cooperation and comparability of the various education systems will support the needs ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
( RO ) Mr President , investment in education is vital to ensure a better future for Europeans .
At the moment , the EU youth unemployment rate has reached 20 % , while the average EU school dropout rate is 16 % , and in some countries , like Portugal , it has reached 40 % .
Lifelong learning is vital if unemployment is to be prevented .
We must give due consideration to the different career paths .
Workers must be made more greatly aware of the need for ongoing further training .
We feel that vocational education and training should be accessible , available and affordable at every stage of life , regardless of people 's status on the labour market and their income .
Vocational education and training should create the conditions conducive to labour mobility , both during initial studies and as part of the lifelong learning process .
We call on Member States to simplify the procedures for recognising qualifications .
( RO ) Mr President , one of the biggest challenges Europe is faced with is the youth unemployment rate .
At European level , the focus is placed on reducing the school dropout rate below 10 % and on actions such as ' New skills for new jobs ' , whose aim is to bring the world of education and training closer to the labour market .
The distinction between education and training , apart from their context in the workplace , will become even less clear in the future .
In order to achieve a greater level of integration , a vital change will need to be made in the way education and training provision is conceived , not only from an individual perspective , but also at institutional level and every level of administration .
Therefore , I think that system-related obstacles and those in terms of attitude preventing integration need to be removed if Europeans are to learn to make progress in the areas of their skills and values and make an effective contribution to achieving the Europe 2020 strategy objectives .
( DA ) Mr President , firstly , I would like to express my sincere thanks to the rapporteur , who has tabled an extremely good report .
Like everyone else , I believe that we should remember the context in which this report is set , and that , of course , is the youth crisis that we are experiencing in Europe .
We are agreed about the general crisis - soaring youth unemployment and young people who are , in fact , moving out of Europe to find work , and this , in my opinion , will be a very serious threat to our economy and our cohesion in Europe in the coming years .
The second context for this report is the common 2020 objectives that we have set for training , employment and the reduction of the drop-out rate .
This is about Europe 's competitiveness .
It is about having a trained workforce , which is something that we know we need .
It is also important to ensure that the new generation has the opportunity for jobs and training .
This is absolutely crucial .
It may be the case that the EU does not have a great deal of competence in this area , but something can be done nevertheless .
In any case , it is a shared concern , and therefore we must ensure that we provide high-quality training and that there is guidance available .
We must reduce the drop-out rate and ensure that there is a strong link between training and work , for example , by means of exchange systems like we have in Germany and Denmark .
We must also ensure that all young people have the right to undergo training .
Vice-President of the Commission . - Mr President , I would like to thank the rapporteur , Ms Hirsch , for her very constructive approach .
I have listened to her with great interest because that was actually my dossier 12 years ago .
I started to bring about the mobility in training which was not on the agenda at that moment , and I am very glad to hear how strongly Parliament is in favour of developing this essential element in the Europe 2020 strategy .
I would also like to say how much we welcome the report , which reinforces and complements the Commission 's communication of June 2010 .
This communication was an input to the latest review of the Copenhagen Process , and the Bruges Communiqué has now , of course , become the European agenda par excellence for vocational training for the years 2011-2020 .
Many of Parliament 's suggestions correspond with the actions proposed in the Bruges Communiqué .
The Commission shares Parliament 's view because we need to modernise vocational education and training in Europe to make it attractive , to have qualified teachers and trainers , innovative learning methods and high-quality infrastructure and facilities , and , of course , we have to have the mobility .
We have to give the will to young people - and to less young people - to go outside their Member State in order to get the experience which is important if we want to have a real European education and training area .
The Commission also aims to attain gender balance and to help disadvantaged groups through the lifelong learning programme , notably through the Leonardo da Vinci programme , which is included .
So all the help which the Commission can get from Parliament is most welcome .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Tuesday , 7 June 2011 , at 12 : 00 .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
During the current economic and financial crisis where the unemployment rate , especially among young people , has exceeded the 20 % mark at EU level and even 30 % in some Member States , improving vocational education and training must become a priority for the European Union .
In this context , youth mobility within the EU , combined with greater flexibility in terms of the labour market and the education and training on offer , are essential elements which ought to be developed at EU and national level .
Ongoing , well-structured dialogue between universities , research centres and businesses can enable a real link to be established between employers ' requirements and the skills acquired during education and training cycles .
Furthermore , increasing mobility at European Union level through expanding programmes such as Erasmus , Leonardo da Vinci or Youth on the Move can also help improve the EU 's ability to respond better to the demand of the European labour market and to have greater potential for development in this area .
Particular attention must also be focused on socially disadvantaged groups , who need to have fair access to vocational education and training .
The transition from education to work is a structural challenge for employees all over the European Union .
Unfortunately , early unemployment has lasting negative effects .
For this reason , Member States should ensure that vocational education and training is better adjusted to the needs of the labour market , and that vocational education provides employees with the skills needed to take up new , sustainable jobs that will be created in the future sustainable economy .
I consider the role of local governments , entrepreneurial partnerships and educational institutions important in the development of the labour market demands of vocational education and training .
The opportunity for mobility is an important part of vocational education and training , but more emphasis should be placed on a better harmonisation of Member States ' different education systems - including mutual recognition of certificates and diplomas - in order to enhance collaboration and support mobility .
High-quality vocational education and training fundamentally contribute to sustainable development .
Better training opportunities must be created for trainers , particularly at regional and local level , with a view to securing the effectiveness of vocational education and training systems , as well as efficient and successful transfer of knowledge .
The possibility to learn in an international context is a prerequisite for a successful working life that will promote the acquisition of foreign-language skills and increased competitiveness .
Cooperation at European level in the field of vocational education is also absolutely crucial for the functioning of the single European Internal Market .
High-quality vocational education and training must both respond to the demands of the labour market and create the conditions for workforce mobility .
Highly qualified and well-educated people represent a competitive advantage for the EU , and support for vocational education should take this into account .
We need to focus on establishing close links with the world of work , and also on facilitating high-quality work experience as part of vocational training , both at home and abroad , within the framework of European mobility programmes .
We need greater coordination at European level between the education systems in the individual Member States , and , following on from this , cooperation on the mutual recognition of vocational qualifications .
The report covers these issues , and , as shadow rapporteur for the Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection , I am happy with its final form .
I welcome the report on European cooperation in vocational education and training .
It points to an incredibly important issue which has not often been discussed to date , namely , the need for national authorities to take action , in cooperation with the European Commission , to prevent unemployment by tailoring vocational training to the needs of the job market .
Unfortunately , vocational education has been neglected in recent years and has reduced in significance .
This is why it is so important to promote it as an effective tool in the fight against unemployment , and particularly against unemployment among the young inhabitants of the European Union , which has reached 21 % .
Apprenticeships , the establishment of advisory services making it easier for workers to plan their training according to the needs of the jobs market and the promotion of lifelong vocational education should be priorities .
That is why I call on the Commission to carry out constant monitoring of the outlook for possible changes in the EU jobs market , so that Member States can continuously adapt their vocational training programmes to the needs of the market .
I welcome the report on European cooperation in vocational education and training and would like to emphasise how important it is to promote lifelong learning through initiatives and Europe-wide programmes in order to make it possible for workers to have a better future .
These days , workers are at the mercy of frequent and risky employment transitions .
There are many types of transition : from training , redundancy , internships or precarious employment into full-time employment .
The report contains some important points , including increasing the quota of women in work , recognition of informal learning and promotion of languages with the goal of providing mobility programmes .
I am particularly pleased that the focus has been placed on education and training for young people , which is something that I will actively support in the flagship initiatives that follow .
The transition from educational institution to working life must be as smooth as possible and , in particular , tailored to individual needs , because it must also be possible for young people with inadequate training to gain the skills necessary to be able to work in skilled jobs and to earn a good living .
Social background must not determine a person 's educational opportunities .
Young people must be given help and support in securing entry to the world of work .
However , the cost of a modern labour market policy must not be borne by our workers .
New skills and competences acquired by graduates of various types of educational institutions have strategic significance for economic growth and open up new possibilities for people , creating a basis for sustainable development .
That is why we cannot underestimate the problem of unemployment , especially among young people .
They are the ones who most often do not obtain permanent work and are forced to accept temporary work which has an inferior level of social insurance and lacks prospects for development .
One of the goals of the Europe 2020 strategy is to reduce the rate of early school leavers to a maximum of 10 % , and to enable 40 % of young Europeans to complete tertiary education .
The legislative process should focus on facilitating the implementation of vocational traineeships and work experience for young workers , especially in micro-enterprises and small enterprises which find it difficult to fund this type of initiative .
Strong emphasis should also be placed on eliminating differences in men and women 's pay by 2020 , since this currently stands at about 18 % .
I believe that the two most important initiatives in the supranational jobs market are the qualifications framework drawn up within the context of the Copenhagen process and the unified European credit transfer system for vocational education and training .
It is also worth mentioning informal training , which represents an underestimated additional source of skills , and which shapes the character and sense of responsibility of the individual , which is why it should be funded by the EU .
In order to accomplish these many important goals , cooperation between Member States is vital , as is the involvement of all entities , including those at local and regional level .
Agenda for next sitting : see Minutes
Closure of the sitting
Opening of the sitting
( The sitting was opened at 09 : 05 )
Documents received : see Minutes
Petitions : see Minutes
Texts of agreements forwarded by the Council : see Minutes
Debates on cases of breaches of human rights , democracy and the rule of law ( announcement of motions for resolutions tabled ) : see Minutes
EHEC outbreak in the EU Member States ( debate )
The next item is the Commission statement on the EHEC outbreak in the EU Member States .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , I should like to thank all of you for this opportunity to inform you about developments in relation to the outbreak of E coli .
I am very concerned about the heavy burden of death and disease that this food-borne epidemic has caused the European population and want to take the opportunity once again to express my condolences to those who are suffering as a result .
In this context , I have to note that the situation is still evolving .
There are now over 1 672 Shiga-toxin-producing E coli cases , and serious complications have developed in at least 661 people .
According to the latest information , this outbreak is responsible for 21 deaths in Germany and 1 in Sweden .
Sporadic cases are reported in 11 other Member States .
Switzerland has also reported 15 cases and the United States 4 .
The epicentre of the disease is still the area around Hamburg in northern Germany .
Most of the cases reported outside Germany concern either German nationals travelling or persons who visited this part of Germany .
So what is the European Commission doing to tackle the outbreak ?
First , we have immediately activated all our networks responsible for managing crises .
The networks are in daily contact and allow for the timely exchange of information , laying the ground for rapid action .
The Commission holds almost daily meetings with your public health authorities and food safety authorities to discuss the evolution of the outbreak , the health measures taken to prevent infection and the treatment of affected people .
The Early Warning and Response System and the Rapid Alert System for Food and Feed have provided a solid basis for exchanging information .
Second , we have asked the European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control ( ECDC ) to do a scientific risk assessment , which is being updated regularly as the situation evolves .
We now have an EU case definition which will allow Member States to share the same approach on the investigation of the outbreak .
Patient questionnaires for outbreak investigations are being collected and compared by the ECDC .
The ECDC has also developed , together with the European Food Safety Authority , advice on preventive measures addressed to the public .
This advice is now available in all official languages on the Commission website .
We have asked the ECDC to urgently set up a platform to exchange best practice on treatment , involving both Member States and professional societies .
Our food safety EU reference laboratory in Rome developed in record time a method which reduces the time needed to detect the E coli bacterium in food from about six days to 48 hours .
Finally , let me stress that public perception is extremely important .
In this regard , the Commission draws up daily updates , shared with the Health Security Committee communicators ' network and food safety authorities .
In addition , the Commission keeps its website dedicated to this outbreak up to date .
I would strongly urge Members of the European Parliament to support this science-based communication to the public , in order to reduce unnecessary fears and to reinforce our common efforts .
I can assure you that the Commission , together with these agencies , is working very hard with national health and food safety ministries to support them in containing this outbreak .
To do that , we need to pursue intensively the investigation into the source of contamination ; the work is taking place as I speak .
During the Health Council yesterday , I asked Germany to reinforce surveillance , outbreak controls and measures in order to identify the source of the outbreak and halt the spread of the infection .
I also asked that the causes of the contamination should be swiftly dealt with .
The German authorities accepted the Commission proposal to dispatch to Germany experts in epidemiology of food-borne diseases from the Commission , the ECDC and the EFSA .
On Sunday , 5 June , the experts started their mission to assist German authorities with the ongoing epidemiology , verify the results and contribute to the ongoing investigations to identify the source .
As we all know , the initial suspicion raised by the German authorities that cucumbers from Spain were the cause has not been confirmed by any test results available .
On Sunday , 5 June , the German authorities notified the European Commission that , based on the epidemiological investigations , they believe bean sprouts are the possible source of the E coli outbreak affecting mainly the northern part of Germany .
The information was transferred immediately to all Member States through the Rapid Alert System for Food and Feed .
The Commission follows any new development closely , and will decide on the appropriate course of action the moment laboratory tests confirm any epidemiological finding .
We do not have any results to date .
Here , I should stress that it is crucial that national authorities do not rush to give information on any source of infection which is not proven by bacteriological analysis , as this spreads unjustified fears in the population all over Europe and creates problems for our food producers selling products in the EU and outside the EU .
While such intensive investigations are going on , we must be careful not to jump to premature conclusions .
In this respect , I want to refer to the latest information coming from Germany regarding the suspicion that sprouts may be the source of contamination ; it noted that laboratory tests have not been concluded and that consequently , premature conclusions have to be avoided .
This illustrates that it is important for the Member States to introduce well sustained and scientifically based alerts into the RASFF and to trigger the RASFF when Member States are confident regarding the scientific evidence supporting the alert notification .
You have to act quickly and decisively in order to preserve the Internal Market .
If we manage to do this , then we can learn from the lessons of this crisis and continually improve our systems .
I have been repeating : our system works .
We need to learn lessons as we go along .
I believe that this is our responsibility : to be flexible and to be fast in adjusting our processes and procedures to respond to these types of incidents .
Coordination and clear lines of information and communication remain the core of our ability to be effective in such situations .
We have to learn lessons on this front .
Before closing , I would like to raise briefly two more points .
The first concerns references to bans on certain products .
I would like to stress again that the outbreak is limited geographically to an area surrounding the city of Hamburg , so there is no reason , as of today , to take such measures at European level .
In the light of this and of the steps towards the identification of the source , we consider any ban on any product as disproportionate .
Finally , I am also very sensitive to the financial impact that this crisis is having on farmers , particularly vegetable producers .
This is why I am working closely with my colleague , Commissioner Cioloş , to address the hardship faced by this group of our citizens that has also been hit by the outbreak .
In fact , Agriculture Ministers are holding an extraordinary Council meeting today to address E coli .
As I finish talking to you , I will head back to Brussels to be with my colleague , Commissioner Cioloş , during this extraordinary Agriculture Ministers ' Council .
In addition , we are in constant contact with third countries , in particular Russia , to ask them to lift their ban , which is considered disproportionate .
The Commission is working hand in hand with the Member States with one common goal : to bring this outbreak to an end as soon as possible .
I am insisting to all concerned that , in situations like this , it is not a local problem , it is a European problem .
( Applause )
on behalf of the PPE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to thank Commissioner Dalli for focusing on the patients first .
I would like to do the same .
Hundreds of people are severely ill .
Medical personnel in northern Germany are really at their limit .
Twenty-two people have already died .
Yesterday in the Council , a representative of another Member State , Luxembourg , said that financial losses could be recompensed , but human life cannot .
Therefore , I would firstly like to ask for understanding with regard to issuing a warning even if we are not 100 % certain where the source is but only have a suspicion - that we also make this information public .
Of course , we still have to find the source .
I see that many people working for the authorities , with the support of the European Food Safety Authority ( EFSA ) , too - my sincere thanks to the European institutions and to Commissioner Dalli for the fact that the European Union is also helping to investigate this matter - are really working very intensively on this .
Nevertheless , as a German Member of this House , I cannot stand here and say that everything is going well .
There have been a few problems in connection with the crisis management .
For example , the Hamburg Health Senator informed the public , which was the right thing to do , even if there was not absolute certainty with regard to the Spanish cucumbers .
The EHEC pathogen was on the Spanish cucumbers and it should not have been there .
Even the Spanish Members must understand that .
However , she informed the public first and only very much later , hours or half a day later , she informed the European Commission and the Spanish authorities .
That was unacceptable .
In this regard , we in Germany must also consider internally how we could manage this better .
However , together we should concentrate on the fact that the enemy is not in Spain or in Germany , but rather the real problem is the pathogen that we need to get under control and to combat .
My final point is that we adopted a resolution during the last plenary sitting on the subject of resistance to antibiotics .
Even though this pathogen should not primarily be treated with antibiotics , we have the problem that it is resistant to many common antibiotics .
This is a long-standing subject that we now need to tackle more quickly because next time , it could be the case that the pathogen has to be treated with antibiotics but , because it is resistant , it is not possible to treat it .
We need to work on this .
on behalf of the S & D Group . - Mr President , Commissioner , you are right that this is a public health issue , a very serious one , and our focus should now be on caring for the sick and identifying the source , but then we have to look to the long term and find out how we stop it happening again .
A few weeks ago , I met a representative of the US Food and Drug Administration .
She was telling me about the problems of E coli in fruit and vegetables in the United States and we discussed how this was not common in the European Union .
Now we have had this outbreak , so we have to ask ourselves some questions .
Is it about our farming practices , as Peter Liese just mentioned ?
Is it about intensive farming , hot-housing fruit and vegetables ?
Is it about overuse of antibiotics in livestock ?
Is it about manure spreading ?
Would more accurate food labelling have helped us to identify more quickly the source of the contamination ?
I note that the Council is not here today , but the Council is resisting proper country of origin labelling on our foods .
I hope they will listen to this debate in the future .
So , Commissioner , we need to investigate thoroughly for the longer term and we need to learn lessons and integrate them into our policies .
Too often , we hear from this Commission and from many in this House about over-regulation , but , as with the banks , I am starting to wonder whether we tend to put the needs of market and supply chains ahead of those of public protection and the consumer .
' Business as usual ' is not going to be good enough .
It is not normal that people in Europe go out for a salad and die as a consequence , and we need policy change to address this .
Mr President , Commissioner , thank you for having first spoken about the victims and the people taken ill .
Clearly , it is to them that our first thoughts must go , as well as to the farmers who are in a very difficult position , one that we can perfectly understand .
I wish to make three points .
Firstly , we uphold the precautionary principle .
It was applied in this case , so we cannot complain , and the consequences will obviously have to be dealt with .
As Mr Liese pointed out just now , human beings clearly come before economic issues , which can be dealt with at any time .
Death , unfortunately , is permanent .
Secondly , I fully agree with what Mrs McAvan just said about the importance of traceability .
We are discussing labelling today .
It is absolutely vital that we have comprehensive labelling and that we can trace products in order to know where they have originated from .
Thirdly , regarding the absolutely crucial issue at the heart of the problem , we must admit that we do not know everything , that there are gaps in our scientific knowledge and , in fact , that we are sometimes completely in the dark .
We cannot know everything .
We cannot challenge those who have taken decisions and , at the same time , believe that we should wait .
In this case , the precautionary principle must prevail .
on behalf of the ECR Group . - Mr President , first of all , I would also like to express my sympathy to those who have been affected .
Concerning those who have lost their lives : you cannot bring back a life .
We can probably put the underlying situation right in the longer term , but it shows how wrong it is to jump to conclusions at a very early point .
I can understand the anger - if there is anger and I am sure there is - from the Spanish side and from those who have lost their business .
We can probably do something to recompense that , but you cannot give back a life .
We have got to learn from this and to ensure that in future , we have a solid base for response , as the Commissioner has said .
We have to find a resolution as quickly as possible to the present situation and , in the long term , we have got to improve our response mechanisms to this type of situation .
I suppose it is very easy with hindsight to talk about what could or should have been done or what we did not do , but now , with the benefit of that hindsight , we could put mechanisms in place to ensure that this never happens again .
The Commissioner is right .
We must learn from the lessons of this .
You must always learn from the lessons of your mistakes .
If mistakes have been made , let us put them right and ensure that it never happens again .
Mr President , Commissioner , you rightly said that there have been too many deaths and too many people made sick as a result of this EHEC pathogen , and I think that the situation we find ourselves in also shows that neither Germany nor the European Union are prepared for the sort of spread of EHEC that we are currently seeing .
A simple comparison with a few other countries makes it clear that we could be better . I would just like to refer once again to the example of the United States .
Since the 1980s , huge efforts have been made there with regard to research , there is a reporting obligation and there is a centralised disease control authority in Atlanta that has extensive powers for direct intervention when such an epidemic occurs .
In Germany , on the other hand , we have two Federal Ministries that are responsible and these ministries clearly could not agree on who was to take responsibility .
We also have regional ministries that want to , and must , assume responsibility , but that are clearly overstretched .
We have communication problems between laboratories and politicians .
Thus , it is wholly unclear when science is to intervene , when disease control measures are to be announced , and when political action is to be taken .
I can understand why a Minister , on receiving the information that the cucumbers are responsible , would issue a warning accordingly , but where is the detailed coordination ?
Where is the genuine decision-making authority ?
It seems to me - and I say this very cautiously - that action was taken just as prematurely with the bean sprouts as with the cucumbers .
There is something of a discrepancy between scientific findings and political action .
Getting back to what we need to do : we need to establish a reporting obligation throughout Europe , define central laboratories and set up a central body within the European Union with the decision-making power in the event of an outbreak of such a disease .
I think that would be the appropriate thing to do .
I am extremely grateful to Mr Liese for mentioning the antibiotics problem .
Here , too , we are faced with problems that we are actually already aware of .
However , because we shy away from entering into a debate with the medical sector , the pharmaceuticals industry and the intensive livestock farming sector - there is a great deal to be addressed here - we are also not being as consistent as we need to be in the way we deal with the matter of antibiotics resistance .
EHEC and antibiotics resistance are both major problems .
Mr President , the EHEC epidemic is making apparent the flaws in the system of industrial food production in the liberalised Internal Market of the EU .
When profits take priority over the protection of health , then food quality and food safety suffers .
So far , at least 22 people have died in Germany as a result of the EHEC pathogen and there have been more than 1 500 cases of infection .
In more than 600 patients , the dangerous haemolytic uremic syndrome ( HUS ) was diagnosed , which can also result in neurological disorders .
After more than two weeks , the source of this life-threatening epidemic is still unclear .
If we had regional production of foodstuffs , it would be easier to determine the source of infection and the effects of the epidemic would be more limited .
As a result of the long transport routes and the anonymous production conditions , it is very difficult to trace the origin of the food .
However , traceability with regard to the origin of the food is essential when it comes to food safety .
Consumers have a right to know how their food has been produced and where it comes from .
The Federal Government in Germany completely failed in connection with the EHEC epidemic .
In the confusion between regional and federal competences , management of the crisis fell by the wayside .
The monitoring authorities were not prepared for this situation .
We need a radical rethink in agricultural policy .
Our food must be safe .
However , agricultural producers should also be protected against incalculable financial risks .
The policy for promoting agriculture and rural areas must consistently aim at a clear decentralisation of the food production and marketing structures .
( ES ) Mr President , I should like to briefly raise three points on the current situation concerning cucumbers .
I am the grandson of a German and feel deep affection for that country , but the German authorities have clearly acted hastily and rashly in this particular case .
As for the EU institutions , an analysis of their actions reveals that the European Food Safety Authority and the Commission reacted feebly and clumsily .
They have failed to coordinate or to manage the situation .
Thirdly , the injured parties are entitled to rapid financial compensation .
In the meantime , however , I propose to Parliament that we hold a great show of European gastronomy either in Brussels or here in Strasbourg , allowing cucumber to take centre stage .
We must vindicate the lost honour - an expression much to the taste of the German author Heinrich Böll - of cucumber producers .
Europe is the right stage for this purpose .
( ES ) Mr President , one can only express a deep sense of sorrow for the 23 fatalities : 22 in Germany and one in Sweden .
This crisis is clear evidence that the European Union has a long way to go in improving its food safety alert system and its internal coordination .
The Member States involved have been slow , inefficient and inoperative in their reaction , and , at this point in time , with 23 people dead , we still do not know where the problem is coming from .
The European Commission must think hard about the problems it causes with its irresponsible actions or its failure to act at times of crisis such as we are seeing now .
These lead to cases of financial ruin , the destruction of previously stable jobs , unemployment , helplessness and , needless to say , an extremely hazardous public health crisis .
While you in the Commission paid heed to irresponsible statements issued by regional authorities in Germany - statements that were totally misinformed and quite irresponsible - mentioning Spanish farms by their names and addresses , the population remained exposed , without knowing it , to the bacterium .
Thus , in the belief that they were avoiding contact with it , the public were more exposed than ever to eating potentially harmful food .
In the Council of Agriculture Ministers that will be held in Luxembourg at two o 'clock this afternoon , the European Commission should propose that a portion of the EUR 2 500 million left over from the common agricultural policy be put to use .
Those EUR 2 500 million should be used to redress , in so far as is possible , the damage that has been caused .
To enable this , a suitable legal solution will need to be found , as was the case in previous instances , for example , the ' mad cow ' and dioxin affairs .
One such solution should also be found now .
Commissioners , Ministers , your actions in Luxembourg today must befit the stature of your office .
Furthermore , the German authorities , in view of their reckless accusations , should definitely support this financial solution from the very beginning , and use funds of their own to conduct communication campaigns aimed at restoring consumer confidence in horticultural products , which is now in shatters .
( PT ) Mr President , the outbreak of infection in Germany has meant that we are facing one of the most difficult public health , crisis management situations in living memory .
The Commission and Germany , in particular , have not been managing this crisis in the best possible way .
We are facing a massive human tragedy involving the loss of many lives , and a threat to the lives of thousands of others .
This is also a crisis of consumer confidence in staple foods , with economic and social consequences that are hard to foresee .
Society expects a rapid response from the national and Union authorities that sheds light on the causes of this crisis , along with effective action .
However , it is also necessary to minimise the disastrous consequences this is having on another group of innocent victims , namely , fruit and vegetable producers , as has been mentioned here today .
These workers have been hastily and unfairly blamed , and have lost income and seen their futures seriously threatened .
Preventative action also needs to be taken as a matter of urgency so that similar situations do not happen again .
One aspect of this is to increase the effectiveness of supervision and control mechanisms for antibiotics in animals , as I mentioned in the debate held here less than a month ago .
Another area where action needs to be taken is the form of the new common agricultural policy ( CAP ) , which we are in the process of reforming .
It is vital that , in future , incentives be aimed at ensuring quality based on sustainable production methods , as the Group of the Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats in the European Parliament has been insisting .
( FR ) Mr President , the situation has worsened still further : 23 people have died and more than 2 200 people have been taken ill in Europe .
Clearly , our thoughts are very much with them this morning .
The German authorities have still not succeeded in formally identifying the cause of this epidemic .
In the meantime , no one is touching European vegetables , and this health crisis has turned into a social crisis and an economic crisis too , of course .
The market garden sector is rightly demanding compensation and , as the Commissioner said , the Ministers and Commissioners concerned are due to meet on this subject this afternoon in Luxembourg .
Aside from what has already been said about the precautionary principle and essential traceability - the first point - it is also a question of knowing how this general alert singling out Spanish cucumbers for blame could have been issued without any , or hardly any , proof .
What urgent lessons does the Commission intend to learn from this serious crisis , Commissioner , so that our food alert system is more than ever based on ' sound and well-sustained scientific evidence ' , as you yourself described it , Commissioner ?
( PL ) Mr President , I , too , would like to express my sorrow at the loss of life and to wish those who are ill a quick return to health .
We have a great deal which needs to be explained .
We have to establish the source and cause of the outbreak , but we must also identify the source and cause of the false information about the outbreak which was spread in Europe and around the world - false and damaging information , which has done so much harm .
We need to look very closely at the causes of the outbreak and , in particular , at industrial animal husbandry , where antibiotics are used on a massive scale .
I agree with those who have just spoken about this .
If antibiotics are used on such a large scale , it is no surprise that strains of bacteria arise which do not then respond to antibiotics .
In my opinion , this intensive farming with the use of antibiotics should be greatly restricted in the European Union , and perhaps even stopped , and the damage which has been done should be repaired by those who caused it .
( DE ) Mr President , EHEC is not a new problem , but it is clear that Europe is still inadequately prepared for a crisis like this .
It takes too long for clear guidelines to be issued .
Three weeks is definitely too long .
Consumer protection , we are all agreed , always takes absolute priority over financial interests .
However , it needs to be made clear who is to issue a warning and when , who is subsequently to take over responsibility for the warnings , and when the European Commission is to get involved .
In Germany , the responsibility lies with 16 federal states and two ministries , which is too finely distributed for a European crisis .
Europe must be involved here at an earlier stage .
I do not believe that we have learnt the right lessons from the crises of the 1990s .
That is something that we now need to rectify as a matter of urgency .
When it comes to food , we need transparency and clear traceability with regard to manufacture .
We need clear country of origin labelling .
However , we also need a European reaction force to coordinate the scientific and medical work and to establish control plans .
( Applause )
( PT ) Mr President , in view of the flurry of conflicting reports about the origin of this outbreak , it is important to bear some points in mind .
Firstly , I would like to point out that more than 15 days after the first cases had been reported and more than a month after the first instances of contamination had occurred , the European early warning and response units have still been unable to identify the real cause of the contamination .
This has caused a great deal of harm , as has already been mentioned here .
Secondly , it is important to remember that this is a serious , but not isolated , case of a lack of food security in the EU .
I would remind you of the recent debate that we had here on the problem of dioxins .
These cases are inseparable from a common agricultural policy ( CAP ) that promotes intensive , export-oriented production models , instead of encouraging , as is necessary , local production and consumption , which could ensure much more effective traceability and , consequently , greater food security .
Finally , it is important to compensate European producers for the damage that they are suffering , and not just those in the geographical area of the outbreak of infection .
The CAP is a common policy , so this should be done through EU measures rather than just national ones , given the obvious inequalities that this would create .
Mr President , first it was cucumbers , yesterday it was bean sprouts .
Today , it is not bean sprouts .
The truth is that the experts just do not know , but each time such allegations are made , they destroy livelihoods in countries ' economies .
What we do know is that there is something very strange about this outbreak .
There is an unnatural combination of strains and DNA in the virus .
It is affecting unusual groups of people in a way not normally associated with E coli outbreaks .
It has already struck far more people and in far more places than a normal outbreak and , unlike in normal outbreaks , it has not been rapidly traced to one or two food suppliers .
Given all these inexplicable factors and the fact that various countries - including Britain , the USA , Iraq and Israel - have , in the past , been reported as experimenting with genetically manipulated E coli as a biological weapon , should there not be an urgent inquiry into the possibility that this outbreak is , in fact , an instance of , and perhaps a test run for , biological terrorism ?
( FR ) Mr President , the situation is serious , very serious even , as this EHEC outbreak is a complete mystery .
I can imagine the anxiety of those taken ill , and we can only lament the deaths that have occurred .
This whole affair must force us to take a very rigorous approach to European public health problems and make us see that it is vital to work with researchers and the pharmaceutical industry in order to respond effectively to such a situation and also to give ourselves the means to do so .
The bacterium costs lives , too many lives .
It also costs our farmers a lot of money and dangerously undermines consumer confidence in our agricultural products and agri-food industry , which are still undoubtedly the safest and most strictly controlled in the world .
After cucumbers , tomatoes , lettuce and bean sprouts , what will be the next victim of this health hysteria ?
There are serious economic consequences for farmers .
The fact is , the alert system worked very well .
The problem is that the Commission has neither the resources nor the opportunity to check whether information given by a Member State is true or not .
Bacteria circulate more quickly today than they did in the past .
Lessons will have to be learnt , in communication terms , from the way in which this health crisis has been managed .
Feedback will have to be given .
Additional checks will no doubt have to be envisaged before the conclusions of a national or regional health agency can be taken as read .
Lastly , this crisis totally justifies a vital improvement in the traceability of foodstuffs .
The obligation to indicate the country of origin or the place of provenance unfortunately only applies in a limited number of cases .
It should be extended to a larger number of foodstuffs .
In the event of a health crisis , this would make it possible to identify the sources of contamination and to warn the consumers concerned more quickly .
( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , farmers can be compensated , but human life cannot be recovered .
Indeed , our sympathy goes out to all those who have died or are lying in a hospital bed .
This situation is dramatic and it is also unacceptable .
It is unacceptable that three weeks after the outbreak of this crisis , we still do not know exactly where the pathogen that caused the crisis originated .
That really should not happen in Europe .
There are several lessons we need to learn from this .
Firstly , we need to look for the source and examine whether improper practices are still present in the food production sector or in the food supply chain .
We have legislation that has been in place for 20 years , and the standards and codes of practices in the European Union are quite stringent , but it is clear that we are still vulnerable when it comes to foodstuffs .
There still seem to be gaps and shortcomings and we need to learn from this once again .
I also think that the communication on this matter has been chaotic .
Facts about this matter are not communicated well or in the right way .
We clearly need more Europe . That has already been said by other Members here .
When any regional or national authority issues a warning for the whole of Europe , it can only be a disaster .
In my view , the European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control ( ECDC ) has done a good job , as far as I can see , but we need a better , modern reporting obligation for determining the causes and also a better system for informing the general public .
Mr President , the German and European authorities are still trying to identify the source of the E coli outbreak .
Today , we still have no concrete evidence about the reason for this spread and all scenarios should be considered , including potential negligence or unintentional entry of the bacteria into the food chain .
How the bacteria were actually created is a different case ; research and findings are needed urgently .
However , I would also like to make a special point about the way current events have been communicated to the general public by German and European authorities , with the serious consequences we know for the fruit and vegetable sector , not only in Spain , but in all our Union .
This is not the first time that we have had a problem relating to food safety in Germany .
I propose that the Commission should help the German authorities to enhance the traceability and control of the German procedures , and similar measures should be taken concerning the procedures in other Member States .
Transparency is needed to maintain consumer confidence .
All information should be available but this information should not be communicated in a way that means raising multiple alarms and triggering consumers ' fears when evidence has not yet been found .
Let me also point out the responsibility of the media .
Mr President , hearsay can be dangerous .
Did this outbreak start in Germany or some other Member State ?
Rumours can be destructive and can even help spread an outbreak .
There are still many unanswered questions surrounding this outbreak .
The only sure thing is that most Member States have reported cases of the bacteria .
To date , we have 22 deaths in the EU .
This outbreak demonstrates the importance of cross-border cooperation in the field of preventive health .
It also brings into play the importance of having a European agency such as the European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control ( ECDC ) to monitor , collaborate and inform the Member States .
We are relatively lucky in the UK to have had only three reported cases , but that is today : tomorrow , things could change , and we must be vigilant .
In addition to finding the cause of the outbreak , we need to keep the public informed and therefore protected .
ECDC is publishing daily updates .
Through cooperation , we can control this outbreak .
If our citizens are informed , they stand a better chance of avoiding infection .
Above all , we need to be calm and measured in our response .
( EL ) Mr President , for the second time in six months , Europe is facing a food crisis which has caused serious health problems for many people and has even resulted in loss of life among our fellow men .
Something is not right , Commissioner .
In January , we had the problems of toxins in Germany ; now we have bacteria problems , again in Germany .
The first case was covered up , even though it was known about for months ; in the second case , the blame has been conveniently shifted to Spanish cucumbers .
This is a problem of recognisability , of traceability and of inadequate controls at EU level .
In the first case , in January , Mr Dalli told us , when speaking about dioxins , that you would take all the necessary measures to ensure that legislation on the food control system was tightened up .
The other day , you said that this was not a problem of recognisability and that there was some other problem .
The Commission 's stand is marked by confusion , cover-up and panic and , as a result , we are mourning lives , we are mourning cases of illness and we are mourning the consequences to agricultural production .
( IT ) Mr President , the situation we are discussing is very serious , but I think in some cases , we are still confusing things at very different levels .
Lost lives clearly cannot be put at the same level as economic problems ; that is not what we are doing .
I would like to stress , however , that it is not by pointing the finger at the causes - which then turn out not to be the causes - that we will solve the problem .
If someone is murdered and an innocent person is put in prison for it , that provides no comfort or justice for the murder that has been committed .
Yet we are doing just that : in an extremely serious situation , with a public health crisis and food safety at stake , we are pointing the finger at people who then turn out not to be guilty , thus causing further victims .
The Spanish growers have already taken to the streets and today , in about 40 minutes ' time , direct growers in Italy , too , will be demonstrating in the streets in Milan and the province of Latina , offering consumers fresh cucumbers and other fruit and vegetables to show that they are healthy foods and important for a healthy , balanced diet .
We would not wish to strike German consumers the extra blow of depriving them of foods that are absolutely essential for their diet and their health .
I would also like to point out some data that should give the relevant authorities , in particular , cause for serious thought when they put out certain information that causes alarm , fear and panic .
Data supplied by Eurobarometer and gathered by Coldiretti in Italy show that in a food emergency , 43 % of Italians , for example , avoid the foods they have heard about for a certain length of time , whereas 13 % cut them out of their diet for good .
We must therefore try to think about what we say and how we influence people 's eating habits .
I should like to ask the Commission , therefore , if it does not think there is a case for triggering the European emergency clause and bringing forward the discussion on financial compensation .

( DE ) Mr President , Mr Dalli , your colleagues in the Directorate-General for Health and Consumers and yourself have done everything right .
The same cannot be said of the German authorities .
The least that we can say is that there is chaos when it comes to communications , and that , perhaps , is putting it mildly .
The fact that Germany 's health minister yesterday thought it unnecessary to travel to a Health Council in Luxembourg where the main topic on the agenda was this serious infection crisis shows that he has absolutely no idea what Europe is really about and that he is ignorant , does not recognise the problems , or is still busy with internal party political crises .
( Applause )
What is more , I must observe - and Mr Dalli said it himself - that the German authorities clearly took the view that they would do without European Union experts , patronisingly and arrogantly believing that they had no need for them .
Furthermore , the fact that it took three days for these experts to get into Germany is a scandal , and one that we must be critical of in this House .
At the same time , however , we also have to say that it is our job , in the European Union , to warn consumers when there is a dangerous foodstuff on the market .
I say to you quite clearly - if there are dangerous bacteria on a cucumber or a lettuce that do not lead to death , that may be a good thing , but for me it is not enough to justify a compensation case .
Cucumbers from Spain and other countries did have EHEC bacteria on them .
They were not the bacteria behind this outbreak , but it takes a while to find that out .
For me , that is not the point , either .
Those of you who understand the European Union and know the early warning system also know how the early warning system works .
You know that , in the early warning system , the product and also the name of the producer must be named .
You can also look that up easily in the legislation .
For me , the important question is what will happen in future ?
In the future , we need to consider whether slurry use can continue .
Could there still be production methods that are unacceptable ?
Who , in the European Union , actually monitors what , when and with what result this is documented , and who has what obligations in that regard ?
( Applause )
Mr President , this is a real crisis .
23 people are dead , over 2 000 have been affected , the vegetable markets are in turmoil with prices on the floor , and it is estimated that producers are losing EUR 300 million a day .
Relations between Germany and Spain are strained to say the least , and yet , three weeks into this crisis , we still have no idea of where the source of this contamination has come from .
Commissioner Dalli , I want assurance from you here today that absolutely every effort is being made to trace where the source of this E coli outbreak has come from , because until we trace the source , we cannot start the process of rebuilding consumer confidence .
Secondly , I want you to spell out what actions you intend to take once we get over this crisis to stabilise the market and rebuild consumer confidence .
Thirdly , we do have to hear from you what the Commission intends to do to try and compensate farmers who , through no fault of their own , have seen their markets destroyed and are unable to sell their produce .
Fourthly , I want an assurance from the Commission that a transparent , independent investigation will be set up to establish the facts of what went wrong .
It is only once we have the facts that we can take action to plug any gaps in food safety law .
( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , the health dimension of the crisis resulting from this outbreak of EHEC bacteria is absolutely tragic .
The situation is serious .
There is an urgent need to get help to those affected and to take all possible steps to prevent the further spread of this infection .
All necessary resources must be made available to our research institutes and hospitals .
Rapid action has been the order of the day since this pathogen emerged .
However , the uniform , Europe-wide crisis management right down to a common language regime has not been characterised by professionalism .
The pathological hunt to locate the contamination site led to premature accusations of guilt all round , and these arguments led to days of negative headlines and total uncertainty on the part of consumers .
For the producers affected , this gave rise to dramatic losses of income that threatened their very survival .
Blameless , regionally-produced products , too , are no longer selling .
In Austria alone , sales of fresh vegetables have fallen by 75 % .
Growers of vegetables are being faced with these losses of income right in the middle of their peak harvesting season .
The uncoordinated way in which consumers have received information in the course of this event once again raises the demand for universal and cross-sector origin marking and efficient monitoring on the principle of ' marked and checked at source ' .
Consumers have the right to know where products come from .
This applies equally to shop shelves and to restaurants and catering .
All the authorities now need to quickly eliminate the prejudices against fresh vegetables , re-invigorate sales of fresh vegetables and breathe new life into trade with third countries .
The EHEC situation has thrust local vegetable growers into an existential crisis completely out of the blue and through no fault of their own .
The Commission must make it possible for there to be compensation for losses , be it through a European agricultural fund , the European crisis fund or measures to promote sales .
Mr Liese is absolutely right to say that human life is irreplaceable and that every death is one death too many .
However , it is also absolutely our duty not to leave our producers high and dry when it is through no fault of their own that they have found themselves in this situation that threatens their very survival .
( ES ) Mr President , Commissioner , we all want the German food crisis to end as quickly as possible .
We have to remember the victims , and I hope that once the initial errors have been remedied , it will be possible to identify the source of the infection , for everyone 's peace of mind .
However , apart from the health aspect of this crisis , I have to mention the economic repercussions .
The Spanish horticultural sector has estimated the economic losses caused by the fatal errors in communication , which we now know about , at EUR 200 million a week .
I wish to emphasise the responsible attitude demonstrated by this sector and its total cooperation with my country 's authorities .
Commissioner , traceability to the origin worked , but how much time was lost in directing attention to the origin , focusing on agricultural production , whereas other forms of contamination , such as handling or distribution at the point of destination , were dismissed ?
Why did the Commission echo the hurried information from Germany ?
There has been a lack of coordination , Commissioner , and the unilateral closure of borders to Spanish products is proof of the failure to monitor the crisis within the European Union .
I would ask the Commission to activate immediately all the necessary mechanisms to compensate the damage to the Spanish and European sector , both financially and in terms of consumer image .
In the long term , however , it remains to be seen which other measures are adopted in this respect .
Unfounded accusations , improvisation , lack of coordination , millions in losses , attacks on the honour and credibility of a sector : is it not sufficient reason to demand who takes responsibility ?

Mr President , I would like to thank Mr Dalli for his measured comments at the start of the debate .
There have been some less measured comments in the Chamber because of the impact on human lives , and indeed the add-on impact on producers and consumer confidence .
This is a most serious food crisis , and Mr Dalli has acknowledged that .
We know it is regionalised in a certain part of the European Union , but it is not a German-only problem ; it is an EU problem .
The system exists to find the cause and deal with the consequences , but I am afraid that not all parts of the system have been adequately put in place , and I have some questions in relation to timing .
I understand that the rapid alert was given on 22 May 2011 : I am concerned that the European experts went into Germany only on Sunday , 5 June .
Why such an incredible time lapse ?
I think that this needs to be looked at .
We have , under Article 55 of Regulation 178 / 2002 , the possibility of creating a crisis unit .
Everyone who spoke said this is a crisis , and Mr Dalli acknowledges it is a crisis .
It is one which is growing rather than declining , and I would suggest it is now time for the EU to invoke that regulation and put such a crisis unit in place .
The thing that has been most distressing has been the virtual ' naming and shaming ' of vegetables and then declaring them not guilty .
This has shattered consumer confidence not just in fresh fruit and vegetables , but in our system of food safety and control .
Commissioner Dalli , I know that you are nodding in agreement , and I welcome that , but I do believe that now is the time to set up the crisis unit , and I would like you to comment on that in your closing remarks .
( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , I come from the region of Europe where the outbreak of the EHEC pathogen is at its raging worst .
This aggressive bacteria seems unstoppable .
Between mid-May and noon yesterday , 1 733 people were infected , while 23 patients died a torturous death .
The situation in the clinics is extremely fraught . Intensive care beds are running out , and blood plasma is needed urgently .
No end is in sight .
The people of my home area fear new cases every day .
For me , it is a question of courage and a sense of responsibility to warn about every even potential carrier of this bacterium .
Various foodstuffs have been analysed , but it has not been found .
My understanding of high grade foodstuffs is that they are healthy and that they are placed on the market subject to monitoring .
I am presuming that glaring errors have been made in this regard , and once again , we are finding out that there are loopholes .
However , to claim , in this situation , that the cause is known , without having well-founded laboratory research to back it up , is negligent in the extreme .
In all the understandable panic , there must not , under any circumstances , be a witch-hunt , as that would drive many hard-working farmers throughout Europe to the wall .
It therefore needs to be clear to everyone that we in the European Union need to show solidarity with one another and stand ready to provide mutual assistance in the event of emergencies .
In other words , all the medical experts must sit down together , and economic assistance needs to be provided to those who innocently find themselves facing financial disaster .
( ES ) Mr President , first of all , I wish to express my condolences to the relatives of those who have died as the result of this crisis .
Commissioner , informing the public of health risks is a difficult and delicate task and has to be perfectly documented and verified .
It is not a question of finding who is to blame , but on this occasion , major errors have occurred , starting with the foolhardy and reckless assumptions of a regional policy manager , recently recruited to the job , who unleashed social alarm and a very serious , irreparable economic crisis .
Nor would it appear that the Commission has coordinated this crisis very well .
I wonder when the first case occurred , and whether Article 3 of the regulation relating to the rapid alert system - which requires Member States to notify the risk immediately and within 48 hours - was met , and also whether Article 8 of said regulation - which obliges the Commission to check whether the information is complete , true and legible and has sufficient legal basis - was met .
What is certain is that the serious shortcomings of this regulation have been exposed and that it is necessary to review the current legal framework in order to define precisely , among other things , the crisis management procedures used by the competent authorities , to attribute errors or omissions to the perpetrator in the food chain ( and traceability is used to this end ) , to prevent health protection from concealing commercial barriers and to arbitrate compensation procedures for damage to trade and loss of profit .
Commissioner , neither cucumbers or soya are the cause .
As Mr Liese has said , the cause is the pathogen .
The cause is serotype O104 : H4 of the bacterium Escherichia coli , which is already described throughout scientific literature and is associated with meat products .
However , in any case , Commissioner , we have to allow the scientists to do their work : they need to investigate the entire traceability system , throughout the food chain , including the handling and distribution of food .

( ES ) Mr President , Commissioner , nothing that we do here or in the European Union is going to bring the dead back to life , but I hope that what is being done will prevent more deaths and halt the chain of people who are ill and who are suffering without having done anything to cause the problem .
Certainly , we do not know the causes , but we do know some things that we have to spell out : there has been negligence in political action and negligence by the German Federal Government ; it cannot act as if Hamburg were a city state on another continent .
If Mrs Merkel and her Ministry of Health had translated the arrogance with which they frequently address other States into diligence and efficiency , some of the things that happened would not have done so .
That negligence has had criminal consequences for one State , namely Spain , and for its most important sector , agriculture .
It has ruined thousands of people and small businesses , and has discredited the economy for a long time .
I ask you to go to the Council today and ask for full compensation for those affected , because we cannot ask for life for those who have died .
And I ask for the control systems to be reviewed .
And for Mrs Merkel to accept responsibility .
And I ask her for less arrogance and more diligence .
And that she be held responsible for the damage she has caused .
She cannot ignore the fact that Hamburg is in her country .
She cannot ignore her responsibilities .
She cannot attribute blame to a Federal State when she herself should be held responsible for the damage caused .
A bit more humility , a bit more good management and a little less conservatism would have gone a long way to ensuring that this crisis did not slip through her hands , and that Spain and other farmers in the south did not have to suffer its painful consequences .
Review the controls , review the warning systems and ask for responsibility , because , Commissioner , in Spain we are asking you , the Council and Germany for precisely this .
( NL ) Mr President , I would like to thank the Commissioner for being here , but I would rather he was somewhere else , such as on a plane to Russia , for example , in order to make the case at the highest possible level that the ban that Russia has now introduced should be withdrawn because it is completely over-the-top .
I thank the Commissioner for his willingness to communicate with us at this point , but the communication that has taken place thus far , including by the Commission , has been a disgraceful failure .
It was days after the outbreak of the crisis when the Commission held a press conference .
The genie was already long out of the bottle by that stage , however , and the wildest imaginable stories were already circulating in the media .
The Commissioner spoke about a possible source on Dutch cucumbers , even though more than 200 tests had already shown days earlier that that was not the case .
I agree with you that the technical side of the story has worked . Rapid alert , tracking and tracing have all worked .
There is also the communications side of the whole issue , though , and that side has been abysmal , first of all in Germany , of course , with so many different institutes , authorities and even a number of ministers all giving out different signals .
There was a minister for agriculture who made a senseless comment that people should ' stop eating uncooked produce altogether ' , even though she had no authority for the matter .
I assume that you are talking to Germany in this regard , as there needs to be a fundamental investigation into how everything could have been handled so shoddily .
I also hope that you will soon argue the case with the agriculture ministers for an emergency fund , to be paid for from the surplus still available in the agriculture budget .
Just as we did with dairy products when a deep crisis broke out in that sector , we need now , too , to call that surplus into use .
In my home country alone , this sector is suffering to the tune of EUR 80 million a week even though the source of the outbreak is elsewhere , and the result is that healthy businesses are now on the verge of collapse .
That cannot be the European Union 's intention .
I take it that you will take this strong signal from Parliament with you to the Agriculture Ministers ' Council .
( SK ) Mr President , Commissioner , I welcome this debate .
We are looking at this problem from various angles , and we are looking for the source of the infection , the identity of the pathogen and the possibility of a cure .
I am now just waiting to see which pharmaceutical firm will come forward and say it has a cure for this disease , thus starting another panic .
In my opinion , the area where there is greatest room for improvement is in public awareness .
I think it is inadequate and irresponsible to inform citizens on a given day about which food they should not buy or which food looks suspicious .
It is necessary to inform citizens about what they should do in their everyday lives , and there should be one campaign here at both European Union and Member State level .
If people maintain basic rules of hygiene , and if they maintain their personal hygiene as well as washing or heat-treating their food , that will be enough to protect them from this infection .
This is not a demanding campaign , but I think that there have been and that there will be epidemics and various diseases here , and what has protected people most has been their personal behaviour .
I firmly believe that such a campaign would help prevent disease , as well as helping vegetable growers .
( PL ) Mr President , it is important that we are discussing , today , the subject of the threat to patients , food producers and consumers caused by the emergence of a dangerous strain of bacteria , the source of which we are , as yet , unable to identify .
We say we have a good system for monitoring food quality and maintaining high standards .
In spite of this , difficult situations such as the present one continue to arise .
Therefore , it is essential to review and improve our system of surveillance and monitoring .
We need to be ready for situations which are even more dangerous .
We must not release information about sources of origin if the information is not reliable .
This slows down the process of continuing to search for the source , and causes serious moral injury and huge economic damage .
We extend expressions of sympathy to the families of the victims and to those who are ill , but let us remember to provide compensation to the farmers from a number of countries who have suffered losses .
We are talking about the future of the common agricultural policy and about issues of security in the area of access to food and quality of food .
Perhaps this difficult situation will make us aware of how important this area of issues and problems is , because it is one which concerns not just what our citizens eat , but the state of their health .
( ES ) Mr President , we are faced with a public health problem - an epidemic according to the Commissioner - and they have been looking for those culpable and not the cause .
The system has not worked : We have 22 dead , 1 600 affected and , three weeks later , we still do not know the cause and , using the precautionary principle without scientific basis - I repeat , without scientific basis - Spain is being blamed .
Ladies and gentlemen , Spanish cucumbers were not contaminated .
They were not contaminated !
I am repeating it because some versions to the contrary have been heard here .
Moreover , so that you can see the impact that these words have had : 300 000 jobs may be affected ; a loss of confidence .
An epidemic knows no frontiers .
I am telling you , Commissioner : knows no frontiers !
We ask for responsibility for what has not been done , for what we have to do immediately , because there is a risk of further infection in Germany at the moment - it has the largest number of people affected - but Spain is not to blame .
We ask for compensation .
( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , as you said , the problem is not local , even if it is localised .
I would like you to say so more loudly and clearly , because we seriously need more tools and European coordination on these issues .
The message has been extremely muddled and fraught with consequences , including for Spanish producers , but not just for them , since others have been affected too .
This point was made several times just now .
Striking a balance between early warning , on the one hand , and transparency , on the other , is certainly difficult .
However , precaution or the precautionary principle does not mean that we should communicate information randomly and far too quickly .
Things should therefore be set straight , and those responsible for an early warning should also be the ones who pay compensation .
This is what you will be discussing this afternoon .
This is what is important , even though , like everyone else , my thoughts are clearly , first and foremost , with the victims .
Still , farmers are waiting for the compensation they deserve .
For the rest , resistance to antibiotics and traceability continue to be key issues which we will have to look into further .
Mr President , with 22 people dead in the EU and over 2 000 taken in for treatment as a result of the ongoing E coli outbreak across Europe , it is appropriate that this Parliament extends its sympathies to those who have lost loved ones and our good wishes for a recovery to others .
Consumers demand food that is of good quality , safe and traceable .
The fact that the source of this outbreak is still unclear and that the search for answers has , at times , seemed haphazard , means that consumer confidence is eroding fast .
Economically , it is farmers who will suffer while this goes on - farmers whose food is perfectly safe .
We must also urge calm in such a situation .
National governments have been quick to apportion blame .
In the past , we in the UK have suffered as a result of such scaremongering around our produce , and this speculative blame game must stop .
Can I also say that this House constantly rushes to introduce regulation .
Before it does so , we must have a full and thorough investigation of the facts .
( ES ) Mr President , the most important thing , and that which is uniting us here today , are the victims , because nobody should feel as unprotected as we , the European consumers , feel at the moment .
Furthermore , we need clarity and responsibility in respect of the victims .
It is my responsibility to denounce the German authorities , who , wrongly and hastily , accused Spanish cucumbers and , more specifically , the cooperatives of Malaga and Almeria , which were model operations and which will not recover from these accusations .
Thousands of jobless families are wondering why - and they need an answer - and , in particular , they want to know what the future holds for them , not just in Andalusia , but throughout European agriculture .
Therefore , and in the hope that the experts will soon find the solution , I demand that today , when the Commission speaks to the Council , it asks for immediate and moral economic measures for all the producers from Andalusia and from the whole of Europe , who are looking towards us with indignation , but also with hope .
( ES ) Mr President , instead of giving priority to the European investigation and cooperation , the German authorities have slandered and prejudiced cucumber producers and others .
Yet nobody in Germany has resigned or offered reparations for the damage caused .
It is Germany that has a serious credibility problem .
The treatment by Mrs Merkel of the southern countries , both with regard to agriculture and finance , is intolerable .
Someone said that Mrs Merkel was a disciple of Adenauer and Kohl .
She is nothing of the sort : she lacks moral fibre .
( NL ) Mr President , Commissioner , clearly , we need to learn from the mistakes that have been made .
There is the coordination problem in Germany - various German MEPs have also said this , both from the governing bloc and from the opposition - with the two federal ministries , the sixteen Länder and the lack of coordination .
There needs to be a strict national monitoring system , and it needs to be looked at how that operates both in Germany and also , above all , in the other 26 Member States .
At the moment , we are pointing our fingers at Germany , but perhaps it will soon be our own Member States we are pointing at .
We therefore need to ask whether the internal monitoring systems in all the Member States are strong enough .
The European systems that are in place - Mrs Roth-Behrendt was quite right - do work .
There is perhaps a lack of coordination .
At any rate , there was certainly a lack of communication .
That should therefore be the focus of our attention .
I would like to ask the Commissioner , first of all , whether he will respond to the question asked by Mr Leinen and Mrs Roth-Behrendt , amongst others , as to whether you will be bringing forward a truly European solution .
Secondly , can you tell us what you will be doing at the agriculture Council and how you can compensate those farmers who have suffered damages ?
( ES ) Mr President , it is precisely in situations of crisis that the efficiency of and confidence in institutions is seen .
In this case , they have left much to be desired .
The Commission has said precisely that suspicions about Spanish cucumbers have not been confirmed .
No , Commissioner : what has been confirmed is that the suspicions were unfounded , irresponsible and without objective data ; what has been confirmed is that there are 23 dead and that the Spanish horticultural sector has suffered enormous damage .
What has also been confirmed is that the Commission must do what it has not done up to now , which is to act with conviction on various fronts : stop the outbreak ; prevent unfounded suspicions from being given a glimmer of credibility , seriously affecting a Member State - in this case , Spain - by taking the necessary measures to achieve this ; compensate the damage suffered without delay and restore to the Spanish brand its image of safe , very high quality agricultural products .
( NL ) Mr President , Commissioner , we are in the middle of a crisis and , if truth be told , we have more important things to be doing at this point in time than pointing fingers and assigning blame .
When you are in the middle of a crisis , all you should be doing is making your decisions and solving the crisis before doing anything else .
Everything else can be discussed later .
The first priority is to find a treatment for patients for these antibiotic-resistant bacteria and to trace the source of the outbreak .
In addition , we need , above all , to communicate well in order to walk the tightrope between keeping the patients , consumers and producers informed and doing right by all of them .
We can then turn our attention to the question of how our crisis management is actually going .
This will certainly not be the last crisis .
Who is in charge ?
Too many authorities are involved , and somebody needs to take the lead .
That is what the conversation today with you and the Council must be about .
What will be the situation with leadership in future , and who will take on the role ?
The use of antibiotics is indeed a thorn in our sides , for both animals and people .
There are major differences between the Member States .
Last but not least , there needs to be compensation for the damage done .
To sum up , there needs to be clarity and drive .
( DE ) Mr President , EHEC is the term of the last week .
First of all , our sympathy , clearly , goes to the victims .
In the interests of public health , the authorities have the obligation to provide them with information .
The well-being of the people must come first .
In the United States , they have an early-warning system to that end .
The fact is that there have been over 2 000 infections and more than 20 people have died .
People have to be told where this bacterium is .
It was on Spanish cucumbers , where it certainly should not have been , as a faecal bacterium has absolutely no place on a foodstuff .
When it comes to economic compensation , those responsible must pay , certainly not everyone else .
Finally , I would like to observe that the Council was absent for the whole of the debate on this issue .
( PL ) Mr President , thank you very much for giving me the opportunity to speak in such an important debate .
The citizens of the European Union need the European institutions to be effective in many areas , including in prevention of the spread of every kind of disease in every part of the European Union , and this is understandable .
However , above all else , preventative agencies working in the area of health and food safety should be ready with ways of preventing panic .
These institutions should be completely independent of the administrations of Member States , and should even be empowered to act with executive authority in the event of a crisis .
We did not manage to prevent panic this time .
This has resulted in losses running into millions , and Polish farmers have also been affected .
The price of vegetables on the Polish market fell by two thirds in the course of a week .
Every day , vegetable producers incur losses of PLN 2 million .
Several months ago , we raised the alarm concerning swine flu .
The European institutions did not pass muster then and were not able to prevent panic from spreading across the European Union .
Now , something similar has happened .
( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , solidarity must prevail : that is one of the European Union 's founding principles , but solidarity must not be an excuse for the various stakeholders to shirk their responsibilities .
It is not right that the German authorities failed to defer , from the start , to the European Union in a tragedy that has transcended their borders ever since the end of their first press conference , when they wrongly blamed Spanish cucumbers .
It is not right to make unsubstantiated accusations , to communicate uncertain information and to cause such confusion .
It is not right that all the principles of crisis communication have been flouted in this way .
Because of this , the crisis has turned into hysteria .
These rumours and witch-hunts fuelled by those same authorities have caused enormous harm ; they indicate a lack of responsibility .
The bond of trust between consumers and producers has once again been broken .
Let us ensure that this tragedy is not a terrible waste , too , by learning important lessons from it : we need to decide on the best ways of implementing a robust cross-border traceability system and establish a European communication unit and a crisis management unit .
If we do not learn the lessons of this failure quickly , 23 people will have died for nothing .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , I would like to thank you and also all the Members who contributed to this debate .
I will not have time to react to every single interesting comment that was made , but I can assure you we have taken note of the feeling expressed in this House .
Today , as I said , I will be attending the Council of Agriculture Ministers .
Tomorrow , I will be in Berlin to participate in a coordination meeting between the food safety sector and the health sector , together with the experts we have in place there .
My main preoccupation is to stop hospitalisations : that is my first and foremost objective .
I am concentrating on mobilisation and on speeding up the identification of the cause of the outbreak .
We set up the crisis unit on 30 May 2011 and , at Commission level , we were fully mobilised at that point .
My public health department mobilised the European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control ( ECDC ) and the ECDC has activated its crisis mode in order to make scientific assessments as rapidly as possible .
The Commission immediately asked the ECDC to carry out a scientific assessment .
In daily meetings with Member State experts , the Commission has coordinated assessment measures : the establishment of common case definitions , case reporting , patient questionnaires , sharing perspectives on treatment , and hygiene advice to the public are some of the outputs we have achieved in a very short time span .
We have to be very careful and we have to keep everything in perspective .
It is easy for all of us to sit in judgment with hindsight and to make statements , rather than being in the eye of the storm when a crisis is happening .
We have to be careful in our statements and criticism because , while insisting - as I do - that decisions be made on the basis of well-sustained evidence , we should not terrify those who are called upon to take risky decisions , sometimes in very difficult situations , fearing that afterwards they will be put in the dock and everyone will pass judgment on their decisions .
I think this aspect of situation management is very important .
The same goes for checking and controlling the information that is circulating .
We have a system in Europe that allows for fast communication and , in order to have fast communication , we apply the subsidiarity principle - looking to the lowest possible level as the base from which communication should start .
We have to be careful because , if we begin to add layer upon layer of controls and checks to verify the information circulating , then we will defeat the purpose of speed , and in circumstances where health is concerned , and where life and death is sometimes at stake , speed is of the utmost importance .
As regards information , we are supplying continuous information as we receive it .
In this respect , we at the Commission agree that coordinated and rapid communication is an essential element of risk management .
If you remember , in 2009-2010 , as a result of our H1N1 experience , we set up a system to coordinate public health communication , and our EU Health Security Committee has a network of communicators .
We will need to involve regional actors more effectively in this process , as well as the World Health Organisation ( WHO ) .
As recently as yesterday , I was on the phone with Margaret Chan , the Director-General of the WHO , about this aspect of coordinating information and ensuring full coordination before any communication takes place .
We will study what happened , and undertake closer investigations and analyses .
Once we are confident that the contamination has been stopped , we will concentrate on what happened in the information sector , with regard to investigation protocols and in terms of coordination across the board when the crisis occurred , and we will then reflect on whether we need more tools and closer European coordination .
That may be part of the answer but , as you say , it is going to involve a lot of discussion both here in Parliament and also at Member State level .
On the issue of compensation , this will be discussed this afternoon in the AGRI Council , and I am sure that my colleague , Commissioner Cioloş , is doing his utmost to identify and develop ways and means of compensating our farmers who have been suffering as a result of this problem .
The debate is closed .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
in writing . - ( HU ) The latest German food safety scandal has directed our attention to the deficiencies of adequate regulatory supervision once again .
Consumers ' faith in the diligence of food producers and , not least , in the professional operation of supervisory authorities , was shaken once more .
In a well-functioning rule of law state , consumers have good reason to believe that the food that ends up on their tables and that they give to their children is safe to consume .
Unfortunately , this is not the first time that this faith has been shaken .
It is enough to think of the poisoned tomato scandal in Hungary , but we might mention January 's dioxin-contaminated pork scandal in Germany as well .
All these sad events call our attention time and again to the fact that the state must strengthen regulatory inspections , and act against all deficiencies or abuses in the strictest possible manner .
It is , after all , absolutely impossible to expect citizens to carry out this work instead of the state .
We cannot get trained to become food scientists or install laboratories capable of inspecting food in our homes .
Instead , the right solution is to impose the strictest sanctions against those who violate regulations , and not be afraid to even shut down businesses .
First and foremost , I would like to express my solidarity with the families of the victims .
For the immediate future , the EU and the Member States should focus their resources on finding the source of the contamination in order to end the outbreak and the deaths that it has caused , and to restore consumer confidence in the food chain , as without this , it is impossible to put an end to our farmers ' desperation .
In order to do this , the European Food Safety Authority and the Member States ' health ministers need to work together .
This has been slow to happen due to Germany 's disastrous management of the crisis .
The EU cannot neglect its farmers in this situation .
It needs to create a mechanism to compensate them rapidly for the massive negative impact of this crisis , which is already jeopardising the survival of many farms .
The absolute priority is consumer protection , but we need to correct our procedures .
It is vital to establish who is to issue a warning , and when and how they should issue it , in order to prevent the information chaos we have been witnessing .
This has had disastrous consequences , while the source of the problem has not even been identified .
We also need to see clear action from bodies of a pan-European nature .
Our concern is , first and foremost , for the victims of this epidemic and their surviving dependants .
This abominable situation must not be repeated ; we need to learn the lessons from it quickly in order , in future , to be able to more quickly detect where the cause is and to communicate in a more efficient and more coordinated manner .
This area , communications and the poor consultation between the Member States in that regard , has been a pitiful failure .
A very great deal of economic damage has been wrought that would have been perfectly preventable if more care had been taken with communications in the crisis .
The operators affected are entitled to damages . We are therefore arguing the case for the establishment of a European emergency fund .
Additional national support measures are like a sticking plaster for a broken arm , and , moreover , hardly provide evidence of serious European solidarity .
As Commissioner Dalli said here this morning , this is not a national problem for Germany ; it is a European problem .
Let us therefore also tackle it in a European context .
This crisis is also an opportunity to make clear to European citizens that Europe will not leave the victims of a public health disaster of this kind in the lurch .
Research into the source of the E coli outbreak is proving complicated .
Bean sprouts are presumed to be the source of the infection and to have caused the deaths of 20 people in Europe and a further 300 or so serious cases diagnosed in Germany alone , but the latest test results on bean sprout samples have been negative .
The immediate consequence of the outbreak has been a noticeable drop in fruit and vegetable consumption throughout Europe .
Although , at the moment , no precise figures are yet available on the extent of the losses in the European market-gardening sector following the E coli crisis , the economic damage caused to this sector will clearly not be negligible .
Given that I have already tabled a parliamentary question on this issue , I take the opportunity in this Chamber to stress the need for the Union to commit itself to supporting European producers in this sector with instruments appropriate to the seriousness of the crisis .
I also draw the Commission 's attention to the fact that it should consider introducing measures to improve the preservation of fruit and vegetables and increase controls on their packaging .
With food safety in the EU in the news for the second time in six months , and with such a high death toll , this is not a food scandal ; it is a food crisis .
Two weeks later and we have rushed to point the finger and created a credibility problem before we have even established the cause .
We have undermined producers who , even though they did their job properly , have found themselves in the position of scapegoat and are still paying the price today .
We have undermined the confidence of European and other consumers .
We have created a rupture in our trade relations and in internal cohesion .
This crisis calls the European agricultural model itself into question and tests the functioning of the Internal Market .
It is no longer enough to say who and what is to blame .
The Commission should take permanent corrective measures , one of which is traceability and should be a priority objective .
Several important points should be raised in connection with the issue we are discussing , and I am relaying here the concerns of my fellow citizens .
Firstly , European consumers must be able to know what they are eating .
Hence , it is vital to ensure that agricultural products can be traced from farm to fork at European level .
Secondly , we must call on Germany to do everything it can to locate the origin of the bacterium .
In this respect , I welcome the Commission 's decision to send experts to Germany .
However , the Commission must carry out its work on a wider scale and check whether all the control , analysis and research systems have been adhered to properly , because we must improve and strengthen our food alert mechanisms .
Thirdly , audits should be carried out across Europe so as to ensure that the monitoring systems are effective .
Fourthly and finally , let us not forget the farmers who have been treated badly : they have been wrongly suspected without having done anything !
And there will be many more of them yet who suffer from the lack of trust among consumers .
Europe must therefore unite in support of proper compensation measures .
In relation to the debate on the EHEC outbreak in the EU Member States , I would like to call attention to the fact that as a result of decisions made by EU and non-EU countries , borders have been closed in order to protect the market from an influx of vegetables from countries which harbour the supposed source of the infection .
The information being received from vegetable producers is disturbing .
Dealers are recording zero interest from customers in buying cucumbers , tomatoes and other vegetables .
They are incurring huge financial losses because they are being forced to throw away entire deliveries or let them go for significantly less than the price they paid for them .
Producers are turning away from growing vegetables , which involves changing production to something else , and this , in turn , means worker layoffs .
If the forecasts are going to continue to be disturbing and we do not find the source of the infection , businesses will be forced to stop trading because of a lack of liquidity .
I think the European Union does have administrative instruments which allow it to react quickly to such cases , so we should consider how to improve the system to make it more effective .
Since we do have these tools , we should find the source of the infection as soon as possible , so as not to expose vegetable producers to further losses .
Society must now slowly get used to the fact that there will be some kind of epidemic every year - first it was avian influenza , then swine influenza , and now it is bacteria in fresh vegetables .
This epidemic will also result in victims and enormous financial losses .
The main difference from previous epidemics , in my opinion , is that we have still not definitively identified the source of the infection - first it was ( Spanish ) cucumbers , and now it is ( German ) bean sprouts .
Questions are also being raised about the mistakes made by Member States .
By this I mean the mistakes made by Germany , which refused help from the Commission and tried to solve this crisis by itself .
The false accusations caused enormous financial losses to Spanish farmers , and not only them but probably the entire agricultural sector as well .
The European Commission yesterday proposed compensation of EUR 150 million for vegetable growers who suffered damages as a result of the intestinal infection in Germany .
In my opinion , it is very important to negotiate compensation in relation to mistakes , such as in the case of Spain .
The latest developments indicate that the only damage to occur was the financial loss for European farmers .
We must not forget , however , that the highest price that we paid for this epidemic was in the dozens of victims across many Member States of the European Union .
It is our duty to take action so that similar errors and outbreaks do not occur .
The first clarification which needs to be made , because a remark was made about this in the Chamber , is that , faced with such a crisis , agricultural policy is not the problem but rather the solution .
European consumers have become used to having confidence in the food which they find on supermarket shelves precisely because European producers are obliged to comply with the highest quality standards in the world .
However , this crisis has highlighted that the European system is not infallible and that we are extremely vulnerable .
Indeed , we must now turn our thoughts primarily to the victims .
What has happened is a tragedy .
At the same time , we must also think about the support measures which are required to prevent the loss of thousands of farming jobs and , above all , the destruction of an entire sector .
The new food scandal , with the emergence of a new , hyper-toxic bacterium which has already caused dozens of deaths and serious damage to the health of thousands of workers , adds to the long , seemingly endless list of food scandals in the EU .
This is , in fact , a crime by international companies , which are poisoning the food chain and sacrificing human life and the health of the workers in order to increase their profits .
The new food epidemic illustrates that the EU neither can nor will protect human life and public health because , as a transnational union of monopolies , it has promised to serve and protect the profits of capital , not the lives of the workers .
The sole objective of the unsubstantiated accusations - for which there is no scientific basis - made by the German authorities against small and medium-sized holdings in the Member States in the south of the EU , which the EU hastily adopted , thereby causing very serious damage to farmers in those countries , was to cover up and conceal the anti-grassroots and dangerous nature of the CAP and the responsibilities of the EU , the bourgeois governments and the monopoly groups , which have no hesitation in feeding the workers highly toxic foods which are dangerous to their health , provided that they maximise the profits of capital .
The manner of the response to the EHEC outbreak in northern Germany raises important questions .
First of all , we need to reflect on the causes of this outbreak and the factors that have stood in the way of fighting it .
Are there too many antibiotics in cattle fodder ?
Is it the case that the over-intensive nature of agriculture does not do us any favours ?
To what extent do we need better labelling and tracing ?
These are important questions , especially now , when the review of the common agricultural policy is on the horizon .
In addition , it has also become clear that there are substantial weak points in the European crisis management system for crises in foodstuffs .
Particularly given the nature of this situation where , as well as the federal government , there are also two competent ministries per region , there is too much fragmentation and too great a lack of clarity in the approach towards , and communications regarding , the crisis .
In crises of this kind , it is of crucial importance , both for consumers and for foodstuff producers , that a European coordination cell be set up as quickly as possible to look after both communications and the coordination of the scientific investigation .
This will enable quicker and more efficient investigation into the causes of an outbreak by also exploiting the expertise of other European researchers and laboratories to the full .
Charging of heavy goods vehicles ( debate )
The next item is the recommendation for second reading , on behalf of the Committee on Transport and Tourism , on the Council position at first reading with a view to the adoption of a directive of the European Parliament and of the Council amending Directive 1999 / 62 / EC on the charging of heavy goods vehicles for the use of certain infrastructures ( 15145 / 1 / 2010 - C7-0045 / 2011 - ( rapporteur : Mr El Khadraoui ) .
Mr President , Commissioner , when , hopefully , the plenary session shortly approves the agreement that we negotiated between the institutions with a large majority , we will be playing our part in a significant moment for the transport sector in Europe , a milestone that could signpost the direction for policy for decades to come .
The immediate tangible impact on the ground will , of course , depend on the political willingness of the Member States to exploit the new opportunities or otherwise .
We are not imposing anything .
We are only making things possible , specifically , the application of a principle that we , Parliament , have been arguing for for a number of years , namely , the ' polluter pays ' principle , the internalisation of external costs .
A number of old stagers amongst us know that we have already been fighting hard for this since 2006 , when Mrs Wortmann-Kool led the previous review .
This was followed , in 2008 , by a Commission proposal which we have since been working on for three years .
Those who have followed this dossier from close quarters know how laborious a job it was to get to this result .
It is a compromise , a compromise between the institutions , but also a compromise between the institutions that , for instance , was backed by the minimum possible majority in the Council , and that also has its opponents here in Parliament .
Some people think it is not ambitious enough , while others believe that it goes much too far .
It is to the credit of the negotiating team and , specifically , of the shadow rapporteurs who , together with myself , Council staff and the Commission , reached this fragile equilibrium .
I ask all of you to support this package that we have achieved as a step in the right direction .
It provides the Member States , for the first time , with the ability to also charge for noise and air pollution over and above the existing infrastructure charges which , in addition , are not consistently levied everywhere at the moment , and in a way that could stimulate the likes of fleet renewal .
At the same time , it gives the Member States the ability to greater vary their charging depending on the time of day at which a lorry uses a road .
This gives the governments control options in order to improve mobility .
At the same time , there is also a strong commitment - the strongest possible commitment - on the part of the Member States to reinvest the income generated into the transport system in order to make it more sustainable and to reinvest at least 15 % of the income into the trans-European transport network .
At the same time - and this was also an important issue for the European Parliament - there is clarity about the transparency requirement .
Member States have to specify what level of income they obtain from the charges and what they are going to do with that money in order to bring about a better transport system .
The package is also due to be applied to a larger part of the fleet , specifically , all vehicles of 3.5 tonnes or above . That is the principle .
That is the standard . This is what has been agreed .
It is also to be applied to the entire motorway network .
We put a strong emphasis on the importance of the interoperability of the system . This will mean one little box per goods vehicle to cross the whole of Europe , rather than 25 or 26 .
That is cast in stone in the legislation .
Finally , I have one more point to make , and it concerns the correlation tables . There has been quite some discussion about this .
The solution that we came up with , taking the form of a number of declarations from the three institutions , would seem adequate to avoid setting a precedent .
To conclude , the Eurovignette is no miracle solution . We will not solve the mobility problem completely on the back of it , of course not .
It is , however , an important part of a solution to bring about a more sustainable transport system .
Cost incentives will make up an important element of this , but we will also have to do much more .
What it is , though , is a step in the right direction and it is for that reason that I and those who worked with me are asking for your support .
President-in-Office of the Council . - ( HU ) Mr President , Commissioner , Mr El Khadraoui , ladies and gentlemen , at the beginning of the Hungarian Presidency , we made a promise to work for a strong Europe , one in which people are in the centre .
I am very glad that we are now ahead of adopting a directive which will clearly improve the quality of life of European citizens .
As such , I wholeheartedly welcome the fact that we have succeeded in reaching an agreement with the European Parliament on the Eurovignette Directive .
The objective of the proposal concerning tolls imposed on heavy goods vehicles for using certain infrastructures is to set the charges used in transportation correctly , so that they reflect more accurately the actual costs of air and noise pollution , traffic congestion and climate change effects caused by heavy goods vehicles .
It is a fact that commercial road transport is one of the determining economic sectors of modern societies .
It is also a fact that the extent of problems that can be associated with road transport , such as air and noise pollution , as well as traffic congestion , are becoming ever more severe .
This is why innovative and professional policy measures , such as promoting the use of environmentally friendly vehicles or developing route planners , are playing an increasingly large role .
As a result of measures that aim to internalise external costs , economic efficiency is likely to increase and negative environmental effects will decrease .
The fair road charge system proposed in the Eurovignette Directive will allow us to use our scarce resources in a more sustainable manner .
This measure is also very important in connection with the Commission 's recently published White Paper , the ' Road map to a Single European Transport Area - Towards a competitive and resource efficient transport system ' .
The measure is the first step on the road leading towards the internalisation of external costs of all transport methods .
According to the view of the Council , this proposal is one of the most important measures in the area of transport .
We know that Parliament agrees with us on this matter .
We have worked very hard together to reach the compromise .
This is why the Hungarian Presidency would like to thank the rapporteur , Mr El Khadraoui , in particular , for being prepared to cooperate constructively with the Council and for making a committed effort to achieve success .
The last open question of the negotiations was related to the correlation tables .
The Presidency was pleased with the solution found for this issue , and I would like to read the respective statement of the Hungarian Presidency , which is supported by the next Polish , Danish and Cypriot Presidencies .
In order to avoid any misinterpretation or misunderstanding , let me read it out in English : ' It is hereby declared that the agreement reached between the Council and the European Parliament in the trialogue of 23 May 2011 concerning the directive of the European Parliament and of the Council amending Directive 1999 / 62 / EC on the charging of heavy goods vehicles for the use of certain infrastructures , Eurovignette , does not prejudge the outcome of interinstitutional negotiations on correlation tables ' .
( HU ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , this is an extremely important issue , one that will clearly influence the everyday lives of our citizens .
Therefore , we welcome the agreement reached between these two institutions .
I believe that in the area of transport policy , this is one of our most important results during the Hungarian Presidency , and we are awaiting tomorrow 's vote with optimism , hoping that the majority of representatives will support this directive .
Thank you once more to all those who helped create this compromise , not only the rapporteur , but also the shadow rapporteurs , as well as our legal professionals , for helping to find a solution for the difficult matter of correlation tables .
Vice-President of the Commission . - Mr President , honourable Members , after three years ' negotiations , we are now close to the adoption of the amended directive on charging heavy goods vehicles , the so-called Eurovignette Directive .
This is part of a wider strategy to internalise the external costs of transport in all modes to get transport prices right .
I would like to thank the Belgian Presidency for unblocking this file in the Council .
The Hungarian Presidency skilfully negotiated with a very narrow majority in the Council .
Let me thank , in particular , the rapporteur , Mr El Khadraoui .
Together with the shadow rapporteurs and members of the Committee on Transport and Tourism , he managed to significantly improve the text at second reading .
I look forward to Parliament adopting this directive for two main reasons .
Firstly , to achieve our goals of a more sustainable green transport system and thus implement the ' polluter pays ' principle .
The directive will authorise Member States to charge tolls on lorries not only for infrastructure costs , as is the case now , but also for noise and air pollution .
It will also allow more efficient varying of tolls to ease congestion during peak hours .
Secondly , at a time of scarce public funding , the charging for external costs provided by the new directive will generate revenues and make new financial resources available for transport infrastructure .
The Commission supports this agreement .
I have noted your declaration on the correlation table . I fully sympathise with you on this issue .
On behalf of the Commission , I will also make a formal statement :
' The Commission recalls its commitment towards ensuring that Member States establish correlation tables linking the transposition measures they adopt to the EU directive and that they communicate them to the Commission in the framework of transposing EU legislation in the interests of citizens , better law making and increasing legal transparency , and to assist in the examination of the conformity of national rules with EU provisions .
The Commission regrets the lack of support for the provision included in the proposal for a directive of the European Parliament and of the Council amending Directive 1999 / 62 / EC on the charging of heavy goods vehicles for the use of certain infrastructures , which aimed at rendering the establishment of correlation tables obligatory .
The Commission , in a spirit of compromise , and in order to ensure the immediate adoption of that proposal , can accept the substitution of the obligatory provision on correlation tables included in the text with the relevant recital encouraging Member States to follow this practice .
It will inform Parliament within 12 months of the adoption of this agreement in plenary and produce a report at the end of the transposition period on practice in the Member States , in order to draw up for themselves - and in the interests of the Union - their own tables illustrating as far as possible the correlation between this directive and the transposition measures and to make them public .
However , the position followed by the Commission in this file shall not be considered as a precedent .
The Commission will continue its efforts with a view to finding , together with Parliament and the Council , an appropriate solution to this horizontal institutional issue ' .
Mr President , the Eurovignette Directive is important because it lays down the European ground rules for a per-kilometre charge and thus ensures a level playing field for road transport within the European Union .
For all that , I have no intention of hiding the fact that my group had major problems with the original Commission proposal and also with the rapporteur 's position at first reading .
Fortunately , the rapporteur took some major steps in our direction and we should certainly also thank the Council and the Hungarian Presidency , who succeeded , ultimately , not only in achieving a solid majority in the Council , but also in getting Parliament to support this position , too .
The majority of my group will also be endorsing this agreement , as it represents the first steps towards actually introducing the ' polluter pays ' principle , and it does so in an intelligent way .
First and foremost is the idea that there should be incentives to stimulate sustainability , not just higher duties .
The arrangement of higher duties during peak hours , compensated for during off-peak hours , is now much better elaborated than in the Council position .
That will mean that total toll levels remain the same .
The exemptions for EURO V and EURO VI are also positive , as well as the fact that the Member States have again committed to regulating the interoperability of toll systems , as it is a thorn in our sides that that is still not the case .
Parliament also finds the earmarking important .
We would have wanted more of it , but it is definitely an important step , and in that I mean not only the percentage that will now be earmarked , but also the reporting obligation on the part of the Member States .
Hopefully , that is a first step towards further earmarking of this money .

Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , following a negotiations marathon , Mr El Khadraoui and the representatives of the Council and the Commission managed to tie up an improved package of measures for road charging for heavy goods vehicles in Europe .
I am very grateful to those involved and , in particular , to our rapporteur , for what they have achieved .
Through the recognition of the principle of internalising external costs , the partial earmarking of funding for the transport infrastructure and the incentives provided for fleet renewal , we have succeeded in realising important objectives from the Transport White Paper .
I also believe that we must not overlook the obligations for transparency , which ultimately must also apply to the Council .
I find it highly regrettable that several Member States attempted , even after the conclusion of the trialogue negotiations , to throw a spanner in the works - they really did try - in connection with the correlation tables in order to block this directive .
Nonetheless , I would like to conclude by calling on all my fellow Members to accept the compromise achieved and not to jeopardise the results of these long and laboured negotiations , as all that would achieve would be to help the wrong people .
You have my thanks for backing this compromise .
Mr President , we will not be winning any beauty prizes with what is on the table , despite the persevering and unbending efforts of the rapporteur , who , by the way , I congratulate in that regard .
The most important and trickiest point , for me , was earmarking .
What will the Member States use the income from these charges for ?
Will they use them to make their transport economy more efficient ? Are we going to oblige them to do so ?
We did not succeed in doing this .
We thus did not achieve what we were hoping for in this regard .
It is somewhat perverse that Member States are seeking to keep the way open for retaining this income , just as the external costs are also retained .
With this charge , we really should be limiting external costs as far as possible and preferably reining them back to zero .
Thus , the things that this money should actually be used for are the likes of improved infrastructure and research into cleaner goods vehicles .
There is one issue that continues to bother me , which is , if you have variable charging for peak hours , how do you tackle traffic jams if you do not treat all those responsible for causing them in the same way ?
This is an issue that we had in black and white at first reading , but the Council did not want to know .
The efficiency of some of the things that we do is thus not 100 % .
What we do have here - and Mr Ertug has already pointed this out - is more transparency .
The Member States have to produce a report stating how much income these charges generate and what they have done to improve the system .
I thus hope that a discussion arises between the payers , the road freight sector and the government on the use of this money and efficiency .
That is one of the positive elements .
I am no enthusiast , but I did defend this in my group because we now have an important principle - the internalisation of external costs - incorporated into European legislation for the first time .
That means that we can make a start on the process of charging for all external costs for all modes of transport in order to improve your economy along with your sustainability .
The Commissioner included a number of measures in the White Paper for which this step is necessary .
If we do not approve it , then we will also be stuck on a number of issues in the White Paper .
It is quite rare , after all , that it is persistently so difficult to reach agreement in the Council - and , Madam President , I am not blaming the Hungarian Presidency of the Council here , it did its best .
This is an important - and essential - first step in a long process .

Mr President , I should also first like to thank the Council and Commission for coming to this compromise but , in particular , Mr Saïd El Khadraoui for the proper way in which these talks were concluded while not losing sight of their goal .
The Group of the European Conservatives and Reformists ( ECR ) will support the compromise agreement because many of the solutions that were worked out are , in reality , fine achievements .
On the Council 's side , this compromise was very fragile , and it is understandable that some issues such as the scope of the directive or collection and distribution of the allocated funds to Member States were sensitive issues even up to the end of the talks .
I believe that further compromise talks would lead to a worse result or would end in no result at all .
The most important thing now is to continue forward , to implement the ' polluter pays ' principle regarding the collection of road tax .
The damage done to the environment must be compensated , and the infrastructure must be improved , and , as Mr Sterckx has stated , this is the first piece of legislation at European level where this principle has been incorporated .
This principle and the taxes should be implemented in all Member States .
Unfortunately , many states have not yet implemented the Eurovignette 1 infrastructure payments and , most likely , these same states will be very tardy in implementing Eurovignette 2 .
This distorts the market in haulage flows and , in fact , whereas the roads are maintained by payments by taxpayers in these Member States and the European Union taxpayers , the benefit is gained by third-country carriers , the infrastructure stays undeveloped , and external costs are not recovered .
Let us hope for some willingness on the part of the Member States .
Thank you
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Eurovignette and the results of the negotiations represent an example of how the Council is currently attempting to place limitations on and water down all Parliament 's proposals , particularly in the field of transport policy .
The transport policy of the Member States ' transport ministers consists of demanding a sustainable and forward-looking transport policy for the European Union every Sunday while doing everything under the sun during the week to actively prevent such a policy from being realised .
One thing is clear , and that is that noise and exhaust gases are to the detriment of both people and nature .
They give rise to costs , and those costs are currently borne by the taxpayers , rather than those responsible for the costs .
Parliament 's proposal , which was already a very tame one and a difficult compromise between the countries at the centre of Europe and those on the peripheries , was still watered down even further .
Thus , for example , the allocation of external costs became voluntary , rather than compulsory .
Costs are not apportioned for all the deleterious consequences caused , only for a small number of factors .
In the end , what remains of the allocation of costs amounts to little more than a couple of hot dogs and a beer for a whole leg of the journey . I find that very little .
The arrangements apply only in a qualified way to goods vehicles weighing over 3.5 tonnes .
Germany got its way with the 12-tonne proposal and in mountain areas , the only goods vehicles now subject to taxation are those that you do not even find there because they cannot get up the large inclines .
In the end , Italy wanted to derail the whole thing on the basis of a bureaucratic detail .
When it comes down to it , that is a prime example of how transport policy , sadly , is still not taken seriously enough .
We in the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance will still vote in favour , as we want to take our place in a majority that at least rescues the principle of the charging of external costs for a future where more reasonable people occupy the role of transport minister in the Member States .
Mr President , I would like to thank the rapporteur for completing a very demanding piece of work .
' Eurovignette ' is one of the directives that should enable road and rail transport gradually to be put on an equal footing .
Rail transport has been disadvantaged for years in the EU 's Member States due to the fact that users have to pay to use transport routes .
In the case of the road network , payments for using the infrastructure have so far been rather symbolic .
If we look at the matter in purely technical terms , disregarding any other factors , we discover that the highest category roads , in other words , motorways , expressways and category one roads , are best adapted to the operation of heavy goods vehicles .
The directive does not go so far as to follow the logic outlined above and set the highest fees for the lowest category roads , in other words , local roads .
On the contrary , it focuses only on charging for some external costs , based on the ' polluter pays ' principle , and only in the case of the highest category roads , in other words , motorways , expressways , category one roads and dual-carriageways .
The payments should include as few exemptions as possible , and should apply to the so-called external costs of road transport , including noise and , above all , emissions .
I am frankly curious as to how the individual states will justify their unwillingness to introduce payments , at least under Table 1 , which is a very watered-down version of what genuine environmentalists want .
Despite these conflicts between logic and the version of the recommendation discussed here , the Confederal Group of the European United Left - Nordic Green Left supports the position of the rapporteur .
( The speaker agreed to take a blue-card question from Mr Leichtfried under Rule 149 ( 8 ) )

( DE ) Mr President , Mr Kohlíček , it could be that I have misunderstood you .
There is something that I would like to clear up .
It is relatively clear , after all , that this is a tame compromise , that heavy goods vehicles will continue to hold the advantage on the roads , and that the charging level overall is far too low .
However , you did start by saying that this directive could now potentially lead to a level playing field between road and rail transport .
I do not believe that such a level playing field will result .
It could be that I have misunderstood you in this regard .
I would ask you to clarify this .

( CS ) Mr President , in my opinion , this is only the first step towards putting things on an equal footing , because if I pay a lot for infrastructure on the railway ... ( the speaker continued in German )
( DE ) ... it is the first step towards equalising the conditions for the railways with those of the roads as , at the moment , you have to pay for distance travelled on the railways , but only a very small amount for the roads .
This is thus a small step towards harmonising the conditions for the railways and the roads .
Mr President , first of all , I would like to thank the rapporteur for doing such an immense and very important job .
As you know , the transport sector plays a key role in guaranteeing mobility and socio-economic development in Europe and , in order to address the challenges of economic growth and sustainability , it is necessary to improve transport sector infrastructure .
We are all concerned about the effects of climate change , environmental conservation and various issues relating to health and social well-being , which are inseparable from the rational use of transport .
I agree that applying the ' polluter pays ' principle , as well as trying to safeguard the public interest , results , and must result , in measures primarily aimed at reducing environmental pollution , noise pollution , damage to the countryside , and social costs that arise due to poor health , because these generate substantial economic costs that are borne by the public at large , and thus by Europe 's citizens .
It is good that in the area of transport , we are finally striving to apply the ' polluter pays ' principle .
Undoubtedly , this will give Member States additional possibilities to make their national road charging systems more efficient , which means that a better transport-demand-management instrument can be developed .
However , I still believe that the instruments we are discussing today , which will be adopted in the near future , are not exactly adequate and are only economically beneficial for central transit European Union Member States , and are not entirely favourable , or significantly less favourable , for a large number of European Union Member States situated on the EU 's external borders .
While basically welcoming the project , I believe that it would be worth fully re-evaluating this aspect , weighing it up again and only then adopting it .
Mr President : So the EU seeks to raise EU revenue by taxation on trucks ?
Well , I ask UK voters what they think of the EU and the usual answer is ' I do not think we should join ' .
The UK has been politically taken over .
UK law is made in Strasbourg , a monster red-tape factory is closing industry , and now we have tax but , because it is not football , the people are not informed .
The UK media avoid EU reality , brains are fed with TV soaps and reporters say the EU does not affect local issues .
The EU is not news .
This report seeks to raise tax from tolls on trucks , partly funding the trans-European TEN-T project , which includes linking high-speed EU trains .
So , when the EU raises taxes in the UK , will the people respond by kicking the EU in the ballot box ?
No , because they are not informed .
The final EU superstate takeover by stealth will be a taxpayers ' sleepwalk into Europe .
The defences are down , the press do not care and the UK is asleep , so get those unfortunate truckers taxed .
( DE ) Mr President , first of all , I would like to congratulate and thank the rapporteur and my fellow Members who were involved for their work .
It was not easy to reach a compromise on this issue .
That is also due to the fact that many people , including in this House , naturally do not agree with the result 100 % .
Some people were for it , others against .
However , I would like to caution , from the outset , against the absurd situation whereby those who expect more link up with those who expect nothing and between them , they collapse the whole deal .
I therefore hope that those who want costs to be internalised , and who even view this deal as very small progress , will support this compromise here .
That is , to a large extent , the view of the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) , if not all the delegations , as we support the internalisation of the costs in all types of transport and we also support the use of resources to promote mobility .
For us , that was one of the most important points .
For us , it is not about making transport more expensive , as has just been claimed .
Making transport more expensive does not make it more efficient .
For us , this is about having a proper balance , so that those resources that are partly earned in relation to mobility are also invested in that area .
Another important factor for us is interoperability .
We do not want technically different charging systems across Europe - the idea of 27 different systems in future is unacceptable .
I hail from a border area , and driving around the area for half an hour , you can face road tolls six times !
That is not sustainable .
The Council needs to be somewhat more flexible in this regard than it was in the past .
We are also putting an emphasis on environmentally friendly goods vehicles .
That means that we are also indicating a course of direction in this connection and , as has just been said , what we have introduced in this regard is not mandatory , with the result that those who favour the internalisation of costs are certainly not satisfied in that respect .
I personally would also have liked this to have been mandatory in all Member States .
We have had this debate so many times in this House .
What do we want tomorrow ?
Do we want 27 different charging systems , or do we want all the Member States to work to the same rules ?
Or do we have to wait for further crises before we hear the call for action at European level again ?
For me , the Eurovignette , too , makes one thing clear , namely , that only Europe brings the answer . Different charges in individual Member States do not .
( Applause )
( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I believe that there has been one major success story in this discussion , and that is the rapporteur .
I really think that , with this dossier , the rapporteur had so much resistance to overcome and that he thus managed to extract the absolute maximum possible from this entire issue .
The fact is that , in this House , there is not really a majority for a real greening of transport .
The first thing you have to do , then , is cope with that .
It is absolutely clear that there is currently a majority of transport ministers in the Council to whom environmental interests are of no concern .
It is equally clear that there is a majority in the Council who do not care about those who live and work along roadways and that there is a majority in the Council who support consumers purchasing any old junk , that has been transported far and wide , rather than high quality regional products .
Given that situation , I would say that the very best result has been achieved .
First of all , we have the principle of external costs .
That was a major step , a difficult step , facing all that resistance .
We now have the ability , for the first time , to charge for exhaust gases . We have the ability to charge for noise .
Of course , these are too limited and at far too low a level .
If you look at the tables , this really is a drop in the ocean .
It also proved possible to expand the corridors , so to speak , but we did not manage to put a tax on CO2 .
That is inexplicable .
Transport is one of the largest producers of CO2 emissions in Europe and it is not charged for this .
These points leave me really dissatisfied .
That said , I endorse what has been said by other Members , who believe that we need to vote in favour of this , as otherwise , everything will go down the drain .
I am voting in favour , with a heavy heart , and the thought that it is a good thing that we have come this far , but there must be much more progress in the future .
( DE ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , in the White Paper , Commissioner Kallas sets out various possibilities for the future of transport .
For instance , he describes how there is a need for incentive systems in order to give transport a more environmentally friendly form , and he also states that new sources of funding are needed , including , for example , in order to be able to work according to the ' polluter pays ' principle .
The Eurovignette Directive that we are debating today is one way that both of these points really can be achieved .
This was a major Belgian effort , I believe we can say , begun under the Belgian Presidency of the Council with three important Belgians involved and , above all , because of the rapporteur , who succeeded in opening a door to the new routes .
As it happens , I would have wished Belgium 's major effort greater success than what we now have .
What we actually managed to achieve is a small and weak compromise .
Although we do now have earmarking to a very limited extent - 15 % of infrastructure costs and 15 % of external costs must go to the TEN-T networks - it is really far too little .
All national transport policy representatives say that we need considerable resources in order to be able to sustain our infrastructure networks .
It is self-evident that the resources collected in this area should also be able to be invested there .
That is a point on which we can all fail to be satisfied .
The fact is that , in this connection , we have nonetheless taken a step in a direction in which we will be able to move further at a later date .
That is also the reason why we intend to vote in favour of this compromise .
It was a tough struggle , though . It very definitely could have been the case that we ended up with nothing at all on the table , since a few Member States would have preferred to have nothing at all .
This is therefore a success , and it will have our backing in the vote today .
( Applause )
( CS ) Mr President , in the directive under discussion , the Commission has put forward the possibility of charging for external costs such as air pollution , noise and traffic congestion , based on an attempt to internalise external costs in accordance with the ' polluter pays ' principle .
I support this principle because I consider it important from the perspective of the impact on the environment and human health , as well as the use of more methods of transport at national , regional and local levels .
This is also in the interest of municipalities , which are often harmed by the negative impacts of transit traffic in particular .
With regard to the continuing economic crisis and the increasing financial burden on transport operators , I also firmly believe that Member States should be given the option to spread out the introduction of charges for external costs over time , and according to individual types .
The new system should also make it possible to replace obsolete fleets through the use of reduced rates for external costs when investing in environmentally friendly vehicles .
( FR ) Mr President , there is nothing to be pleased about today : a green transport system is still a long way off , as has been said .
What is in this text ?
What does it say ?
Quite simply , it permits the Member States , on a voluntary basis , to use a ' polluter pays ' system .
Furthermore , the system is so restricted and so limited that , at the end of the day , the cost will only increase by around three to four cents .
How can people think that a three or four cent mark-up will actually have an impact on modal shift ?
In other words , it is not a great success from an environmental point of view .
This is what this famous principle of internalisation of external costs has become , after being put through the Council mill - sorry , Mrs Győri - after so much resistance , and despite the considerable efforts of the rapporteur .
Nevertheless , we shall vote for this principle because it is an important one .
It is a principle like others - we spoke earlier about the precautionary principle , which has made its mark in the European directives .
We shall vote for this principle .
It is just one principle ; a whole battle remains to be fought , and we will continue to fight it in order to effect a genuine modal shift and to establish a greener transport system that protects people 's health and combats climate change more effectively .
( NL ) Mr President , the current proposal for the Eurovignette is based on the idea of Europe 's efficient road transport system subsidising its inefficient railways .
The most disconcerting fact , however , is probably that this Parliament sees this proposal as just a first step .
It would be a first step , it should be noted , in the wrong direction that would mean that the Member States ' current right to implement this legislation would become an obligation , that the charge per kilometre would only rise and , above all , that car drivers would soon be next .
This Parliament talks of a single system among the Member States .
However , adopting this proposal will mean that hauliers should get ready for a new box in the cabs of their lorries , with associated new taxes , of course .
It is clear that , with this proposal , the European Parliament is strangling the life out of road transport as a result of the hysteria about the climate .
The transport sector has it hard enough as it is , and is not expecting more taxes imposed by Europe .


( IT ) Mr President , Mrs Győri , Mr Kallas , first of all , I acknowledge and applaud the work accomplished by the rapporteur , Mr El Khadraoui , who has done his utmost in searching for a possible compromise .

Precisely because of that , I think we should go through the ritual procedure .
This dossier should really have gone to conciliation , though , because the correlation tables were not included in the final agreement .
That could have been an ideal opportunity to reach a comprehensive agreement .
Unfortunately , as has already been pointed out , that is not a mere detail .
The ' polluter pays ' principle is right , valid and agreed upon and , to avoid any doubt , I am in favour of the greening of transport .
However , this instrument - Eurovignette - is too partial and ineffective , as well as unfair .
At a time of great economic difficulty such as we are experiencing now , the only purpose of this decision to strike at an economic sector that underpins our market is to make money , even if hardly any of this money is then used for transport infrastructure .
In my view , a very complicated mechanism is being introduced , not least for calculating the amount to be charged .
I am therefore critical of this dossier because I believe the way it penalises the geographically more peripheral Member States is unacceptable in this Europe of economic and territorial cohesion .
The effectiveness of this instrument has not been demonstrated , and the modulation of transport flows creates problems for current and future financial planning because the charges are shifting and changing all the time .
In this respect , I am told that the Member States are free to apply this extra charge or not .
In the case of cross-border transport , however , we also depend on the decisions of others and so we need to reach an agreement .
Therefore , I am convinced that an agreement reached at any price , at the expense of the haulage industry , cannot be considered a success .
I really think there is still a very long way to go , especially as regards fair charging .



( ES ) Mr President , first of all , I would like to acknowledge the tenacity of the rapporteur , Mr El Khadraoui , though I also have to say that from the beginning , I did point out the particular sophistry of the peripheral countries , with the scandalous lack of alternatives to the road - look at the continuous obstacles in the Pyrenees , between Spain and France , to establishing regular cross-border rail traffic .
Now , moreover , - and I take advantage of the fact that Mr Kallas is here - the Commission is placing in doubt the future central crossing of the Pyrenees in the future core network .
In other words , with these problems of a railway alternative , the truth is that the agreement on the Eurovignette is now imposing even greater burdens on the transportation of products by road , which , in the peripheral countries , particularly in the south and in the east , are products of little or limited added value .
In creating at this precise time - as a rumour , shall we say - the problem of adding even a few centimes - four cents do not appear anything at all to Mrs Durant - right now , when we have just passed through the crisis , or are still in mid-crisis in the case of the cucumber , and due precisely to these irresponsible and false accusations which are without proof , they have dealt a brutal blow to thousands of Spanish families , not just farmers , but also hauliers , because just these few centimes , on thousands of kilometres and products like the Spanish cucumber , will generate a major problem in terms of transporting them to the central market , which is precisely where these accusations originate .
No , Mr El Khadraoui , at the beginning , some initial accounts appeared , from which it was clear that , through the problems of the tax burden , there was an increase , and then they simply disappeared .
I have always asked why those studies disappeared , but the truth is that it was worrying , so they have told us time and time again .
Even so , I - and they also - would be prepared to make the sacrifice if the problems were to be resolved , important problems like congestion .
However , in the current agreement , we have to say that the car does not seem to be included in the congestion .
I am referring to major problems , such as the state of the infrastructure and the fact that things are improving , including in terms of reducing noise or other pollution .
Even now , we know that it is not going to be possible because we do not have any alternatives at all to this .
Therefore , the Spanish socialist delegation sees itself obliged to vote against this agreement .
( FR ) Mr President , two words sum up the general tone of our work and the mood in Parliament : ' finally ' and , on the flip side , ' a bit of a shame ' .
' Finally ' because , after very lengthy negotiations , we have reached a compromise and the ' polluter pays ' principle is now genuinely beginning to take shape in this dossier .
' A bit of a shame ' because , even though the public finance situation in the Member States is complicated , we should have done everything in our power to reinvest the revenue collected for the benefit of , for example , trans-European transport network ( TEN-T ) priority projects .
Mr Kallas , it will be up to the Commission to exercise close scrutiny .
' A shame ' , also , because I personally regret this minimum agreement where the desire to ease congestion is concerned : although the proposed agreement retains the off-peak concept , the methods by which the Member States must implement it are ' weak ' .
The Commission must provide impetus on this issue as well .
Thirdly , although the current directive stipulates that 3.5 tonne heavy goods vehicles must be included from 2012 , we provide for the possibility of exempting them in the agreement .
This is a harmful concession .
Here too , Mr Kallas , it will be up to the Commission to play a key role .
In short , although it is a modest compromise and a small step , it is a step nonetheless . We shall therefore vote for it .
( PL ) Mr President , Mrs Lichtenberger said that there are some reasonable ministers in the European Union 's Member States .
I would be grateful to her if she could give me their names , although I do realise it would be a very , very short list .
I would like to thank the rapporteur for his very thorough work , although it is good that we can debate it , because it does contain a number of things that are extremely controversial .
Lorries are to pay more , which means that the owners of transport firms are to pay more .
This is a problem for firms during a crisis , and we cannot pretend otherwise .
The question is : how will the money be spent ?
There is a real dilemma here , because if the money goes on yet more foolish projects of marginal groups , that will be a bad thing .
It should be spent on the transport sector , on the development of transport , in which case the increases would be understandable .
Otherwise , it is a kind of extortion , and this with the sanction of the European Union and the European Parliament 's stamp of approval .
I think this is something which really is controversial .
( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , transport in Europe is too cheap .
Only environmentally friendly transport is too expensive .
All of this is brought about by policy choices , and this directive will not change that .
We have unfair competition .
The tax privileges that heavy goods vehicles enjoy are not being curtailed .
Every lorry causes 60 000 times as much damage as a car but , of course , it is not charged 60 000 times as much .
We have had a mandatory rail toll within the European Union for decades .
Every locomotive - whether it transports passengers or goods - must pay a rail toll for every kilometre it travels .
On the roads , the toll is voluntary . It is capped .
It mostly applies only on motorways and only to vehicles weighing 12 tonnes or more .
On the railways , there is no limit .
That is unfair , and it hinders the environmentally friendly railways while relieving the environmentally unfriendly roads .
We know that we need a change in mobility in order to protect the climate .
We in the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance want to protect the climate and secure mobility for the future , and that is why we need fair competition .
This Eurovignette is only a tiny step forward towards that goal .
Mr President , HGV haulage is integral to the supply process essential to a good economy .
If added charges are levied across Europe , the extra cost is ultimately filtered to the consumer .
The UK Government is looking into HGV charges to bring us in line with Europe by 2015 .
We do not have a network of toll roads , nor do we lay additional charges on heavy goods vehicles after road tax .
We face unfair competition from an increasing number of foreign trucks taking up more than their fair share of cross-border haulage .
Foreign operators pay nothing to use our roads but UK diesel duty is as much as 23 pence a litre higher , giving competitors a 15 % advantage .
However , under EU law , the UK cannot introduce a charge applicable only to foreign vehicles .
If this directive expands its capabilities , any move by the UK Government to introduce HGV charges will be overshadowed by an unwanted indirect tax which the Commission also reserves the right to make obligatory in 2013 .
As the proposals relate to taxation , it should require unanimity at Council level , yet the legislation is being ushered in via the transport provision of Lisbon .
It is an underhand way of introducing indirect taxation and should not be voted through by anybody with a democratic bone in their body .
( FR ) Mr President , in its Europe 2020 strategy , the European Union set itself the objective of making our economy greener and our transport more modern .
All the European institutions , including the majority of our Parliament , have broadly supported this objective , as have almost all the Member States .
It is a pity , then , that several Member States should have gone to great lengths , since 2008 , to strip the proposal for a new Eurovignette directive of its content and to block this dossier .
Today , however , thanks to the tenacity of our rapporteur - and I should like to pay tribute here to Mr El Khadraoui - and of the shadow rapporteurs in their negotiations with the Council , we have a compromise before us at long last .
Admittedly , this text is far less ambitious than the initial proposal , but it will enable us for the first time to implement the ' polluter pays ' principle and to internalise external transport costs such as noise and CO2 emissions .
In order to ensure that this Eurovignette is not just a tax but actually helps improve transport in Europe , the Member States are also encouraged to reinvest the revenues they collect in the modernisation of transport modes .
Parliament has also successfully ensured that real progress is made on the interoperability of toll systems and that stronger incentives are given to use less polluting heavy goods vehicles .
In order to remain consistent with the policy objectives that our institution has set itself , I sincerely hope that we will be able to endorse this compromise that is being proposed to us at second reading and thus pave the way for a more sustainable transport policy .

( FR ) Mr President , Mrs Győri , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , at last we have something to be satisfied about : the toll charge for road transport , which is capped by this new Eurovignette Directive , may , in the future , include the costs of noise and air pollution .
Another cause for satisfaction is that , with this report by Mr El Khadraoui - and I congratulate him on his tenacity - we are clearly expressing our desire to see the ' polluter pays ' principle factored into the costs of road transport .
We must remain vigilant , however : after three years of interinstitutional negotiations , we need to convince certain Member States that a policy for genuinely protecting the environment and an economic policy for successfully developing Europe 's rail network are both achievable thanks to the balance struck in this trialogue .
We must also ensure that part of the revenue collected is actually allocated to infrastructure and trans-European transport network projects as indicated .
May I also say how sorry I am that the binding nature of the ' polluter pays ' principle has been left out of this compromise .
Leaving aside our rapporteur Mr El Khadraoui 's tenacity , on which I congratulated him , Commissioner , the European Commission has once again lost the fight to certain nationalist positions and sentiments .
( SV ) Mr President , I would like to say a big thank you to the rapporteur for his excellent work on a very difficult subject .
As many people have pointed out , the new rules merely contain calls for the Member States to use the revenue they receive to improve the environment and it is therefore important , just as Mr Sterckx said , that we here in the European Parliament continually remind our governments of the importance of following these recommendations .
The intention is clearly not that our drivers and hauliers should pay for the noise and environmental impact if we do not , at the same time , introduce measures aimed at solving the problems , such as road treatment and other noise-attenuation measures .
It is very important to prevent these charges simply becoming a new tax on heavy goods vehicles , as some Members here have pointed out .
We must continue to work to improve the environment and reduce carbon dioxide levels in Europe , and it is therefore of central importance that we ensure that environmental charges are genuinely used to reduce and eliminate the environmental problems that arise .
( Applause )
( NL ) Mr President , with the decision on the Eurovignette , Europe is taking a step in the right direction in order to be able to apply the ' polluter pays ' principle to road transport .
Ultimately , we now have the agreement to pass on the costs for the use of infrastructure , for noise and for air pollution to the carrier .
I hope that many EU Member States will adopt this system , including the Netherlands .
The Rutte government in the Netherlands is sensibly planning to pull ' paying for mobility in a different way ' out of the hat .
Those plans fit in well with today 's agreement .
I hope that the Commission will bring forward proposals to also charge these costs to other means of transport in a phased manner .
Of course , in so doing , account must be taken of the specific properties of each sector .
Thus , inland shipping is not the only user of river water , something that is abundantly clear during these days of extreme drought .
Agriculture , after all , currently has its sprinklers wide open .
However , we have now taken an important step forwards and we need to push on even further .

( ES ) Mr President , it is no coincidence that Spain , Italy , Greece , Ireland , Portugal and other countries are all reluctant to accept the so-called Eurovignette .
This common critical stance stems from our position as peripheral countries since , at the end of the day , it will be us who will pay this quite singular levy and the Member States enjoying a geographical location in the centre of the European Union who will collect it .
The reasoning that underlies the Eurovignette is beset by major contradictions and the discourse that supports it becomes weaker every day .
Even accepting the rationality of internalising external costs as a valid starting point , it is ultimately untenable to penalise heavy goods vehicles only and not ordinary cars with the aim of mitigating traffic congestion , just as the old ' polluter pays ' principle is applied in a clearly discriminatory way .
In addition to this , ladies and gentlemen , only 15 % of the funds collected through the Eurovignette - which was conceived as a funding source for infrastructures - will finally be used to fund trans-European networks , and not as a requirement but merely as a recommendation .
Thus , finance ministries will allocate the funds as they see fit according to the interests of their countries , within the wide sphere of infrastructures .
The ultimate result will be yet another setback for road freight transport , which , the way things stand today , is the only means enabling the operation of the Internal Market .
This is reality , ladies and gentlemen , a reality that is a lot starker in the context of an economic crisis .
If European products are to be competitive in global markets , we cannot afford experiments that may result in even further damage to an already weak European economy by imposing yet more additional costs .
Lastly , the food crisis , which has recklessly been blamed on Spanish products , has led to unfair penalties and huge losses for those penalised by the Eurovignette : freight carriers and prime crop farmers .
It is for all these reasons , ladies and gentlemen , that the Spanish delegation of the European People 's Party shall vote against this draft directive .
( EL ) Mr President , the general principle introduced in the directive on goods transport , by which I mean the internalisation of external costs , is very basic and of symbolic importance .
This is a modern and , at the same time , flexible framework for the application of the ' polluter pays ' principle and a tool to moderate the congestion problems on major national motorways .
That is precisely why the concerns expressed by many speakers about the imbalance in terms of the repercussions of its application in the regions of the Union and in the road transport sector - some of which are justified - need to be overcome .
The aim of the compromise text , which is due in large part to Mr El Khadraoui , is to achieve gradual application of the charges in question , so that it is accompanied by gradual renewal of the European fleet .
However , the way to overcome the objections and to pave the way for the acceptance and efficacy of the framework of the Eurovignette is to ensure , firstly , that the directive is applied strictly , transparently and quickly to all the Member States and , secondly , that all the revenue is channelled , as contributory resources , to transport infrastructures and is not used to plug well-publicised gaps .
( DE ) Mr President , as we all know , this directive is a compromise .
However , it is , without doubt , also a good compromise , as it accommodates both sides , at least to a certain extent - both the carriers and the citizens , who have to suffer the noise and the exhaust gases .
What are the advantages of this directive ? For me , there are three .
Firstly , there is the earmarking of the revenue from road charges for investment in improved transport infrastructure , which is in the public economic interest and provides increased safety and better transport routes .
Secondly , there is the standardisation of collection , which lowers costs and prevents traffic congestion .
Thirdly - and very importantly - there is the fact that it gives the Member States the ability and the freedom to factor costs such as noise and pollutant emissions into their road charges at a future point .
These , then , are control mechanisms .
Those who steer clear of rush hours and traffic jams will pay less and those who drive clean and quiet goods vehicles will enjoy lower costs .
I hope that these incentives will mean that , in future , traffic jams will be avoided and goods vehicle fleets will be renewed .
All in all , we are aware that not all wishes could be satisfied in the negotiations , but these positive aspects that we were able to achieve in the negotiations thanks to Parliament 's strength should lead to the desired positive effects .
I also hope that there is not too much bureaucracy in the implementation , as that would harm the whole .
( RO ) Mr President , the inclusion of a charge based on external costs in the toll charge allows Member States to introduce it for using the trans-European road network , or certain sections of it , as well as any other additional sections of their own motorways which are not part of the trans-European road network .
We do not support the deliberate introduction of tariff barriers which will increase the costs of transport operators from peripheral Member States and , by extension , the prices of the products transported .
Although the directive should not allow discrimination based on the haulier 's nationality , Article 7k permits Member States which introduce a system for charging tolls and / or users of the infrastructure to offer suitable compensation for these charges , which may distort competition .
I think that the income generated from the charge on users of the infrastructure and from the charge based on external costs must be used to support the trans-European road network , improve road safety and provide safe parking areas , which are an absolute necessity for compliance with the applicable social legislation .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , we all agree on the need to make goods transport more sustainable , but this result is achieved mainly by investing in infrastructure and gradually renewing the existing fleet .
In reality , behind the environmentalist spirit of Eurovignette and the ' polluter pays ' principle lies a major competitive disadvantage for some countries compared with others , with serious repercussions not only on their section of the haulage industry , which is , to a great extent , made up of small and medium-sized enterprises , but also on their national systems .
All that will happen without the mandatory reallocation of sufficient resources to improve transport infrastructure and the efficiency and environmental performance of the haulage industry , something that should be an essential outcome of this directive .
The negotiations have led to a few minor positive results - I am thinking of interoperability and mini-hire marketing in mountain areas - but the overall outcome is unsatisfactory .
I think a possible conciliation procedure would be the best way to smooth off the sharp edges that still remain unresolved .
Mr President , the proposed directive might be the last straw to break the back of the British road haulage industry .
The industry has been declining steadily over the last decade . Drivers with operating licences have fallen by 8 % in the last three years .
Foreign lorries now control 80 % of cross-Channel business .
In the last decade , 20 % of domestic business has been lost to foreign hauliers .
There is a large and growing resident population of foreign hauliers using foreign vehicles and paying only their own countries ' modest vehicle charges who are taking more and more domestic business .
It might appear that British hauliers are simply losing business as the result of competition , a favourite word in the EU lexicon .
However , the competition is not fair competition .
The British road fund licence is much greater and fuel tax exceeds that of other countries .
Foreign hauliers work in the UK on fuel brought with them in 1 000-litre tanks .
Whilst the proposed charges will apply to all vehicles , the burden on the British industry could be fatal .
This directive must be resisted .
( DE ) Mr President , it is beyond doubt that the Internal Market is one of the major achievements of our Union and that efficient transport structures are part of that .
However , I personally live on a stretch across which over 50 million tonnes of goods a year are transported , and I believe that , alongside people 's right to efficient transport , there is also a right for those living alongside to be protected from the impact and effects of this transport .
This proposal is therefore certainly a small step in the right direction if it is used in such a way that investments are made to improve noise protection , provide modern heavy goods vehicles and , above all , to bring about modern rail networks and modern rolling stock .
It is also a positive thing that a supplemental rate can be charged in mountainous areas .
I do find it particularly questionable , however , that we are planning to proceed in this area according to the principle of voluntary action , in other words , such that , as before , States that do not wish to be involved in this Eurovignette simply do not have to implement it .
That will not only lead to discrimination within Europe but it is also extremely questionable with regard to the impact on the people .
Mr President , the general trend of this proposal is positive because we are in an era where we have to tackle climate change , etc. in every possible area ; all methods which lead to pollution have to be dealt with .
Certainly , the focus on the heavy goods vehicles makes sense regarding the use of tolls , etc .
The one point which we need to expand on in particular is that we should be able to develop technology that produces engines that require less and less fuel , in other words , that travel more and more miles for fewer miles to the gallon .
Certainly that is one area where much research needs to be done ; many efficiencies could be made , not just for heavy goods vehicles , but also for all other vehicles .
That is something which is not being mentioned and promoted and researched enough .
( FR ) Mr President , the fact that the taxation of road freight transport and the Eurovignette have finally been addressed is , in itself , good news for all Europeans .
That said , we still have a long way to go before road freight transport bears a reasonable proportion of the costs it represents for our societies : wear and tear of infrastructure , pollution , public health and accidents .
As someone who lives in a city through which millions of heavy goods vehicles pass each year , I can confirm that the suffering of the populations concerned is rarely taken into account .
Then there are the issues that no one wants to address in this House : the very low wages paid to drivers , the terrible working conditions and the unacceptable driving times that compromise everyone 's safety .
It is no exaggeration to talk about slaves of the road .
So yes , it is necessary to impose a maximum rate of taxation in order to encourage short journeys , piggyback transport , maritime transport and inland navigation , and it is necessary to make the entire Union and its neighbourhood strive for the best possible social conditions .
However , it is important to have intelligent taxation , so that the ones paying are not transport SMEs , drivers and still less consumers , but large shippers and major customers such as the large-scale distribution sector .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , I would like to thank honourable Members very much for their comments and I would like to make some remarks .
Firstly , Eurovignette is not a European tax .
This must be made very clear .
In that sense , it is a bad name .
On the contrary , it is a directive which limits and regulates national charges .
We have 22 countries with different tolls and charges for different types of vehicles - heavy vehicles and private cars .
All users from different countries pay these tolls if they appear on this network .
Secondly , please accept the compromise .
This is much bigger and more complicated than it looks .
There are two fundamental continuing fights behind this .
The first is a fight about principle - who should pay for the use of infrastructures and what specifically they should pay for .
So it is going in the right direction .
The ' user pays ' and ' polluter pays ' principle will inevitably continue .
This is the direction that things are going .
The second fight is much more continuous and sharper .
It is a conflict between the countries which have heavy transit traffic , which , of course , want more flexibility to address problems with their infrastructure , and clearly want to share the burden for the use of infrastructure between taxpayers and all users - I stress all users : there cannot be any discrimination .

Of course , there is a group of countries who are fiercely against it .
This was also very visible here during the debate .
I must just remind you that on 15 October , the Council agreed on the political compromise .
It was just short of a blocking minority and the fight continues here now .
Mr El Khadraoui has done tremendous work to reach a good compromise and to have a good proposal for this compromise .
I sincerely ask you to please support this compromise .
It appears to have a lot of details that are not satisfactory in different parts and to different people but it is a really big step .
This issue has been up in the air for years and years . Now we are taking a step forward .
President-in-Office of the Council . - ( HU ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , first of all , I would like to thank you for this valuable debate , which included a great number of arguments and counterarguments .
This also shows , as the Commissioner has also mentioned , that a compromise has been reached .
After great difficulties , problems and struggles of course , I am nevertheless convinced that this is a European success , as has already been mentioned by Mr Leichtfried .
Thank you also for the appreciation expressed to the Hungarian Presidency .
As with every other compromise , a serious balancing act was carried out .
We had to balance environmental and economic sustainability .
I reject the notion that the Council did not attach any importance to environmental protection .
Had it not been important , this directive would not exist .
We also had to create a balance - and I would like to say this to Mr De Grandes Pascual as well - between the centre and the periphery .
It is true that heated debates took place in the Council on the best ways to ensure that peripheral Member States do not feel locked out , and eventually a qualified majority was formed in the Council , and I hope - and I believe that the discussion has shown this as well - in Parliament , too .

We could say that this is just a drop in the ocean , but I believe - and I am happy that this has been acknowledged by many during the debate - that we have made an extremely important first step towards internalising costs and re-circulating revenues into the sector , even if , as with every compromise , it is not the most perfect one , and I am certain that we will be able to take further steps in the following years .
I would like to mention three specific issues which attracted several questions .
The first one is the utilisation of revenues , and I would like to return to the comment made by Mr Sterckx .
The agreement contains a detailed recommendation for Member States , precisely with respect to the utilisation of revenues , and states , inter alia , that 15 % of generated revenues - and I emphasise this for Mrs Meissner in particular - should be used to finance trans-European transport projects .
I would also like to add that this is the result of an adequate compromise and , as Mr Dirk Sterckx has also mentioned , a good and adequate one , although perhaps only a first step in the right direction .
The second specific question was also asked by Mr Sterckx , with respect to showing the costs of traffic jams and congestion .
Well , the agreement reached with the European Parliament extends to this problem as well , since it makes it possible for Member States to determine road usage charges in a differentiated manner on the basis of location and time .
As you all know , Member States have the opportunity to levy higher infrastructure charges during peak periods .
This increased differentiation of infrastructure charges gives us an alternative for fighting traffic congestion , and even if we only include air and noise pollution in the calculation of external costs , the differentiation mechanism introduced in the directive can still make an efficient contribution to the reduction of traffic jams typical of European roads .
Finally , I would like to address your third question , specifically the question posed by Ms Lichtenberger concerning the external charges .
The Council has already adopted its first-reading position on 14 February of this year , and we subsequently inserted a provision in the directive at the request of Parliament , to the effect that we will give a political signal to citizens concerning the environmental characteristics of heavy goods vehicles .
To this end , we have included the possibility that in addition to the surcharge applied in mountainous regions , an external charge can be added in the case of Euro 0 , 1 , 2 and 3 vehicles .
Since Euro 3 vehicles are less polluting than the other most polluting vehicles in the Euro emission categories , the double charge system will apply to them only from a later date , while it will already be applicable to the other categories from the effective date of the directive .
Furthermore , the agreement reached with the European Parliament also provides incentives in respect of the least polluting vehicles in the Euro 5 and 6 categories , in order to promote the renewal of the vehicle fleet .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , it has become very clear from our debate today that we have made an extremely important step forward for the transport sector with the Eurovignette Directive .
The specific recommendation regarding heavy goods vehicles is important not only in itself , but it also carries a symbolic significance .
It is the first to apply - and I am glad that you have confirmed this in your comments - the ' polluter pays ' principle , and launches a lengthy debate and implementation process , which leads to the internalisation of the external costs of all transportation methods .
Mr President , the Hungarian Presidency is very pleased that this agreement was reached with the European Parliament , and I am sure that the measure debated now and awaiting adoption by Parliament can lead to an increase in economic efficiency and a decrease in the negative environmental impacts in the transport sector , and that as a result , European Union citizens will be the winners of this directive being adopted .
Mr President , I thank each and every one of you for your expressions of support and your comments , and that includes those who opposed the report , by the way .
The transport sector is important for our economy .
It does , however , also give rise to costs - infrastructure costs , but also other costs such as fine particulates in the air , noise , traffic jams and so on .
With this revised directive , we will finally be creating a European framework that gives the Member States the opportunity to get the costs partly paid back by those who actually gave rise to them .
At the same time , this method also enables the Member States to generate resources to reinvest in the transport system in order to make it more sustainable so as to actually reduce these external costs .
In this way , we can make our society more liveable , increase the efficiency of the sector and also contribute to a more level playing field between the different modes of transport , so as , in so doing , to also provide greater opportunities for the railways and inland waterways .
I stressed earlier on , in my introduction , how difficult it was to reach this compromise .
The aim in the Commission 's White Paper , by the way , is to achieve the mandatory internalisation of external costs by 2020 .
That promises heated discussions over the next few years .
In the meanwhile , I hope , first of all , that this plenary grants sufficient support to enable us to get going and to demonstrate that Europe can also take decisions that are good for our citizens .
Secondly , I hope that a number of Member States will now really get on with making use of the new opportunities and will also be able to tempt other Member States to join in on the strength of their good results .
That will enable us to build a wider support base to also go further .
In the meantime , this directive provides the Commission with an awful lot of homework to be getting on with .
Over the forthcoming years , the ideas of also internalising other external costs , making internalisation mandatory and including other types of vehicles , also need to be looked into .
These are things for the forthcoming years , however .
We must first take this step forwards .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place today at 12 : 00 .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
I think completion of the work today at second reading on the directive on charging heavy goods vehicles - the Eurovignette Directive - is extremely important .
The basic and most important issue is the provision which establishes the ' polluter pays ' principle , according to which heavy goods vehicles which cause more pollution and are noisier than those fitted with engines which comply with the Euro V or Euro VI standards will be subject to tolls for using road infrastructure .
In addition , allowance has been made for the possibility of a certain dependence of tolls on vehicle movement ( road congestion ) at peak hours - for a maximum , however , of five hours a day .
I think that this solution will successfully encourage avoidance of the use of some sections of road during peak hours .
Furthermore , the Member States will be able to specify the use to be made of revenue generated from tolls collected , but at least 15 % will have to be used for financial support for TEN-T projects , in order to increase transport sustainability .
I am delighted to say that the Eurovignette Directive has reached the end of its second reading .
This report introduces the key phrase ' the polluter pays ' , which means that the change to the rules on road transport tolls will allow us to add the real costs of air and noise pollution by lorries to the taxes and fees collected when heavy goods vehicles use motorways .
In addition , the directive stipulates that money collected in this way should be used to finance effective and environmentally friendly transport systems .
At the same time , 15 % of the fees collected must be invested in pan-European transport networks : not just road transport , but also rail and inland waterway transport .
Although the directive will apply to all vehicles over 3.5 tonnes , I think that this provision goes too far , because such vehicles mainly operate regionally , and this should not be regulated at European level .
At the same time , a Member State has the right to exempt vehicles under 12 tonnes , an option which I hope Estonia will use .
Speaking of Estonia , I think that this directive will bring to an end the situation in which our lorries pay in other countries , while vehicles from other countries do not pay to drive on our roads .
I hope that the government will put an end to this type of unequal treatment and set equal conditions for all .
The directive also provides an incentive for fleet renewal : the newer and lower-polluting the vehicle , the less tax it must pay .
This requires large investments from transport companies , which will actually pay off relatively quickly , both in terms of lower road tax and in terms of lower fuel consumption .
The revision of the Eurovignette Directive is crucial in order to integrate more effectively the cost of pollution caused by road transport , something which will now be possible thanks to the opportunity for the Member States to take into account air and noise pollution , as well as congestion of certain routes , when setting toll charges for heavy goods vehicles .
In regions such as mine , where international freight vehicles clog the Alpine roads , this is a long-awaited measure .
This revision is also a first step towards the reintroduction of fair competition between European road hauliers , since some Member States , such as France and Germany , already apply the ' polluter pays ' principle and want the EU to extend it to all the others .
What matters now is that the revenue from the Eurovignette actually goes towards projects to improve infrastructure , cut pollution and protect the environment .
I therefore welcome the Member States ' undertaking to reassign part of this revenue to the TEN-T , a major project designed to guarantee Europe 's territorial cohesion and to improve access in regions such as those of the Alps , where the infrastructure is not sufficient to ensure a modal shift from road transport to other forms of transport .
I am convinced that the European Union needs harmonised guidelines which enable Member States to make charges for external costs created by the road transport sector .
However , we must remember that transport firms , particularly during a crisis , will not be able to afford to change their fleets quickly and buy vehicles which comply with the Euro V and VI standards .
We cannot , therefore , punish hauliers for external factors over which they have no influence .
In my opinion , we need to try to achieve a maximum extension of the period during which incentives apply to the ecologically cleanest vehicles .
Transport firms which invest in low-emission technologies must have the right to an appropriate period during which their investments are guaranteed , when they would pay the lowest charges or be exempt .
Finally , we very often emphasise in Parliament that people are the most important .
Let us remember , therefore , that the transport sector around the Union not only represents excessive noise or CO2 emissions but also represents , above all , hundreds of thousands of jobs and an important component of GDP in many Member States .
( The sitting was suspended for a few moments )
1 .
Appointment of a Member of the Court of Auditors ( H.G.Wessberg-SV ) (
2 .
Request for the waiver of Agnes Hankiss 's parliamentary immunity (
3 .
Proof of origin for certain textile products (
rapporteur . - Mr President , just briefly , I was very honoured to be a rapporteur when we had the chance to repeal , instead of adopting , a piece of legislation .
This is a redundant piece of legislation . I think it fits perfectly with our long-term goal , which is to legislate and to regulate better , so I can only recommend all of you to support this repeal .
I would like to thank you for that in advance .
4 .
Participation of Croatia in the work of the European Monitoring Centre for Drugs and Drug Addiction (
5 .
Extension of scope of regulation on the professional cross-border transportation of euro cash by road between euro area Member States (
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , as rapporteur , and on behalf of the political groups that are in agreement , I call for the vote on the two reports on the transport of funds to be postponed .
I am referring to the report that we are discussing now and to report , which is the fifth item to be voted on after this one .
This postponement is justified on procedural grounds and is designed to ensure the best possible collaboration with the Commission and the Council .
I therefore invite you all to vote in favour of postponing the vote on this report and the one that follows five items later .
I will now ask for two statements . I will ask for a statement from one person who would like to support the proposal .
Mrs Bowles , you have the floor .
Chair of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs . - Mr President , I would like to clarify that the committee has asked for this to be deferred because we have been the subject of a procedural violation .
A recital that was agreed in a written trialogue procedure - and about which there can therefore be no doubt - was removed in the Coreper ( Committee of Permanent Representatives ) text .
We have also been told that the Commission Legal Services will not agree to a text that is not wholly in accord with the common understanding , even though the common understanding is not legally binding .
We cannot accept this unilateral change as a precedent in any way , and therefore we will not vote until the matter is resolved .
We cannot allow the interinstitutional agreements , or common understandings or anything else , to restrict the power of this Parliament that has been conferred on us by the Treaty , and therefore this text cannot be allowed to proceed .
Before we go ahead , we will also need to have a clear understanding that this cannot be repeated .
( IT ) Mr President , I am not against the proposal as such but , since we approve the order of business for the whole week on Monday afternoon , I wonder why this proposal for deferral was not made yesterday but only now , just before the vote .
6 .
Transport applications of the Global Navigation Satellite Systems (
7 .
International air agreements under the Treaty of Lisbon (
8 .
Charging of heavy goods vehicles (
9 .
European environmental economic accounts (
10 .
Seventh EU programme for research , technological development and demonstration (
( PL ) Mr President , I have informed the Secretariat that I would like to table an oral amendment which would involve the deletion of paragraph 27 , because it contains untrue information concerning an important scientific project named INDECT .
I would like to inform the House that this project has been endorsed by an ethical review . It underwent this review on 15 March 2011 in Brussels , with the participation of specialists from Austria , France , the Netherlands , Germany and the United Kingdom .
The ethical audit concerning the work of this project produced a positive result and this has been certified .
No problems have been found with the ethical aspects of the project .
The ethical aspects of the report have been continuously monitored by the European Commission from the very outset .
I want to stress this and to ask the House to take care that our report does not contain information which does not have a basis in fact .
This is a very important scientific research project which is being conducted by the AGH University of Science and Technology in Kraków and a number of European institutions of research and higher education .
Voting time
The next item is the vote .
( For the results and other details on the vote : see Minutes )
Explanations of vote
Written explanations of vote
Above all , the proposed candidate has political experience , and also auditing and financial experience , although the latter is perhaps not as strong as might be hoped .
I am voting in favour of this candidate , but I believe that more thought needs to be given to the type of qualifications that Members of the Court of Auditors ought to have .
I supported the nomination of Hans Gustaf Wessberg as a Member of the Court of Auditors because he has over 30 years of professional experience of high level management in public institutions as well as private enterprises in Sweden .
A large part of his career has been devoted to improving conditions for private enterprises in Sweden , as manager in organisations representing industry interests in public life .
He also has extensive experience of public service , as both a politician and civil servant .
He has served as director general of the Swedish Companies Registration Office , an independent government agency , and as state secretary on several occasions .
That is why I am convinced that he has the qualities required for this post .
The curriculum vitae submitted by H.G. Wessberg for his nomination as a member of the Court of Auditors shows skills and experience that are certainly in line with the technical and scientific standards required by the position .
In particular , Mr Wessberg 's commitment to the private-sector business fabric makes the candidate particularly suited to ensuring the balance between EU law and the specific demands of both the market and the people of Europe .
I therefore voted in favour of this proposal for a European Parliament decision .
in writing . - I voted for Sweden 's nomination of H.G. Wessberg to join the European Court of Auditors and replace Lars Heikensten .
When the Budgetary Control Committee interviewed Mr Wessberg on 24 May 2011 , MEPs praised his past performance in both the private and public sectors .
Once appointed , H.G. Wessberg will serve until the end of Sweden 's mandate , that is until March 2012 , and could then be re-elected for another mandate of six years .
I wish him all the best in his new role .
I wish Mr Wessberg every success in the important office for which he has been chosen , and I am convinced that he will carry out the functions for which he has now been appointed with complete dedication and competence .
As expected , the hearing of the Swedish candidate for membership of the Court of Auditors was unproblematic .
As was evident later in the vote , the final result was marginally in favour of the candidate .
He has ministerial experience , as well as experience of working in the private sector .
He has also worked in the area of defence , has handled finances and budgets at a high level and was also a supporter of Swedish membership of the EU .
in writing . - I voted to support Sweden 's nomination of H.G. Wessberg to join the European Court .
Mr Wessberg will replace Lars Heikensten , who left to become executive director of the Nobel Foundation .
Mr Wessberg will take up his duties following his formal appointment by the Council of Ministers , scheduled for Friday , 10 June 2011 .
The Court of Auditors is an institution that inspects the European Union 's income and outgoings in order to verify their legality , as well as verifying good financial management .
It operates in complete independence .
In this spirit , the nomination of the individuals of which it is composed must be governed by capability and independence criteria .
Mr Wessberg , from Sweden , has submitted his curriculum vitae , completed a written questionnaire and has been interviewed by the Committee on Budgetary Control .
He has argued his case well enough to justify his appointment to the Court of Auditors , and to perform his duties capably and independently .
in writing . - The European Parliament ,
having regard to Article 286 ( 2 ) of the Treaty on the Functioning of the EU , pursuant to which the Council consulted Parliament ( C7-0103 / 2011 ) , having regard to the fact that at its meeting of 24 May 2011 the Committee on Budgetary Control heard the Council 's nominee for membership of the Court of Auditors , having regard to Rule 108 of its Rules of Procedure , having regard to the report of the Committee on Budgetary Control ,
whereas H.G. Wessberg fulfils the conditions laid down in Article 286 ( 1 ) of the Treaty on the Functioning of the EU ,
delivers a favourable opinion on the nomination of H.G. Wessberg as a Member of the Court of Auditors ; instructs its President to forward this decision to the Council and , for information , the Court of Auditors , the other institutions of the European Union and the audit institutions of the Member States .
I voted against because I think that it is possible to find a more suitable person for the position offered , from a professional point of view .
I voted in favour of the report on the nomination of Mr Wessberg as member of the Court of Auditors .
My decision is based on all of the information presented for this choice , including his responses to the questionnaire for candidates for membership of the Court of Auditors , annexed to this report , as they indicate compliance with the criteria laid down in Article 286 ( 1 ) of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union ( TFEU ) and the need for members of the Court of Auditors to be fully independent .
I therefore welcome the nomination of Mr Wessberg .
I voted for this report because I believe the Court of Auditors may benefit from Mr Wessberg 's experience in the financial management of institutions .
The candidate fulfils the conditions laid down in Article 286 ( 1 ) of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union , and his curriculum vitae shows a series of high-level positions in financial management and budgetary control in public institutions and private enterprises .
The candidate 's answers to the questionnaire show that he is serious and highly motivated .
in writing . - I was pleased to support the Swedish candidate for the Court of Auditors .
Bearing in mind that the accusations date back to 2004 , which means that they were made before Mrs Hankiss became a Member of this House , I am voting in favour of waiving her parliamentary immunity .
I support the rapporteur 's recommendation to waive Mrs Hankiss 's immunity in the case in question .
The case pending against her has its origins in an incident dating back to early 2004 , when she was not yet a Member of the European Parliament .
Evidently , therefore , the rules of procedure concerning parliamentary immunity and privilege cannot apply , and so waiving her immunity complies with the rules governing this House 's institutional and legal affairs .
The Central District Court in Buda , Budapest is asking the European Parliament to lift the immunity of MEP Ágnes Hankiss in connection with renewed criminal proceedings .
Ágnes Hankiss was accused by a private plaintiff of allegedly committing the crime of public defamation and , in particular , the crime of defaming the memory of a dead person , the plaintiff 's father .
On the basis of the facts as stated , and in accordance with the rules of procedure of the Committee on Legal Affairs , I think it would be appropriate to recommend lifting immunity in this case .
Mrs Wallis claims that the same principles are always applied by the European Parliament with regard to the waiver of the immunity of its Members .
That is a cynical lie .
In a case concerning me personally , the Court of Justice ruled in 2010 that Parliament had violated my rights as an MEP - and it violated them again last month , on exactly the same grounds !
For her to say that an MEP 's immunity should be waived because the comments for which he or she is being criticised did not come within the scope of his or her parliamentary activities is absolute nonsense from a legal point of view .
If that had been the case , legal action would not have been possible !
This is the basis of the current Article 8 .
By definition , Article 9 applies to activities beyond the scope of this Parliament !
Parliament now preserves or waives immunity according to how it feels : it waives it for political opinions in one case , but preserves it for suspected tax evasion in another , considering it an example of fumus persecutionis .
As I am more strongly attached to freedom of expression than the pseudo democrats in this House , I shall systematically refuse to waive the immunity of one of my fellow Members , from whichever political group , for the expression of his or her opinions , no matter how much they differ from my own .
The responsible committee recommends ( unanimously ) waiving parliamentary immunity because the Central District Court of Buda , Budapest , is asking the European Parliament to waive the immunity of its Member , Ágnes Hankiss , in connection with renewed criminal proceedings ordered by the judgment of the Supreme Court of the Republic of Hungary given on 12 November 2009 .
Ágnes Hankiss is accused by a private plaintiff of an alleged offence of defamation of honour committed in public ( Section 179 of the Hungarian Criminal Code ) and , in particular the defamation of the memory of a dead person , the plaintiff 's father , under Section 181 of the Hungarian Criminal Code , as a result of a statement made during the programme ' Péntek 8 mondatvadász ' on 23 January 2004 .
On 12 November 2009 , the Supreme Court considered that there was indeed a violation of the substantive provisions of criminal law and ordered a renewed procedure to be conducted by the Central District Court of Buda .
The court is to conduct this renewed procedure in light of considerations stated in the decision of the Supreme Court .
The Central District Court of Buda opened renewed proceedings on 31 March 2010 .
On the same day , the proceedings were suspended on the grounds that Ágnes Hankiss enjoys parliamentary immunity as a Member of the European Parliament .
The relevant request for the waiver of that immunity was made by the Court on 6 July 2010 .
in writing . - I voted to waive the parliamentary immunity of Ágnes Hankiss , accused of defamation .
Ms Hankiss 's immunity was lifted because the events in question took place in 2004 , before she was elected to the European Parliament ( in July 2009 ) , and because the case does not concern her political activities as an MEP .
Parliamentary immunity does not cover ordinary criminal cases .
Ágnes Hankiss can be tried without her parliamentary activities being called into question .
I voted to waive her immunity .
in writing . - Since Ágnes Hankiss is accused of alleged defamation under Section 181 of the Hungarian Criminal Code , as a result of a statement made during a programme on 23 January 2004 , I voted in favour .
At the sitting of 6 September 2010 , the President announced that he had received a letter sent by the Central District Court of Budapest on 6 July 2010 requesting the waiver of the parliamentary immunity of Mrs Hankiss , pursuant to Rule 6 ( 2 ) of the Rules of Procedure .
The President referred the request to the Committee on Legal Affairs pursuant to the same Rule .
The report by the Committee on Legal Affairs , which was voted for unanimously , concluded that the present case does not come within the scope of the political activities of Mrs Hankiss as a Member of this House .
It concerns instead a statement made in 2004 , long before she was elected a Member of this House .
The rapporteur has also found no evidence of fumus persecutionis : that is , a sufficiently serious and precise suspicion that the case has been brought with the intention of causing political damage to the Member .
I therefore support the proposal by the Committee on Legal Affairs and voted in favour of waiving the parliamentary immunity of Mrs Hankiss .
On 6 July 2010 , the Central District Court of Buda sent a request to waive the immunity of Ágnes Hankiss in connection with renewed criminal proceedings ordered by a judgment of the Supreme Court of the Republic of Hungary in 2009 .
On 23 January 2004 , following a statement made during a programme , Mrs Hankiss was accused of an alleged offence of defamation of honour committed in public and , in particular , of defamation of the memory of a dead person .
In an appeal hearing on 25 March 2009 , the Budapest Municipal Court acquitted Mrs Hankiss of the charges , but , on 12 November 2009 , the Hungarian Supreme Court ordered a renewed procedure to be conducted by the Central District Court of Buda .
The renewed proceedings were opened on 31 March 2010 and suspended the same day because of Mrs Hankiss 's parliamentary immunity .
For these reasons , and because the case does not come within the scope of Mrs Hankiss 's political activities as a Member of the European Parliament , since it concerns a statement made long before she was elected a Member , I am voting in favour of waiving her parliamentary immunity .
in writing . - In favour .
The case relates to an alleged offence of defamation which does not come within the scope of Ms Hankiss ' political activities as an MEP , but relates instead to a statement made in 2004 , before she was elected an MEP .
The rapporteur has also found no evidence of fumus persecutionis .
I am voting in favour of this report as it covers the Commission 's objectives of simplifying the legislation in force with a view to creating a better and clearer legislative environment for businesses , mainly with respect to the simplification of customs formalities carried out by importers of textile products .

Regulation ( EC ) No 1541 / 98 and Regulation ( EEC ) No 3030 / 93 , which were initially adopted in order to implement trade policy measures in the textile sector , have now become obsolete instruments that constrain the free market and are poorly adapted to changes in the new regulatory environment .
Until recently , quantitative restrictions on imports originating in World Trade Organisation ( WTO ) member countries were in force , together with special safeguard provisions for textile products from the People 's Republic of China .
Those restrictions were eliminated with the expiry of the WTO agreement in 2005 , as were the provisions for China in 2008 .
Therefore , the only effective method of preventing distortions in the market and continuing to control textile imports is still to subject such imports to verification procedures that require indication of the country of origin .
That indication is , in fact , contained in the proposal for a regulation on ' Made in ' origin marking , which was adopted in this Chamber on 21 October 2010 , which introduces a control mechanism and aims to simplify the legislation in force with a view to creating a better , clearer legislative framework for companies and for consumer protection .
I voted in favour of this document , repealing Council Regulation ( EC ) No 1541 / 98 on proof of origin for certain textile products falling within Section XI of the Combined Nomenclature and released for free circulation in the Community , and on the conditions for the acceptance of such proof and amending Council Regulation ( EEC ) No 3030 / 93 on common rules for imports of certain textile products from third countries .
In 2005 , the World Trade Organisation repealed the restrictions on imports originating in Member States , and the European Union should also simplify the legislation in force with a view to creating a better and clearer legislative environment for businesses , mainly with respect to the simplification of customs formalities carried out by importers of certain textile products released for free circulation in the Community .
I believe that the amendments mentioned will ensure the uniformity of the rules for import and will align the rules relating to imports of textiles with those for other industrial goods , which should improve the overall consistency of the legislative environment in this area .
I supported the Zahradil report because I think that Council Regulation ( EC ) No 1541 / 98 on proof of origin for certain textile products has served its purpose .
The 1998 Council Regulation introduced instruments for controlling the import of textile products , which enabled the WTO Agreement to be implemented .
With the expiry of the WTO Agreement in 2005 and of the special safeguard measures in 2008 , the Council Regulation served its purpose , while the import restriction measures it imposed can be managed using other instruments .
Although repealing these regulations might appear to be a positive and welcome step from the standpoint of legislative simplification , it would , on the other hand , mean depriving our textile industry of still valid forms of defence against unfair competition from countries like China .
The rapporteur 's arguments that future legislation on ' Made in ' origin marking and new World Trade Organisation agreements will soon be a good solution to the problem of defending our industry do not appear to stand up : we are still waiting for the Council to respond regarding origin marking , but it does not seem to have any intention of endorsing a regulation that this House adopted last autumn by an overwhelming majority .
It would certainly appear to be wiser to wait until there is a clear legislative framework governing future imports of certain textile products from the Far East before we start repealing the old laws .
I have therefore voted against the report .
I voted in favour of this report because its primary aim is to repeal the EU regulation currently in force , laying down additional requirements proving the origin of textile products imported into the EU , thus simplifying the legislation in force and creating a better and clearer legislative environment for businesses .
Until the World Trade Organisation ( WTO ) repealed restrictions on imports of textile products from China in 2008 , the EU really needed a legislative instrument for regulating trade with third countries and protecting the EU Internal Market and its manufacturers .
However , such complicated administrative procedures are now no longer proportionate , particularly as another EU regulation imposes an obligation to indicate a product 's country of origin in customs documents before it is released for free circulation in the EU market , and consumer protection is also currently being enhanced in the EU by increasing the amount of information provided to consumers .
I am in favour of repealing the Council regulation on proof of origin for certain textile products as I believe that efforts need to be made to simplify the existing legislation in order to create a clearer legislative environment for businesses .
I should , however , add that I consider it important to maintain alternative controlling mechanisms for imports of such products into the EU , in order to avoid market disruption caused by increases in such imports .
My nature is to be in favour of less red tape and of administrative simplification .
When it comes to resolving anachronisms , I am all for it .
That is the case here .
In fact , the existence of unnecessary administrative burdens , as was the case with proof of origin for certain textile products in cases where there are no quantitative restrictions on the importing of these products to Europe , or in cases where there is a need to present an import authorisation , only impedes the easy flow of international trade that is our intention .
That said , and although it is not directly related to this measure , I would also like to highlight the importance of maintaining the status quo in terms of the current World Trade Organisation ( WTO ) rules , particularly as regards the world market for textiles and clothing , very specifically , the changes to the rules on importing textiles and clothing products into the EU at a time of severe economic downturn in various Member States .
I voted for this report because I believe the Commission proposal contributes to reducing excessive administrative burdens and additional costs for companies by making rules on importing certain textile products more uniform .
The repeal of Council Regulation ( EC ) No 1541 / 98 is intended to remove the burden on importers of presenting proofs of origin for certain products .
Since these products can be freely imported , proving their origin is apparently unnecessary , but there are still some doubts about this facilitating measure .
I cannot fail to stress the need to ensure the quality of products sold within Europe and to guarantee the safety of those who use them .
Beyond simply knowing the origin of textile products from outside the Union , it is essential to ensure that European standards are met , and to not allow raw materials and processed products to enter and be sold in the Union without meeting the minimum conditions .
I also believe that more important than ascertaining the type of products used in the manufacture of textile products is to assess whether these are in compliance with competition rules and respect for workers ' dignity and rights , as cases where these are violated are on the increase .
This has unacceptable consequences for the workers themselves and for the viability of the European textile sector , particularly in Portugal , which has been forced to compete with producers that systematically fail to observe such rules and rights .
This report concerns a proposal for a regulation of Parliament and of the Council repealing Council Regulation ( EC ) No 1541 / 98 on proof of origin for certain textile products , and on the conditions for the acceptance of such proof , and amending Council Regulation ( EEC ) No 3030 / 93 on common rules for imports of certain textile products from third countries .
The changes that have now been introduced into the regulatory environment allow trade policy measures to be improved , especially following the surge in imports from the People 's Republic of China , by introducing control instruments for imports of textile products from third countries .
I voted in favour of this report because , by significantly improving the information given to consumers , it will allow informed and responsible choices to be made by all citizens of the Member States , and will allow them to opt for products that are made in the EU .
The Commission proposal , which is adopted by this report , is aimed at simplifying the customs formalities followed by importers of certain textile products released for free circulation in the Union .
To this end , it proposes repealing the conditions of acceptance of proofs of origin for certain textiles and textile articles originating in third countries .
The list of products covered is extensive , comprising : silk ; wool ; cotton ; other vegetable textile fibres ; man-made or artificial filaments ; felt and non-woven materials ; carpets and other textile floor coverings ; special woven fabrics , lace , upholstery and embroidery ; knitted or crocheted fabrics ; articles of apparel and clothing accessories ; and many others .
The consequences of liberalising the international textiles trade are known all too well in countries like Portugal , with the elimination of quantitative restrictions on imports and special safeguard provisions .
This proposal , which is in line with previous measures , aims to make the lives of major European importers , which are its main beneficiaries , even easier , as they will be able to access raw materials and low-cost finished products , while sacrificing national industry and thousands of jobs .
Despite already being the object of resolutions of this Parliament , the last of which was in 2010 , the old request that the country of origin be marked and that information be made available about the origin of various goods has been postponed .
This report adopts the proposal by the Commission to simplify the customs formalities followed by importers of certain textile products released for free circulation in the European Union .
It thus proposes to repeal the conditions of acceptance of proofs of origin for certain textiles and textile articles originating in third countries .
The list of products covered is extensive , comprising : silk ; wool ; cotton ; other vegetable textile fibres ; man-made or artificial filaments ; felt and non-woven materials ; carpets and other textile floor coverings ; special woven fabrics , lace , upholstery and embroidery ; knitted or crocheted fabrics ; and articles of apparel and clothing accessories .
The consequences of liberalising the international textiles trade are known all too well in countries like Portugal , with the elimination of quantitative restrictions on imports and special safeguard provisions .
This proposal , which is in line with previous measures , aims to make the lives of major European importers , which are its main beneficiaries , even easier , as they will be able to access raw materials and low-cost finished products , while sacrificing national industry and thousands of jobs .
Despite already being the object of resolutions of this Parliament , the last of which was in 2010 , the old request that the country of origin be marked and that information be made available about the origin of various goods has been postponed , which we regret .
The Commission is aiming , among other things , to support the unification of import rules by harmonising the rules on textile imports with the rules on imports of other industrial products .
This should improve the overall cohesion of the legislative environment in this area .
The legal instrument that is to be abolished relates to the conditions for accepting the evidence of origin of certain textiles and textile products originating in third countries .
In my view , the aim should be to implement trade policy measures that would help to prevent market distortion caused by the sharp growth in imports from third countries , such as China , for example .

I endorsed this document because the Commission 's proposal to repeal Council Regulation ( EC ) No 1541 / 98 and to amend Council Regulation ( EEC ) No 3030 / 93 is driven by the European Union 's policy commitment to simplify the legislation in force with a view to creating a better and clearer legislative environment for businesses , mainly with respect to the simplification of customs formalities carried out by importers of certain textile products released for free circulation in the Community , which fall within Section XI of the Combined Nomenclature .
Moreover , the Commission 's objective is also to enhance the uniformity of the rules for import by aligning the rules relating to imports of textiles with those for other industrial goods , which should improve the overall consistency of the legislative environment in this area .
It is the Commission 's view that the very limited trade policy measures in the textiles sector applied by the Union can be managed without imposing the excessive burden of having to present proof of origin for all imports .
This also helps to prevent the problem of market distortions that would be caused by a surge in imports of such textile products to the EU market , if the allowable quotas were not respected .
in writing . - I voted for this report which is driven by the European Union 's policy commitment to simplify the legislation in force with a view to creating a better and clearer legislative environment for businesses , mainly with respect to the simplification of customs formalities carried out by importers of certain textile products released for free circulation in the EU .
We strongly supported this report in view of the EU 's policy commitment to simplifying the legislation in force .
We aim to create a better , clearer legislative environment for businesses .
European trade policy measures in the textiles sector can be managed without imposing the excessive burden of presenting proof of origin for all imports .
In order to continue controlling imports of textile products still subject to remaining quantitative restrictions and originating from countries that are not yet members of the World Trade Organisation , the EU will now rely on import authorisations .
Meanwhile , concerning the categories of products falling within Section XI of the Combined Nomenclature that are not subject to quantitative import restrictions and are released for free circulation in the EU , a system of ex post statistical surveillance is being applied to monitor their impact on the EU market .
We would point out that , in addition to the abovementioned import control mechanisms , it has been mandatory since 2010 to indicate the country of origin of certain third-country products in order to better inform consumers about their origin .
We should now seek to enhance the uniformity of the rules for import by aligning the rules relating to textile imports with those for other industrial goods , which should improve the overall consistency of the legislative environment in this area .
The outcome of the vote expresses the sense that the indication ' made in ' is essential for market transparency and clarifying for consumers the origin of the products that they use .
It is necessary to strengthen the EU economy by improving the competitiveness of EU industry in the global economy .
We can only have fair competition if the world economy operates according to clear rules for producers , exporters and importers , while also taking into account common social and environmental norms .
The aim of this proposal is the codification of existing legislative texts on indications or marks identifying the lot to which a foodstuff belongs .
It is regrettable , however , that it is not yet possible to monitor the path of the product from its source .
in writing . - Since the report is on a Commission proposal that aims to simplify the legislation in force with a view to creating a better and clearer legislative environment for businesses , mainly with respect to the simplification of customs formalities carried out by importers of textile products , I voted in favour .
I voted against this report because it is based on unfounded premises and vague future assumptions .
On the one hand , it maintains that proof of origin is useless , since it states that the European Union can protect itself on the basis of a system of ex post statistical customs surveillance .
However , it does not say , for instance , that the ' updated Community Customs Code ' is far from being fully operational and still has some obvious gaps in it , especially in terms of the complete computerisation of the system , a much-needed measure .
At the same time , the report expressly states that implementation of the Muscardini report on ' Made in ' origin marking - which , by the way , we strongly supported - will serve to protect origin marking .
Well , I am glad that the rapporteur is so sure , but at the moment , the origin marking regulation does not yet exist and we do not really know if , when or how it will be adopted .
In essence , therefore , I think this report is a dangerous leap into the void , with serious consequences as usual for the textile industry , which the European Union continues to mistreat in the face of general indifference .
The adoption of Mr Zahradil 's proposal has reopened the debate on the importance of origin marking for products from third countries , as a measure designed to implement a trade policy that can prevent market disturbances due to a rise in foreign imports , and to sort out the complicated legislative environment that today makes it difficult for small and medium-sized enterprises to develop .
I am therefore in favour of a regulation that enhances the uniformity of the rules for European textile imports by aligning them with those for other industrial goods .
However , we should bear in mind the fact that , even if we use ex ante and ex post control mechanisms to assess the impact of third-country imports on the European market , the European Union has not yet been able to adopt a control mechanism based on fair and important information for consumers such as that provided by origin marking .
I hope that the Council , too , will quickly come to a positive conclusion on the decisive steps taken by this House towards ensuring traceability and adequate information on products .
These measures will both ensure that people have appropriate , reliable knowledge about the goods on the market and make them appreciate the uniqueness of European manufacturing .
I voted in favour of the report on the proposal for a regulation of Parliament and of the Council repealing Council Regulation ( EC ) No 1541 / 98 on proof of origin for certain textile products falling within Section XI of the Combined Nomenclature and released for free circulation in the Community , and on the conditions for the acceptance of such proof and amending Council Regulation ( EEC ) No 3030 / 93 on common rules for imports of certain textile products from third countries .
I voted in favour with reservations , but did so because , overall , it is positive and is in line with EU policy commitment to simplify the legislation in force , with a view to creating a better and clearer legislative environment for businesses , mainly with respect to the simplification of customs formalities observed by importers of certain textile products released for free circulation in the Union , and with the objective of making the rules for importing more uniform , by aligning the rules relating to textile imports with those for other industrial goods , which should improve the overall consistency of the legislative environment in this area .

The aim of the Commission 's proposal to repeal Council Regulation ( EC ) No 1541 / 98 on proof of origin for certain textile products and to amend Council Regulation ( EEC ) No 3030 / 93 on common rules for imports of certain textile products from third countries is to simplify the legislation in force with a view to creating a better and clearer legislative environment for businesses , mainly with respect to the simplification of customs formalities carried out by importers of certain textile products released for free circulation in the Community .
The requirements for the presentation of proof of origin for textile products were introduced in order to ensure the proper implementation of import restriction measures so as to avoid market disruption caused by imports from the People 's Republic of China .
The impact and the number of measures applied by the European Union to imports of these products have gradually diminished in recent years .
In fact , special safeguard provisions have been created for textile and clothing imports from the People 's Republic of China and quantitative restrictions on imports from World Trade Organisation member countries have been lifted .
For the reasons given above , I voted in favour of the report .
in writing . - I have spoken on this issue before and I am voting for this report because I believe EU citizens have the right to know the make-up of the clothes they buy .
This regulation will allow consumers to avoid buying products containing non-textile parts of animal origin , whether for health , ethical or other considerations .
Under this regulation , for example , the trimmings on collars will be labelled clearly and separately from the rest of the garment , allowing consumers to make an informed choice about the clothes they buy .
Allergy sufferers in particular stand to gain from this proposal , as fur is potentially hazardous to their health and without proper labelling , they may buy a product containing these textiles without realising it .
Regulation ( EC ) No 1541 / 98 was aimed at introducing requirements for the presentation of proof of origin for certain textiles originating in third countries to which the quantitative restrictions on imports applied .
Due to the changes that have taken place in the meantime , particularly as a result of the 2005 World Trade Organisation ( WTO ) Agreement on Textiles and Clothing , the removal of the first proof of origin for products seems to be justified , and I therefore voted for the repeal of this regulation .
In general , it aims to relieve the burden on products when they enter the EU , without sacrificing the interests of purchasers , so it is therefore important to maintain alternative monitoring mechanisms for imports of such products into the EU .
I should like to offer my congratulations on the excellent work carried out by Mr Zahradil .
The very limited trade policy measures applied by the EU in the textiles sector can be managed without imposing the excessive burden of presenting proof of origin for all imports .
However , import control measures on textile products must be maintained .
In fact , in order to continue controlling imports of textile products still subject to remaining quantitative restrictions and originating from Belarus and North Korea , which are not yet members of the World Trade Organisation , the EU now relies on import authorisations .
That helps to prevent the problem of market distortions that would be caused by a surge in imports of certain textile products onto the EU market , if the allowable quotas were not respected .
Moreover , concerning the categories of products not subject to quantitative import restrictions and released for free circulation in the EU , a system of ex post statistical surveillance is being applied to monitor their impact on the EU market .
I would also like to point out that in 2010 , the European Parliament adopted at first reading the report by Mrs Muscardini on the indication of the country of origin of certain products imported from third countries ( ' Made in ' ) , which also concerns textiles and clothing .
in writing . - In favour .
In the ambit of the better law making approach , the Commission proposes to repeal a 1998 Council Regulation under which importers have to provide proof of origin of textiles and articles of apparel for EU customs procedures .
The regulation had value as long as quantitative restrictions on textiles and articles of apparel existed through the WTO 's Multifibre Agreement .
This agreement was terminated in 2005 .
By 2008 , the Agreement on textiles and clothing between the EU and China and all other surveillance systems for imports of textiles and clothing from China had also ended .
Textile and clothing imports from Belarus and North Korea , neither of which are members of the WTO , are still subject to quantitative restrictions .
The system of import authorisations still remains in place for controls on these imports , which , however , do not pose problems with regard to the functioning of the EU market .
This system is deemed sufficient .
All in all , Parliament is advocating a new ' made in ' labelling regime , which is currently a Sleeping Beauty after the conclusion of the first reading in 2010 .
Such a regime would provide much better control possibilities - and also consumer information - than the old Proof of Origin Regulations .
I voted in favour of this report because I agree with its underlying spirit : to simplify and harmonise EU legislation on imports of textile products in order to facilitate trade with third countries .
I believe , in fact , that the limited trade policy measures applied by the EU in the textiles sector can be managed entirely without imposing the excessive burden of presenting proof of origin for all imports .
Besides , import authorisations , ex post statistical surveillance systems and the requirements of single administrative documents already ensure that imports are effectively controlled in the Union .
To complete the picture , however , I look forward to the time when the Muscardini report fully enters into force , as it will enable European consumers to be better informed about the origin of products , including textiles , from third countries .
The legislation being repealed in this case concerns the conditions of acceptance of proof of origin for certain textile products originating in third countries , which established specific requirements by applying quantitative restrictions .
The rapporteur shares the Commission 's view that the trade policy measures applied by the EU in the textiles sector can be managed without imposing the excessive burden of presenting proof of origin for all imports .
As far as we are concerned , it is in the interests of both consumers and businesses to ensure that any burden imposed on importers of goods from third countries serves to control and limit such goods .
Above all , we are concerned that we are going to repeal regulations that are useful for customs control without there being any progress at the moment on the ' Made in ' origin marking regulation , which is currently at a standstill in the Commission because of the Council 's obstructionism .
I would also like to point out that the Council has vetoed origin markings in relation to the ad hoc textile measure and is trying to do the same as regards the mandatory indication of place of origin on food labels .
We voted against the report .
in writing . - This Commission proposal simplifies the legislation in force on proving the origin of certain textile products .
In 1998 , the EU set out the requirement for importers to present proof of origin for products falling under Section XI of the Combined Nomenclature , listed in Annex I to Council Regulation ( EEC ) No 3090 / 93 , and which have been made in third countries .
It should be noted that in 2005 , quantitative restrictions on textile and clothing imports originating in World Trade Organisation ( WTO ) member countries were rules , while the rules for the same type of products originating in the People 's Republic of China expired at the end of 2008 .
In view of this , I am voting in favour of this report , as I believe that it marks a positive step in defining a clearer and simpler legislative environment for European businesses which import textile and footwear products originating in third countries for which there continue to be quantitative restrictions because they are not WTO members .
I also believe that the customs authorities make an effective contribution to efficiently monitoring imports of this type of product , effectively supervising their impact on the EU 's economic climate and , thus , the economy of each Member State .
I voted in favour of the report on proof of origin for certain textile products .
The recasting of the legislation in this area aims to simplify and standardise the legislative framework , including the administrative formalities , whilst , at the same time , also including appropriate instruments to manage the market disruptions brought about by the serious rise in imports from third countries .
Finally , the new arrangements make allowance for the calls the European Parliament has hitherto made for more information for consumers .
I am voting in favour of the participation of Croatia in the work of the European Monitoring Centre for Drugs and Drug Addiction ( EMCDDA ) , as the EMCDDA is open to the participation of any third country , and particularly bearing in mind that Croatia is a transit route through which illicit drugs are smuggled on the way from the production countries to consumer countries .
I therefore believe that its immediate involvement is essential .
By asking to participate in the work of the European Monitoring Centre for Drugs and Drug Addiction ( EMCDDA ) , the Republic of Croatia has shown that it shares the interest of the EU and its Member States in the objectives and work of the Centre , the task of which is to collect data on drugs and drug addiction in order to prepare and publish objective , reliable and comparable information at European level .
That is why I endorsed the report by our fellow Member , Mrs Serracchiani , on the conclusion of the Agreement between the European Union and the Republic of Croatia on the participation of the Republic of Croatia in the work of the EMCDDA .
I voted in favour of this document .
The European Monitoring Centre for Drugs and Drug Addiction plays a vital role in collecting data on drugs and drug addiction and preparing objective , reliable and comparable information at European level .
The information is intended to provide a basis for analysing the demand for drugs , ways of reducing it , and the drug market in general .
In 2005 , the Republic of Croatia asked to participate in the activities of the European Monitoring Centre for Drugs and Drug Addiction .
The Republic of Croatia is a transit route through which illicit drugs are smuggled on the way from the production countries to consumer countries .
There have been large-scale cocaine seizures in Croatia , which are mostly linked to sea transport .
I supported this agreement and the participation of the Republic of Croatia in the work of the European Monitoring Centre for Drugs and Drug Addiction , which will allow factual and objective information to be collected from Croatia at European level concerning drugs and drug addiction and their consequences , and will enable the Republic of Croatia to gain information on best practices to understand the nature of its drug problems and improve its response to them .
Drugs are one of the major scourges of our society today .
This is a socially and culturally complex and dynamic problem , which is constantly changing and taking on new forms , with the use of new substances and new groups of consumers .
The European Monitoring Centre for Drugs and Drug Addiction ( EMCDDA ) was set up in 1993 , and its main tasks are to collect data on drugs and drug addiction , and to prepare and publish objective , reliable and comparable information at European level .
This information is vital as it provides a basis for the analysis of demand for drugs and of ways of reducing it , as well as of phenomena associated with the drug market in general .
Croatia is a transit route through which illegal drugs are smuggled on the way from production countries to consumer countries .
It is therefore crucial for Europe that Croatia provide information concerning drugs and drug addiction , and their consequences .
It is also crucial that it be able to obtain information on best practices .
That is why I am voting for this recommendation .
I support the draft Council decision on the conclusion of the Agreement between the European Union and the Republic of Croatia on the participation of the Republic of Croatia in the work of the European Monitoring Centre for Drugs and Drug Addiction because the number of deaths , compared with last year , is falling for all drugs except heroin , and progress is being achieved as a whole in the fight against drug use .
The Republic of Croatia will be able to receive information on best practices to understand the nature of its drug problems and respond to them better .
I voted in favour of Mrs Serracchiani 's report on the conclusion of the agreement between the European Union and the Republic of Croatia on the participation of the Republic of Croatia in the work of the European Monitoring Centre for Drugs and Drug Addiction because I believe it would represent a highly beneficial exchange for both parties .
On the one hand , Croatia 's participation in the monitoring centre would provide decisive factual information to support our commitment to fight the illegal drug trade , given that Croatia is one of the main transit routes for smuggling drugs into the European Union ; on the other hand , Croatia could make use of European best practice in order to respond to and combat the problem .
I voted in favour of this report because I agree that Croatia 's participation in the European Monitoring Centre for Drugs and Drug Addiction ( EMCDDA ) is vital for combating illicit drug use and trafficking , both within Croatia itself , and throughout the EU .
As a coastal state on the EU 's external borders , Croatia is used as a transit country in international drugs trafficking , and it is therefore especially important for the EU to provide this country 's national institutions with all the assistance necessary for combating a phenomenon that poses a particular threat to health and social stability .
According to the agreement , Croatia will take part in the Centre 's work programme , will satisfy the obligations laid down in EU legislation , and will share data with the EMCDDA , subject to the data protection requirements of the Union .
The Republic of Croatia is an important transit route through which illicit drugs are smuggled from the production countries to consumer countries .
Evidence of this is provided by the significant cocaine seizures in Croatia , which are mostly connected with sea transport .
According to the European Monitoring Centre for Drugs and Drug Addiction ( EMCDDA ) , no general population survey on illicit drug use has been carried out in Croatia .
However , the latest data on drug-related deaths from 2008 indicate that 87 cases were registered .
There has been a steady increase in the quantities of drugs seized .
Training of police officers and provision of the necessary equipment have continued .
However , the results from investigations and the prosecution of drug-related crime need to be considerably improved .
Croatia remains one of the main trafficking routes for drugs to the EU .
The participation of the Republic of Croatia in the activities of the EMCDDA becomes , in these circumstances , a positive development for the whole Union .
This means that Croatia 's involvement in the EMCDDA 's work programme requires a link to the European Information Network on Drugs and Drug Addiction and an exchange of data with the EMCDDA .
Firstly , I would like to congratulate the European Monitoring Centre for Drugs and Drug Addiction ( EMCDDA ) on the important work that it has been carrying out to reduce the quantity of drugs and of related phenomena in Europe .
I agree with the participation of Croatia in the EMCDDA 's activities , given the fact that the country has become part of a transit route through which illicit drugs are smuggled , due to its strategic location , and I believe that the adoption of the European programme will lead to the improvement of health care and social peace , at both European and international level .
The European Monitoring Centre for Drugs and Drug Addiction ( EMCDDA ) plays a vital role in collecting data about drugs and drug addiction , adding to the store of objective , reliable and comparable data at European level , which provides a basis for analysing demand for drugs and ways of reducing it , as well as phenomena associated with the drug market in general .
Any third countries sharing the interests of the Union and its Member States regarding the EMCDDA 's objectives and work can participate in that work .
Croatia applied in 2005 , and the negotiations were successfully concluded in 2009 .
It is important that this agreement be adopted , as Croatia is one of the main transit routes through which illicit drugs are smuggled into the EU , so it is vital that this country be involved in the EMCDDA 's work as soon as possible , particularly bearing in mind that Croatia 's accession to the EU is envisaged for the end of 2012 or beginning of 2013 .
Croatia will be linked to the European Information Network on Drugs and Drug Addiction ( REITOX ) and will share data with the EMCDDA , subject to the data protection requirements of the Union and national law .
The phenomenon of drug addiction , particularly of the drug market , is a global threat and a terrible obstacle which is difficult to fight due to its constant relocations and changes .
The nature of the work by the European Monitoring Centre for Drugs and Drug Addiction ( EMCDDA ) is very important in this area , as it allows the various Member States to create an international knowledge and information base .
Information is crucial for analysing and creating strategies to reduce and combat the existence of drug markets and drug addiction .
Croatia has been expressing its wish to work with the EU on this crucial issue since 2005 , and it is now time for this to happen , through its inclusion in the work of the EMCDDA , which is based in Lisbon .
The proposal set out in the report regarding Croatia 's compliance with its obligations to the EMCDDA and the EU is very positive .
I am voting in favour of this report as I believe that this link between Croatia and the EU will contribute not only to a more effective fight against the phenomenon of drugs and drug addiction , but also to the creation of greater solidarity between the EU and Croatia , which is an accession candidate , and will - at least , I hope so - shortly become a fully fledged Member State .
The main task of the European Monitoring Centre for Drugs and Drug Addiction ( EMCDDA ) is to collect data on drugs and drug addiction in order to prepare and publish objective , reliable and comparable information at European level .
The EMCDDA is , in practice , open to the participation of any third country that shares the interests of the EU .
Croatia has asked to participate in it since 2005 . It will now also be part of the European Information Network on Drugs and Drug Addiction .
As I see it , this report also illustrates the need for better information exchange between Member States and European agencies and , above all , for Croatia 's potential accession to be prepared in a calmer manner than the ' major ' enlargement of 2004 and 2007 , when the countries of Central and Eastern Europe joined the EU .
I voted in favour of the report on the participation of Croatia in the work of the European Monitoring Centre for Drugs and Drug Addiction ( EMCDDA ) as I believe that this is a positive step , given that Croatia is expected to accede to the EU shortly , bur mainly because the consumption and trafficking of illicit drugs are global phenomena with severe socio-economic and health repercussions .
The European Monitoring Centre for Drugs and Drug Addiction ( EMCDDA ) aims to collect data on drugs and drug addiction , so as to analyse changes in drug consumption among the population and to study the promotion of policies and actions aimed at reducing consumption .
In view of the fact that the EMCDDA is open to participation by third countries and that Croatia has been seeking to participate since 2005 , and considering that the country is a transit route through which illicit drugs are smuggled on the way from the production countries to consumer countries , and that significant seizures , particularly of cocaine , are made in this country , I believe that Croatia 's participation in the EMCDDA is an important step .
I am therefore voting in favour of the decision on the conclusion , on behalf of the EU , of an agreement between the EU and the Republic of Croatia for this purpose .
This recommendation , drafted by Mrs Serracchiani and based on the proposal for a Council Decision on the conclusion of an agreement between the EU and the Republic of Croatia , concerns the interest that Croatia has shown in forging a link with the European Monitoring Centre for Drugs and Drug Addiction ( EMCDDA ) .
Given that Croatia is one of the main routes for trafficking drugs to the EU , where significant seizures of illicit hallucinogenic products - including cannabis , heroin , cocaine , ecstasy and amphetamines - have been made ; that the Croatian Government has adopted a National Programme for Prevention of Drugs amongst Youth ; that the country has sought accession to the EU ; and that its integration is expected to take place in 2013 , I support the conclusion of the agreement between the EU and the Republic of Croatia , so that the latter can forge links with the Lisbon-based EMCDDA .
The changes to the global situation regarding the production , trafficking and consumption of illicit drugs is worrying .
The 2009 report by the European Monitoring Centre for Drugs and Drug Addiction ( EMCDDA ) confirmed that the situation has deteriorated in relation to drugs such as cocaine , heroin and new synthetic drugs , and it has seen persistently high levels of consumption and a spiralling upward trend in this regard .
Countless factors have a bearing on this growth , which is not unconnected to the deepening of the crisis of capitalism and its social effects in many countries .
This report proposes support for the agreement between the European Union and the Republic of Croatia on the latter 's participation in the work of the European Monitoring Centre for Drugs and Drug Addiction ( EMCDDA ) .
Regardless of the process of this country 's accession to the EU , its development and ultimate outcome , it is proposed that it will participate in the EMCDDA , given that it is making an effort in terms of investigating and prosecuting drug-related crime .
It is suggested , however , that these efforts should be significantly improved , given that Croatia continues to be one of the main routes for drug trafficking into the EU .
It is important that Croatia 's accession to the EMCDDA , which we support , could contribute to stepping up the fight against drug trafficking .
By adopting this report , Parliament has given its support to the agreement between the European Union and the Republic of Croatia on the latter 's participation in the work of the European Monitoring Centre for Drugs and Drug Addiction ( EMCDDA ) .
Although , as the rapporteur mentions , Croatia 's entry into the EU is envisaged for the second half of 2012 or early 2013 , its participation in the EMCDDA could be accepted given that this country is making an effort to investigate and prosecute drug-related crime .
However , these efforts must be significantly improved , given that Croatia continues to be one of the main routes for drug trafficking into the EU .
We are aware that the development of the global situation regarding the production , trafficking and consumption of illicit drugs is worrying .
According to data given in the 2009 report by the EMCDDA , it was shown that the situation has deteriorated , especially in relation to drugs such as cocaine and heroin , and to new synthetic drugs , and it has seen persistently high levels of consumption and a spiralling upward trend in this regard .
We hope that this decision will contribute to stepping up the fight against drug trafficking .
Croatia straddles the transit route through which drugs are illegally smuggled from producer countries to consumer countries .
Significant and large-scale cocaine seizures in Croatia are mostly connected with sea transport .
The use and smuggling of illegal drugs are global phenomena which post a threat to health and social stability .
I therefore welcome the participation of Croatia in the work of the European Monitoring Centre for Drugs and Drug Addiction , mainly for the purposes of education in this area and preventing the use of drugs and other narcotic substances .
Since Croatia will be an important partner for the European Union 's future relations with the countries of former Yugoslavia , and since it is a key transit area for drug smuggling , we welcome this candidate country 's participation in the European Monitoring Centre for Drugs and Drug Addiction .
It is essential for us to be able to meet and work with Croatian experts in the field in order to fight this sad problem , which is why I am in favour of the proposal .
As shadow rapporteur on this dossier , I voted resolutely in favour of this resolution and this agreement to allow Croatia to participate in the work of the European Monitoring Centre for Drugs and Drug Addiction , as well as in the European Information Network on Drugs and Drug Addiction ( REITOX ) .
I therefore fully support Croatia 's participation so that it can play an active part in combating this problem , the scale and devastating effects of which are dangerously on the increase in Europe .
According to statistics compiled by the Centre , 75 million Europeans have already tried cannabis and 14 million Europeans have already tried cocaine at least once .
It should also be pointed out that Croatia remains one of the main trafficking routes for drugs to the EU .
This agreement will therefore not only make it possible to obtain factual and objective information from Croatia concerning drugs and drug addiction and their consequences , but will also enable Croatia , through these exchanges of information and best practices , to understand the nature of this phenomenon and better respond to it .
I endorsed this report because , as we know , the main task of the European Monitoring Centre for Drugs and Drug Addiction is to collect data on drugs and drug addiction in order to prepare and publish objective , reliable and comparable information at European level .
The information is intended to provide a basis for analysing the demand for drugs and ways of reducing it , as well as phenomena associated with the drug market in general .
It is stipulated that the European Monitoring Centre for Drugs and Drug Addiction ( EMCDDA ) shall be open to the participation of any third country that shares the interests of the Union and its Member States in its objectives and work .
In 2005 , the Republic of Croatia asked to participate in the activities of the EMCDDA .
The Republic of Croatia will take part in the Centre 's work programme , will satisfy the obligations of the regulation , will be linked to the European Information Network on Drugs and Drug Addiction ( REITOX ) and will share data with the EMCDDA , subject to the data protection requirements of the Union and national laws .
The Republic of Croatia will also contribute financially to the Union to cover the cost of its participation and will also participate in the Management Board of the Centre without the right to vote until such time as it becomes a member of the European Union .
For its part , the EMCDDA will treat the Republic of Croatia as an existing Member State , through equal treatment in terms of linkage to the European Information Network on Drugs and Drug Addiction ( REITOX ) and staffing provisions .
Drug addiction is a social problem , both for developed countries and for those which are poorly developed .
Croatia , just like other countries , is having to contend with drug addiction , and it has very tough legislation in this area .
Preventative work is being done chiefly in schools , because that social group is the most vulnerable to drug dependence .
Croatia , as a candidate country for EU membership , has a duty to adapt its legal system to the system which is in force in the countries of the Union .
I think that Croatia 's participation in the work of the European Monitoring Centre for Drugs and Drug Addiction is extremely important , particularly because Croatia is a transit route .
Illicit substances are smuggled through Croatia from the production countries to consumer countries .
Participation in the work of the European Monitoring Centre for Drugs and Drug Addiction will help introduce the European Union 's extremely important anti-drugs policy to Croatia .
With my vote today , I supported the recommendation for the participation of the Republic of Croatia in the work of the European Monitoring Centre for Drugs and Drug Addiction .
The Republic of Croatia will , in fact , take part in the Centre 's European work programme on drugs and drug addiction .
The Centre 's main task is to collect data on drugs and drug addiction in order to prepare and publish objective , reliable and comparable information at European level .
The subject is clearly very important , both for its marked impact on health protection and for the fight against the criminal activities associated with the drug market .
Croatia is , in fact , on one of the sea transit routes commonly used by organised crime to bring illegal drugs from producing countries to consuming countries .
To us , that fact is even more worrying when we realise that Croatia will be the next candidate country to become a Member State of the European Union .
I therefore hope that Croatia 's participation in the work programme proves to be of the greatest benefit .
This draft Council decision on the conclusion of the Agreement between the European Union and the Republic of Croatia on the participation of the Republic of Croatia in the work of the European Monitoring Centre for Drugs and Drug Addiction ( EMCDDA ) is important as Croatia is one of the main entry points for drugs in Europe .
With a view to tackling drug trafficking effectively , which not only poses a threat to Croatia but to the European Union as well , it is important that Croatia is also linked to the European Information Network on Drugs and Drug Addiction ( REITOX ) and actively and directly involved in exchanging data with the EMCDDA .
This exchange of data helps create a database for analysing the demand for drugs and secondary drug-trafficking activities , which is vital for publishing proper , objective information that can be compared at a European level .
in writing . - I welcome this agreement and the participation of the Republic of Croatia in the activities of the European Monitoring Centre for Drugs and Drug Addiction .
Illicit drug use and trafficking are worldwide phenomena that threaten health and social stability .
Statistics show that around one in three young Europeans has tried an illicit drug and at least one of our citizens dies every hour from a drug overdose .
At a European level , it is also important to have factual and objective information from Croatia concerning drugs and drug addiction and their consequences , and , at the same time , the Republic of Croatia can get information on best practices to understand the nature of its drug problems and better respond to them .
The problem of drugs , which we are discussing now , is , to a large extent , also a historical problem .
The illegal drugs trade goes beyond , and always has gone beyond , the borders of any one country .
In my opinion , the establishment of high quality international cooperation in the fight against the illegal drugs trade , not only at the European level but especially at the global level , would be one way to improve the effectiveness of the fight against this kind of trade .
As a doctor , I would also like to say that drug abuse can have extremely grave and irreversible consequences for human health .
I therefore support effective international cooperation in the fight against the illegal trade in drugs or their precursors and , at the same time , I would like to mention the need for prevention .
Illicit drug use and trafficking are worldwide problems that threaten health and social stability .
The Republic of Croatia is a transit route through which illicit drugs are smuggled on the way from the production countries to consumer countries .
Moreover , in the last 10 years , the number of drug-related deaths has been gradually increasing .
Despite the continuing training of police officers and the provision of the necessary equipment , the results of investigations and prosecutions of drug-related crime need to be considerably enhanced .
Croatia continues to be located on one of the main trafficking routes for drugs into the EU .
We are certainly in favour of the government 's adoption of a national programme for preventing drug use among young people , with the aim of updating the existing programmes .
We therefore approve of the participation of the Republic of Croatia in the work of the European Monitoring Centre for Drugs and Drug Addiction .
Since this is a candidate country that will soon be joining the European Union , it is particularly important for it to provide the Member States with exhaustive , objective information about drug trafficking and drug addiction and their economic and social consequences .
The scourge of drugs continues to cause concern throughout the EU .
The more countries help to combat it , the greater the chance of success .
Croatia 's participation in the work of the European Monitoring Centre for Drugs and Drug Addiction is therefore welcome .
Croatia does , however , need to step up the fight against drug trafficking on its territory as this continues to be one of the main routes for drug trafficking into the EU .
The main task of the European Monitoring Centre for Drugs and Drug Addiction ( EMCDDA ) is to collect data on drugs and drug addiction in order to prepare and publish objective , reliable and comparable information at European level .
The Republic of Croatia will accordingly take part in the Centre 's work programme , be linked to the European Information Network on Drugs and Drug Addiction ( REITOX ) and share data with the EMCDDA .
The Republic of Croatia is a transit route for drugs arriving from production countries and remains one of the main trafficking routes for drugs to the EU .
Nevertheless , in 2010 , it adopted a programme for implementation of the Action Plan on Combating Drugs Abuse , as well as a National Programme for Prevention of Drugs amongst Youth .
Furthermore , training of police officers and provision of the necessary equipment have continued .
By participating in the EMCDDA and exchanging information , Croatia will be able to understand the problem and better respond to it .
Its participation is also an encouraging sign with regard to its forthcoming accession to the European Union .
in writing . - As is known , the Centre is working basically with policy makers at the level of the Community and the Member States , which thus help to develop a strategy for combating drugs and providing information to the general public .
At the present time , attention is mainly paid to implementation of the EU Action Plan for 2009-2012 , which is aimed at strengthening European cooperation in the struggle against the unacceptable consequences of drug addiction .
I would like to see the Centre working not only on the consequences but also on the causes of drug addiction , thus solving the problem at an early stage .
I voted in favour .
I believe that we must take steps , not just within the European Union , but beyond its borders , to reduce the use of and demand for drugs , using strict preventative measures to combat phenomena associated with the drug market .
Consequently , it is very important to obtain accurate data and information on drugs and drug addiction , because these are global phenomena , posing a threat to the health , security and social well-being of us all .
I support Croatia 's participation in the activities of the European Monitoring Centre for Drugs and Drug Addiction .
Croatia aims to become a full member of the European Union .
It should be noted that Croatia is a transit route through which large quantities of drugs are smuggled to other countries .
I am pleased that Croatia is making significant efforts to combat the trafficking , use of and trade in illegal drugs .
However , Croatia remains one of the main routes for trafficking drugs to the EU .
It is therefore crucial to quickly obtain factual and objective information on drugs , drug addiction and the consequences of these .
Furthermore , this will create an ideal framework for Croatia to obtain information on other EU Member States ' best practices in addressing problems related to drugs and drug addiction .
I welcome Croatia 's participation in the work of the European Monitoring Centre for Drugs and Drug Addiction ( EMCDDA ) .
The main task of the EMCDDA is to collect data on drugs and drug addiction , and to prepare and publish objective , reliable and comparable information at European level .
This information provides a basis for analysing demand for drugs and ways of reducing it , as well as phenomena associated with the drug market in general .
Indeed , Croatia , like certain other European countries , is a transit route through which illicit drugs are smuggled on the way from production countries to consumer countries .
The significant and large-scale cocaine seizures in Croatia are mostly connected with sea transport .
With the adoption of this report , Croatia will start participating in the EMCDDA 's work programme and sharing data with the EMCDDA , subject to the data protection requirements of the Union and national law .
The agreement sets out financial contributions to the Union to cover the cost of its participation .
The EMCDDA is the European Monitoring Centre for Drugs and Drug Addiction , which was established in 1993 with the main task of collecting data on drugs and drug addiction , in order to prepare and publish objective , reliable and comparable information at European level .
The information supplied by the Centre provides a basis for analysing the demand for drugs entering the EU and all the phenomena associated with the drug market , so as to be able to work out how best to combat these problems .
The Centre is open to the participation of any third country that shares the interests of the Union and its Member States in its objectives and work .
Croatia asked to participate in the Centre 's activities in 2005 and , in 2006 , the Council authorised the Commission to open negotiations with the Republic of Croatia .
These were positively concluded in July 2009 with the initialling of the agreement .
The agreement was subsequently revised in December 2009 in light of the Treaty of Lisbon .
It should be pointed out that Croatia is already part of Reitox , the European Information Network on Drugs and Drug Addiction .
For the reasons given above , and in order to further improve cooperation with non-EU countries , I have voted in favour .
Croatia asked to join the European Monitoring Centre for Drugs and Drug Addiction in 2005 .
Since this country is on one of the main drug smuggling routes into the European Union , I consider it important to have factual , objective information from Croatia on these problems .
I therefore find the rapporteur 's position entirely acceptable and I support this recommendation .
The Republic of Croatia has requested that it be allowed to participate in the European Monitoring Centre for Drugs and Drug Addiction ( EMCDDA ) , created in 1993 and based in Lisbon .
Indeed , the country is particularly interested in the fight against drug trafficking : as well as the problems it is experiencing with its domestic policy , it is a route of entry for smuggling these products into the EU .
In its fight against drug addiction and trafficking , Croatia has already implemented measures to address this at a national level , both in terms of preventing consumption and in terms of supporting the investigation of drug-related crime .
There is , therefore , mutual interest in Croatia 's accession to the EMCDDA .
However , insofar as it is not yet a Member State , it is necessary to define its status - its rights of participation and what responsibilities it should have - in the context of the EMCDDA .
in writing . - We supported the mandate of EMCDDA in 2006 .
As regards the specific situation in Croatia , it is a transit route through which illicit drugs are smuggled on their way from the producer countries to consumer countries .
Significant and large-scale cocaine seizures in Croatia are mostly connected with sea transport .
In the last 10 years , the number of deaths has gradually increased in Croatia .
A majority ( 77.1 % ) of the cases of deaths were associated with opiates .
In 2008 , the total number of reported drug-related offences was 7 168 .
In 2009 , a total of 7 934 persons were treated by the national drug addiction institutes .
The number of seizures decreased for all drugs except heroin when compared to the previous year and , in general , progress has been made in combating drug abuse .
Generally Croatia 's anti-drug legislation is similar to that of the EU Member States .
However , the rapporteur 's position points out that , from 2010 on , every therapeutic community has to provide the Office for Drugs with data on treated patients .
It would be good to obtain more information on the scope of this obligation .
Nevertheless , this is an issue for domestic legislation , not the Agreement .
I voted in favour of this recommendation because I consider the protection of European citizens ' health and social stability to be a priority that should be borne in mind in the fight against illicit drug use and trafficking .
Croatia is situated on one of the main trafficking routes for drugs into the EU .
Its participation in the work programme of the European Monitoring Centre for Drugs and Drug Addiction will provide the European Union with factual information on drug trafficking and use in Croatia , and will enable Croatia to understand the scale of its drug-related problems and adopt best practice to deal with them .
Moreover , a sound legal basis for its participation can be found in Article 21 of Regulation ( EC ) No 1920 / 2006 establishing the Centre , which opens the Centre 's doors to third countries that share its aims and interests .
in writing . - I welcome this report , which integrates Croatia into the fight against drugs in the EU .
The aim of the European Monitoring Centre for Drugs and Drug Addiction is to collect data on the drug problem ( sale , market , use ) and to disseminate it in the Member States so that they can analyse and better respond to the problem .
I therefore fully support Croatia 's participation in the work of the Centre so that it can play an active part in combating this problem , the scale and devastating effects of which are dangerously on the increase in Europe .
The Agreement between the European Union and the Republic of Croatia represents an efficient means for the EU and Croatia to reduce and impede the trade in , and consumption of , drugs on the basis of the sharing of data and experience in relation to drugs and their abuse , and in light of the fact that one EU citizen dies of an overdose every hour .
Account needs to be taken of the fact that Croatia will accede to the European Union in 2012 or 2013 and that , as a result of its geographical location , it represents a good trans-shipment point for drug dealers .
I voted for Mrs Auconie 's report .
I welcome this proposal to extend the scope of application to the cross-border transport of euro cash by road .
The territory of Member States which are about to introduce the single currency must be included in the cash transport system .
It ought to be possible , within the euro area , to sign a contract with the cash-in-transit company offering the best price , even if it is located in another Member State .
This will facilitate access to the most efficient channels for collecting and delivering cash and providing cash services .
In future , an ever increasing number of cash-in-transit operators will be required for the euro in the run-up to the changeover to this currency .
Furthermore , a large number of Member States in the euro area have signed or may wish to sign agreements for the production of banknotes and coins abroad .
I support the report on the draft Council Regulation concerning the extension of the scope of the Regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council on the professional cross-border transport of euro cash by road between euro area Member States .
This is because it is a good idea to also include in the scope of the proposal for a regulation on the cross-border transport of euro cash by road between euro area Member States the territory of Member States which are about to introduce the euro , since there is normally an increased need for euro cash transportation in the run-up to the changeover .
I agree with extending the scope of the proposal for a regulation on the professional cross-border transport of euro cash by road between euro area Member States to the territory of Member States that are about to introduce the euro .
The purpose of the present proposal is to extend the scope of the proposal for a regulation on the cross-border transportation of euro cash by road between euro area Member States ( the main proposal ) to the territory of Member States that are about to introduce the euro , since there is normally an increased need for euro cash transportation in the run-up to the changeover .
I welcome this extension of the scope ( although it should be noted that the legal basis here is Article 352 TFEU , which means that Parliament merely has the power of consent ) .
I voted in favour of this recommendation as I believe that the scope of this regulation should be able to be extended to the territory of any Member State about to join the euro .
This decision will contribute to a more harmonious transition to the euro , whilst adequately responding to the increased need for cross-border transportation of euro cash in the run-up to the changeover .
I agree with the rapporteur in the follow-up to her initial report on extending the regulation on the professional cross-border transport of euro cash to the territory of Member States that are about to introduce the euro .
The aim of this provision is to simplify regulatory restrictions in order to make it possible for euro notes and coins to circulate more easily between Member States and to ensure a high level of professionalism and security within the euro area .
It is right to expand the scope of this regulation , since there is a greater need to transport euro currency in the period preceding the introduction of the euro in the Member States of the euro area .
in writing . - I voted for this report , the purpose of which is to extend the scope of the proposal for a regulation on the cross-border transportation of euro cash by road between euro area Member States ( the main proposal ) to the territory of Member States that are about to introduce the euro , since there is normally an increased need for euro cash transportation in the run-up to the changeover .
I believe that it is appropriate to widen the scope of application of the regulation on the cross-border transportation of euro cash by road between euro area Member States , and to apply its provisions on the territory of Member States that are preparing to introduce the euro .
It should be noted that in countries that are preparing to change currency , a significant need for euro cash transportation services is emerging .
Consequently , we need to improve the quality of transportation services , creating favourable conditions for cash-in-transit companies to provide services quickly and efficiently .
Furthermore , given the nature of the goods transported and their value , it is very important for the cash to reach the end recipient safely .
Euro bank notes and coins are genuinely a pan-European means of payment , as the euro area currently consists of 16 Member States .
Since national laws may be incompatible between countries , it is usually very difficult for professional cash transport companies to move euro cash between euro area Member States , which means that such transport is currently very limited .
As a result , the demand for cross-border transport of euro cash by road has risen markedly .
This new proposal for a regulation seeks to extend the scope of the regulation on cross-border transport of euro cash by road between euro area Member States to the territory of Member States that are about to introduce the euro .
The principal proposal is to extend the scope of the regulation on cross-border transport between euro area Member States , not forgetting that there is an increased need for euro cash transport in the run-up to the changeover to the euro as the national currency of new Member States .
For these reasons , and to ensure that this issue is clearly regulated , I have voted in favour of the regulation in question .
I voted in favour of this recommendation because I believe the scope of the regulation on the professional cross-border transport of euro cash by road between Member States should be extended to the territory of countries that are about to introduce the single currency .
In fact , such states normally have an increased need for euro cash in the run-up to the introduction of the single currency in their territories , to enable them to quickly and completely engage in EU trade and thereby participate in it to the full .
in writing . - I welcome this report , which has provisions to allow a greater volume of euro cash to travel to countries which are due to adopt the euro to cope with demand .
I supported this report because it improves the safety and training of professionals who transport euro cash .
I voted in favour of the draft Council Regulation concerning the extension of the scope of the regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council on the professional cross-border transport of euro cash between euro area Member States .
I voted in favour of it because I consider that extending the scope of the regulation is necessary and will resolve problems relating to the safety of the personnel responsible for transportation .
I am voting in favour of the report in question , bearing in mind that satellite navigation systems should ensure interoperability between the various systems .
For its part , the Commission should ensure adequate levels of funding .
I should also note that , of the 15 actions included in the Commission 's action plan , nine should have an immediate application .
I voted in favour of the report by our fellow Member , Mrs Ţicău , on transport applications of global navigation satellite systems .
Indeed , I am in favour of the application of GNSS functions to different modes of transport and of the proper implementation of research and funding in this area .
I voted in favour of this report .
On 14 June 2010 , the Commission published its Action Plan on Global Navigation Satellite Systems ( GNSS ) , which included 24 specific recommendations for action .
The action plan was prepared by taking into account the general deployment of global satellite navigation systems and , specifically , the development and use of EGNOS ( European Geostationary Navigation Overlay Service ) .
The EU launched the EGNOS project ( and Galileo ) to provide signals guaranteed for civilian use and to ensure that European industry at all levels has an opportunity to compete in this growing strategic market .
Europe 's current market share of 25 % is below expectations .
EGNOS will offer more possibilities ( EGNOS is ten times more accurate than GPS ) when Galileo becomes operational in 2013 .
The Commission is best placed to coordinate the implementation of the action plan to avoid duplication at Member State level and to ensure overall progress in various EU policy fields covered by GNSS applications .
In view of the major economic benefits , which EGNOS will have on the broader European economy if fully developed and deployed , the Commission should set out clear priorities in this area , including the operation of EGNOS throughout the whole of the EU and ensuring adequate investment in related research and technological development .
The dynamic development of satellite navigation systems in recent years is the result of both technological progress and market needs .
These systems are used everywhere , today , in every form of transport .
The continued expansion of this sector means that the value of European systems is projected to reach a level of EUR 230 billion by 2025 .
The EU 's EGNOS and Galileo projects can contribute to competitiveness in every area of this sector of services , because they are markedly better and more accurate than the GPS system while also being compatible with it .
Unfortunately , the countries in the east and south of the Union are still not covered by the EGNOS system .
Extending its range would , therefore , appear to be essential in the context of its further development .
Something else which has not been made clear is how the costs of maintaining the Galileo system will be financed .
They are estimated at around EUR 800 million per year .
In view of the above , I have abstained from voting on the report .
in writing . - ( BG ) I support the report on transport applications of global navigation satellite systems - short- and medium-term EU policy , because the navigation systems market is huge .
The proposal will help avoid duplication at Member State level and ensure overall progress in the multiplicity of EU policy fields in this sector .
On the whole , the European navigation system ( 10 times more accurate than GPS ) will make an important contribution to safety and environmental objectives in road transport and to freer traffic flow through providing the opportunity for road tolling .
I have taken a prudent approach and decided to abstain on Mrs Ţicău 's report .
Although an action plan on global navigation satellite systems might be considered strategic , to provide signals guaranteed for civilian use and to ensure that European industry at all levels has an opportunity to compete in its growing market share , there are many key points that have not been addressed .
Among these are the possible data protection risks and especially the uncertainty about how the annual maintenance cost of Galileo , which is estimated at around EUR 800 million , will be financed .
The lack of clarity over the financial sustainability of a project that is so important for Europe 's economy , and yet also so ambitious , demands a cautious , objective approach .
The aim of the European Parliament resolution of 7 June 2011 is to encourage the European Commission to take targeted action to promote the development of global navigation satellite systems .
Europe 's GNSS ( Global Navigation Satellite System ) and Galileo projects are in direct competition with the United States ' GPS .
These projects will make everyday life easier from now on .
They represent added value not only for industry but also for transport in Europe , which is why I fully support them .
They will have many knock-on effects : for civil aviation , air traffic control systems will be made safer ; and for road traffic , this system will facilitate fee collection and improve safety via satellite tracking of emergency calls and monitoring of road transport .
All these areas will be improved by the creation of this European service .
I voted for this resolution in order to put pressure on the European and national authorities and to prevent a delay that deprives Europe every day of infinite possibilities .
The Action Plan on Global Navigation Satellite System ( GNSS ) Applications outlines the steps that are essential to the GNSS passing a turning point and guaranteeing project success .
It is important that the plan does not founder in an excessive number of initiatives , and get bogged down in mere consultations , and that it really is implemented by 2013 .
The European Geostationary Navigation Overlay Service ( EGNOS ) system must cover the entire European Union , and should be extended to northern , eastern and south-eastern Europe .
In order for it to be fully effective for transport purposes , it must include not only the entire Union , but also our closest neighbours .
In the area of civil aviation , the development of the system and the use of the EGNOS application for landing manoeuvres should be supported .
It is a strategic precondition for the genuine establishment of a Single European Sky .
There is also considerable potential for the exploitation of EGNOS and GNSS in the areas of safety , the environment , and the smooth operation of road transport , as they can be used for collecting tolls .
I am voting for the policy on the transport applications of global navigation satellite systems , which I believe will contribute to better management of transport and logistics , as well as surveillance systems .
Given the high value of the global market in this sector , which will continue to grow over the coming years , I would also like to highlight the importance of creating the conditions for European industry to be competitive .
According to current estimates , global navigation satellite systems are expected to earn the European economy between EUR 55 and 63 billion over the next 20 years .
These applications , which are largely based on the US GPS system at present , account for around 6 % of the EU 's total GDP .
In the light of this , I voted in favour of Mrs Ţicău 's own-initiative report , which calls on the Commission to provide adequate funding for the development of applications based on the European global navigation satellite system , EGNOS and Galileo .
SME access to this funding should be particularly encouraged in order to stimulate innovation on the basis of these European systems .
I voted in favour of this report as I believe that the application of the proposed Action Plan on the Global Navigation Satellite System ( GNSS ) will contribute to the establishment of a transport network that is more efficient through safer , more environmentally friendly and more economical modes of transport .
Global navigation systems are part of everyday life in the transport sector , and they will have growing importance in a world that increasingly functions as part of a network , and where trade and rapid communication are essential .
The commercial advantages and value of such systems are obvious , and there is understandable European interest in having as many of these solutions as possible , and in these operating without depending on third parties .
The action plan tabled by the Commission makes valid proposals for the future of the EU approach to these issues , and enables the topic to be raised in a more solid and consistent way .
The way these systems are funded requires particularly strict handling in order to avoid waste , and an imaginative approach is also needed in order to garner support and partners .
I hope that the Union will still be able to equip itself with independent global navigation systems , and will exploit its full potential , in order to promote the strengthening of the economy , increased employment and transport safety .
This report , drafted by Mrs Ţicău , concerns transport applications of navigation satellite systems for the EU , following the publication of the Commission 's Action Plan on Global Navigation Satellite System ( GNSS ) Applications on 14 June 2010 .
This sector has experienced exponential growth since 2000 , which saw the first provision of Global Positioning System ( GPS ) services , going from EUR 124 billion in 2008 to an estimated global market value in the region of EUR 230 billion in 2025 .
The EU could not afford to fall behind in this satellite navigation technology , so it developed its European Geostationary Navigation Overlay Service ( EGNOS ) , the forerunner of the Galileo system , which it is hoped should be operational in 2013 and will be ten times more accurate than GPS .
It is expected that accuracy to 45 centimetres will be possible in the near future .
I would congratulate the rapporteur , and I welcome the adoption of this report , which I voted for , as it will allow the EU to increase its market share and enhance Europe 's competitiveness in a strategic and growing market .
Global navigation satellite systems ( GNSS ) can have important and extremely useful applications for all modes of transport .
Among other aspects , they can make them safer , more environmentally friendly and more economical .
GNSS can also play a vital role in supporting and promoting the use of so-called intelligent transport systems .
The rapporteur addresses some of these aspects .
However , like other technologies , the practical results of GNSS applications are inseparable from the economic and social context in which they occur , and from the ends and objectives they serve .
This is the case in general , and in this sector in particular .
As such , it is not surprising that it is proposed that this system should also help establish the Single European Sky , for instance ; we would like to distance ourselves from this aspect of the report .
We agree with a GNSS that can support the development , modernisation and diversification of public services , especially in the area of transport .
The GNSS cannot fail to be analysed across all of the many dimensions in which it may be applied .
In view of this , we would question the limits of the potential use of these programmes in the context of assumed competition between the EU and the United States with regard to the functionality and efficiency of these systems .
Global navigation satellite systems ( GNSS ) can have important and extremely useful applications for all modes of transport .
Among other aspects , they can make them safer , more environmentally friendly and more economical .
These systems can also play a vital role in supporting and promoting the use of so-called intelligent transport systems .
However , like other technologies , the practical results of the applications are inseparable from the economic and social context in which they occur , and from the ends and objectives they serve .
As such , it is not surprising that it is proposed that this system should also help establish the Single European Sky , for instance ; we would like to distance ourselves from this aspect of the report .
We agree with a global navigation satellite system that can support the development , modernisation and diversification of public services , especially in the area of transport .
However , the system cannot fail to be analysed across all of the many dimensions in which it may be applied .
In view of this , we would question the limits of the potential use of these programmes in a context of assumed competition between the EU and the United States with regard to the functionality and efficiency of these systems .
In June 2010 , the Commission published the Action Plan on Global Navigation Satellite System ( GNSS ) Applications , which includes 24 specific recommendations .
The action plan was drawn up in a period when the global navigation satellite systems were being implemented , specifically , the European Geostationary Navigation Overlay Service ( EGNOS ) system .
The satellite navigation systems should ensure cooperation between the various systems , and should also be usable in passenger and freight transport .
In my opinion , the Commission should take the steps necessary for coordinating implementation of the action plan and securing progress in EU policy areas related to GNSS applications .
Although we agree with some aspects of Mrs Ţicău 's proposal , we are unsure about many others .
These include identifying how the annual maintenance cost of Galileo , which is estimated at EUR 800 million , will be financed once it has become operational ; the possible data protection risks associated with using global navigation satellite system applications and services ; and the pressing need to find additional funding to ensure that operations involving the European Geostationary Navigation Overlay Service ( EGNOS ) and Galileo are soon successful .
For these reasons , the proposal should not be thrown out but I cannot give it my full support .
The adoption of this report is an important step forward as it lays the foundations for the general deployment of global satellite navigation systems and , specifically , the development of EGNOS , which should smooth the way for implementation of the Galileo system .
I also gave it my vote because it will provide an opportunity to take concrete measures that will facilitate the development of transport in Europe , have a major impact on safety and environmental matters and improve traffic flow conditions for road transport .
I endorsed this document because , on 14 June 2010 , the Commission published its Action Plan on Global Navigation Satellite System ( GNSS ) Applications , which included 24 specific recommendations for action .
The action plan was prepared by taking into account the general deployment of global satellite navigation systems and , specifically , the development and use of EGNOS ( European Geostationary Navigation Overlay Service ) .
EGNOS is the forerunner of the Galileo system .
GNSS are important for developing Intelligent Transport Systems ( ITSs ) , because ITSs can provide more efficient , cleaner and safer transport solutions , and proper implementation of a number of ITS services requires fully operational GNSS systems .
EGNOS and Galileo can make an important contribution to road traffic management and an awareness-raising campaign in that sector is required in order to increase the use of the opportunities it provides in relation to fee collection , eCall , online booking of safe parking sites for trucks , and real-time tracking to contribute to safer and more environmentally friendly road transport .
This motion for a European Parliament resolution is important as GNSS ( Global Navigation Satellite Systems ) can be applied to all modes of transport ( land , sea and air ) , making traffic operate more efficiently , supporting economic growth and reducing pollution .
At the same time , GNSS is part of the EU 2020 strategy 's key innovation objectives .
A larger amount of annual funding than is allocated at the moment needs to be provided so that this global navigation system is implemented in a suitable , uniform manner in all EU Member States .
This motion for a resolution proposes , amongst its suggestions , allocating funding for the research and development of new GNSS applications which can be applied in areas such as climate change , agriculture , civil defence , natural disaster warning systems and so on .
Last but not least , developing an EU-level GNSS system guarantees the EU 's independence from similar navigation systems outside the EU .
in writing . - I welcome the Action Plan on Global Navigation Satellite System ( GNSS ) Applications ( COM ( 2010 ) 308 ) , which aims to promote the development of downstream applications through certification , standardisation and coordination with the industry and other countries , as well as by disseminating information , raising awareness , implementing regulatory measures and increasing funding .
With the publication of the Action Plan on Global Navigation Satellite System ( GNSS ) Applications and the development and deployment of EGNOS ( European Geostationary Navigation Overlay Service ) , the European Union has sought to point out civilian uses and ensure that European industry at all levels has an opportunity to compete in this fast-growing strategic market .
We agree with the targeted action plan drawn up by the Commission , which includes 15 sectoral actions , nine of which have an immediate and important transport application , particularly as regards promoting EGNOS in third countries .
In fact , for this system to be fully effective from a transport perspective , its range has to go beyond the borders of Europe to include our near neighbours .
As a matter of priority , therefore , it should be extended to northern , eastern and south-eastern Europe .
In the area of civil aviation , we call on the Member States to prioritise EGNOS-based procedures and services with a view to creating a real Single European Sky .
It is also clear that EGNOS and GNSS generally can make an important contribution to safety and environmental protection .
To achieve these objectives , we will need adequate investment in the European research and development sector .
This is the time for the Commission to coordinate the implementation of the action plan so as to avoid duplication between Member States and to ensure overall progress in the many different EU application areas for applications of Global Navigation Satellite Systems ( GNSS ) .
The European Geostationary Navigation Overlay Service ( EGNOS ) should cover the entire European Union , and should be extended to the southern , eastern and south-eastern regions of Europe as a priority .
For the European Geostationary Navigation Overlay Service ( EGNOS ) to be fully effective from a transport perspective , its range has to be the whole of the Union , and indeed beyond , to cover our closest neighbours .
In the area of civil aviation , the Member States must promote the development and use of EGNOS-based landing procedures , and both these and EGNOS-based services must be certified as a matter of priority for civil aviation .
This is a strategic requirement for a real Single European Sky .
It is also clear that the EGNOS and GNSS systems can , in general , make an important contribution to road safety and environmental objectives , and to freer road traffic flow , due to their availability for use in road tolling .
We must find ways of funding this system .
Global Navigation Satellite Systems ( GNSS ) applications are a central and crucial business component in all transport-related sectors , and their effective functioning makes transport safer , more environmentally friendly and more cost-effective .
The European Union cannot continue to depend on systems initially designed for other uses by other countries .
Considering the high added value that the GNSS and Galileo projects generate for EU industrial policy , it is essential to ensure their success .
A targeted action plan is the best way of giving fresh impetus and contributing significantly to targets on safety and the environment as well as to those on traffic flow improvement for road transport .
Furthermore , satellite navigation systems must provide interoperability with different systems , including traditional systems .
Extending the coverage of EGNOS ( European Geostationary Navigation Overlay Service ) should be a priority .
This system must then be extended to the entire European continent as well as to Euro-Mediterranean Partnership countries and also to the Middle East and Africa .
Finally , the Commission should propose measures to ensure an adequate level of financing without diminishing the other funds allocated to transport policy .
in writing . - Satellite navigation systems should ensure interoperability between different systems and should also allow intermodal use in passenger and freight transport services .
Therefore , I voted in favour .
I voted in favour of this resolution on EU policy in the short and medium term on transport applications of Global Navigation Satellite Systems , above all because , across the entire EU , significant attention should be paid to the GNSS and Galileo projects in the transport sector .
The Commission has a special role to play here , establishing a regulatory mechanism that would eliminate various bureaucratic and other obstacles and would facilitate the smooth and effective implementation of these projects .
Furthermore , it is very important to ensure appropriate and sufficient funding for these projects , according to criteria of transparency and proportionality , with particular attention being paid to SMEs .
We must promote the use of EGNOS and Galileo in civil aviation and thus contribute to establishing the Single European Sky ATM Research programme and facilitating its implementation .
It is crucial for European satellite radio navigation programmes to be adapted to multi-modal services and applied throughout Europe , not only in certain countries , because the effective implementation of the programmes mentioned would improve freight transport efficiency and help to address many transport safety and environmental issues .
I voted in favour of the report by Mrs Ţicău because I think that new technologies such as satellite navigation systems , which are becoming increasingly widespread and benefit all of society , should be applied to the transport sector .
In the global system in which we live , the EU must adapt its policies to the needs of the various sectors and develop a global satellite navigation system that integrates perfectly with the well-known GPS system so as to provide immediate information with no margin for error .
With a booming market and an estimated turnover of more than EUR 200 billion over the next 10 years , satellite navigation needs adequate funding to support its development in practice .
On 14 June 2010 , the Commission published its Action Plan on Global Navigation Satellite System ( GNSS ) Applications , which included 24 specific recommendations for action .
This sector as a whole has experienced enormous expansion since the first provision of Global Positioning System ( GPS ) services from US satellite facilities in 2000 .
Indeed , the estimated global market value in 2008 was EUR 124 billion , projected to reach EUR 230 billion by 2025 .
Of this , 20 % is represented by intelligent transport systems ( ITS ) and 5 % by safety applications , including transport safety applications .
This project aims to provide signals guaranteed for civilian use and to ensure that European industry at all levels has an opportunity to compete in this growing strategic market .
Europe 's current market share of 25 % is below expectations .
EGNOS is GPS-compatible but will offer more possibilities when Galileo becomes operational in 2013 .
EGNOS is ten times more accurate than GPS at present .
These aspects have immediate and important implications for the transport sector , including Advanced Driver Assistance Systems , and I am therefore voting in favour .
The global satellite navigation systems sector has experienced strong growth since 2000 , when the systems were first used in the United States .
The estimated global market value in 2025 is EUR 230 billion , 20 % of which will come from intelligent transport systems and 5 % from safety applications .
In June 2010 , the Commission published the Action Plan on Global Navigation Satellite System ( GNSS ) Applications and , specifically , the European EGNOS system : this action plan also includes 24 specific recommendations for action .
If the EGNOS system is to be developed further , priority must be given to the measures proposed in the action plan and adequate investment and funding in research and development activities must be provided without fail .
Indeed , a lack of European funding for small and medium-sized enterprises to participate in this research project under the seventh and eighth framework programmes would make it less attractive to commercial operators .
In order to support the further development of the EGNOS system and to ensure that the system does not suffer from a lack of European funding , I voted in favour of this proposal .
in writing . - The Commission 's Action Plan on Global Navigation Satellite Systems shows there is huge demand in a market projected to be worth EUR 230 billion by 2025 .
However , Europe is failing to compete globally in this field and our current market share of 25 % is below what is expected .
We must ensure we take the necessary steps to ensure this industry achieves its full potential .
The European Geostationary Navigation Overlay Service ( EGNOS ) is ten times more accurate than GPS and it is predicted that accuracy to 45 centimetres can be achieved in the near future .
This system has obvious uses in the fields of air and sea transport and can also be used in road transport .
However , we must be mindful of encroaching too much on European citizens as there are obvious personal privacy issues with such technology .
Overall , I welcome ENGOS and GNSS as they can make an important contribution to safety and environmental objectives and I believe adequate investment in the related research and development will be essential .
But the funding gap must be closed in order to reap the benefits of these projects .
Following the Action Plan on Global Navigation Satellite System ( GNSS ) Applications , published by the Commission on 14 June 2010 with a view to increasing the European Geostationary Navigation Overlay Service ( EGNOS ) , efforts should be made to extend the navigation system to cover the entire EU .
Indeed , the expansion of this system can offer huge advantages for the economy and security .
To this end , however , major investment is needed in innovation and development .
This is the only way , firstly , that the system will achieve its full scope and , secondly , that it will reach the level of maturity that will ultimately enable a financial return .
This is an area , moreover , that has seen massive development .
For instance , it is estimated that in the near future , it will be possible to achieve geographic locations accurate to 45 centimetres .
For these reasons , I voted for this report .
Today , we voted during the plenary session of the European Parliament in Strasbourg on the report on transport applications of Global Navigation Satellite Systems .
In 2010 , the Commission published the Action Plan on Global Navigation Satellite System ( GNSS ) Applications .
The action plan outlines the solutions necessary to ensure the success of satellite navigation .
The general background to the action plan is the general deployment of global satellite navigation systems and , specifically , the development and deployment of EGNOS ( European Geostationary Navigation Overlay Service ) .
EGNOS is the forerunner of the Galileo system .
The EU has launched the EGNOS project ( and Galileo ) to provide signals guaranteed for civilian use and to ensure that European industry at all levels has an opportunity to compete in this growing strategic market .
I believe it is necessary , as Mrs Ţicău points out , to set aside additional funding for the Galileo programme and , hence , to create perhaps a Galileo reserve fund within the EU budget to cover any additional costs , taking care not to harm the other programmes .
in writing . - I voted in favour of this report .
On 14 June 2010 , the Commission published its Action Plan on Global Navigation Satellite Systems ( GNSS ) , which included 24 specific recommendations for action .
The background to the action plan is the general deployment of global satellite navigation systems and , specifically , the development and deployment of EGNOS ( European Geostationary Navigation Overlay Service ) , the forerunner of the Galileo system .
The sector as a whole has experienced enormous expansion since the first provision of GPS services from American satellite facilities in 2000 .
The estimated global market value in 2008 was EUR 124 billion , and it is projected to reach EUR 230 billion by 2025 .
Of this , 20 % is represented by Intelligent Transport Systems ( ITS ) and 5 % by safety applications , including transport safety applications .
The EU launched the EGNOS project ( and Galileo ) to provide signals guaranteed for civilian use and to ensure that European industry at all levels has an opportunity to compete in this growing strategic market .
Europe 's current market share of 25 % is below expectations .
EGNOS is GPS compatible but it will offer more possibilities when Galileo becomes operational in 2013 .
EGNOS is 10 times more accurate than GPS .
Like the rapporteur , I support the Commission 's Action Plan for the development of EGNOS and Galileo , which is based on nine horizontal measures with an immediate transport application .
The deployment of EGNOS to its maximum extent throughout Europe and beyond to our near neighbours will have a major beneficial impact on the broader European economy , as well as on safety and environmental objectives , and will encourage a freer traffic flow in road transport .
If we are to achieve these objectives , however , we need adequate funding for research and development , which has been scarce until now .
The EU is , in fact , the only trading block that does not provide direct funding to its GNSS programme .
The report on transport applications of global navigation satellite systems supports and highlights the role and importance of the Commission 's 2010-2013 action plan in this area and its impact on transport .
The nine measures in the action plan are immediately and essentially related to transport .
It envisages the use and development of global navigation satellite systems in all forms of transport .
Of course , this will play a very big role in road and air transport .
Two of the measures that are definitely worth highlighting are the facilitation of the creation of a Single European Sky and the creation of applications for intelligent transport systems .
In addition , the use of satellites will provide an opportunity to develop and use a great many different applications .
I sincerely hope that the development and putting into practice of the systems , applications and solutions specified in the report goes as planned , and that , already in the next few years , the various solutions will find an application , which will make companies ' and citizens ' lives easier and enhance safety at sea , in the air and on the roads .
in writing . - I welcome this report , which deals with developing and deploying European systems to exploit Galileo and other satellite systems and their applications in the transport domain .
Global navigation satellite systems ( GNSS ) currently have implications for all EU policies , and their development and application will have a catalytic effect on implementing the Europe 2020 strategy and on creating a strategic and competitive European sector .
Transport applications account for 20 % of all GNSS applications by volume , and 44 % by value .
This industry represents a growing global market in which Europe should take the lead and achieve its independence .
GNSS applications and services in the area of transport have various implications for security , for effectiveness , and for the economic and environmental costs of all modes of transport .
I also believe that it is important to note that in order for there to be fair development , the European Geostationary Navigation Overlay Service ( EGNOS ) programme should cover all of the Member States and enable interoperability and compatibility with third countries , so as to make this market competitive and dynamic .
Finally , I would stress the rapporteur 's idea that the new Multiannual Financial Framework ( MFF ) should ensure adequate levels of funding for GNSS research and development , as well as for its implementation .
Mechanisms should be created to help small and medium-sized enterprises ( SMEs ) gain access to this funding more easily , and to facilitate the development and marketing of GNSS applications .
I have voted in favour of this report .
Following the failure of Europe 's market share in the growing satellite navigation systems market to live up to expectations , in June last year , the Commission brought forward an action plan on global navigation satellite system ( GNSS ) applications .
The Commission sensibly chose a targeted action plan , the recommendations of which not only include the realisation of the Single European Sky - already a priority that the Union has confirmed many times - but in the sphere of road transport , too , GNSS is to make an important contribution to attaining our safety and environmental protection targets .
Taken as a whole , the action plan is designed to ensure that the European market , too , can compete in this sector , the worldwide market value of which is forecast to further grow to EUR 230 billion by 2025 .
I am convinced that actions to promote the use of EGNOS and Galileo in civil aviation are crucial for implementation of the Single European Sky ATM Research programme .
Unfortunately , as the rapporteur has emphasised in her document , introduction of the Galileo system continues to be beset by new problems .
I agree with the call to the Commission to ensure swift certification of EGNOS for civil aviation .
I have often stressed already that I am an enthusiast of the concept of the Single European Sky and the Single European Sky ATM Research programme .
Rapid and full realisation of the European air space is a very important strategic step towards real integration of the Union and strengthening the common market .
Without Galileo , we will not have SESAR , and without SESAR , we will not achieve Single European Sky 2 .
Let us remember that in this area in particular , we are dealing with a system of interconnected vessels - a weakness in one part will have a disastrous effect on the rest .
I am voting for the report in question as there needs to be a framework for assessing individual air agreements , although Parliament needs to monitor the negotiations closely , instead of being left behind and only deciding whether to accept or reject the final text .
The Treaty of Lisbon , which entered into force on 1 December 2009 , extended the circumstances in which Parliament 's consent was required for the conclusion of an international agreement .
Air agreements now fall within this category .
That is why I am in favour of the report by my fellow Member , Brian Simpson , on the implementation of a set of criteria for evaluating the content of these agreements .
I also think that there is a need to promote balanced market access and investment opportunities , as well as fair competition , particularly with regard to public subsidies and social and environmental standards .
Following the entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon , agreements covering a field to which the ordinary legislative procedure applies require Parliament 's consent .
I voted in favour of this report aimed at setting out some general principles regarding how air agreements should be evaluated , both in terms of substance and the procedures the European Parliament Committee on Transport and Tourism might adopt to ensure that it is well informed throughout the course of negotiations and has an opportunity to express its priorities well before being confronted with the yes / no choice of consent .
Comprehensive air agreements with neighbouring countries or significant global partners can deliver substantial benefits to passengers , freight operators and airlines , by means of both market access and regulatory convergence to promote fair competition , including issues with regard to state subsidies and social and environmental standards .
I agree with the rapporteur that Parliament needs to follow the process from the very beginning and be closely involved in the topics under discussion to discover the current state of the negotiations on air agreements .
The Commission should also be aware of the criteria that Parliament will use to evaluate an agreement and its elements .
The entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon extended the circumstances in which Parliament 's consent was required for the conclusion of an international agreement .
Air agreements now fall within this category .
The new Parliamentary powers established by the Treaty bring with them new responsibilities to ensure that Parliament and its responsible committee are well informed about the preparation of the agreements to which it will subsequently be asked to give its consent .
In view of this change , I welcome the corresponding new Parliamentary responsibility to monitor the conduct of negotiations more closely .
I would take the opportunity to point out here that , in order to be well placed to consider whether or not to grant consent once the negotiations have been completed , Parliament needs to follow the process from the outset , rather than after the negotiations have been concluded .
Lastly , I repeat the call for the Commission to supply Parliament with a constant flow of information and to submit reports analysing the strengths and weaknesses of existing agreements on a regular basis .
I believe , in fact , that this would enable Parliament to assess future agreements more effectively .
This motion for a European Parliament resolution on the conclusion of international air agreements incorporates many of the key principles upheld by the Lega Nord .
They include the need to ensure equal market access rights for airlines from all Member States , preventing concealed dumping practices financed directly by national policies , in breach of Community rules on State aid .
The motion also voices concern about citizens ' safety , acknowledging the fundamental importance of establishing a reference framework on safety .
Another principle defended by the Lega Nord and upheld in the motion concerns transparency between the activities of the European institutions and EU citizens , whose interests are directly represented in Parliament .
To this end , the motion highlights , in fact , the need for the Commission to fulfil its responsibility of keeping Parliament constantly informed of the progress of its negotiations with non-EU operators .
For the reasons listed above , I decided to vote in favour of this motion .
I voted in favour of this report because I agree that comprehensive EU air agreements with neighbouring countries can only benefit passengers , freight operators and airlines in many respects : maintaining security and environmental standards and promoting a favourable business environment .
The aim of this report is to simplify and clarify the conclusion of air transport agreements and the adoption of decisions on such agreements , with the European Parliament informing the Commission in advance about the criteria upon which it will base its decision whether or not to consent to the conclusion of a particular agreement on behalf of the EU .
In the report , Parliament also draws the attention of the Commission and the Council to agreements which , if concluded , may benefit the EU and its citizens , but which the EU has , for one reason or another , yet to conclude with countries such as Russia , China , Japan and India .
The Treaty of Lisbon , which entered into force on 1 December 2009 , extended the circumstances in which Parliament 's consent is required for the conclusion of international agreements .
This means that it is a natural step for the Committee on Transport and Tourism to draw up an own-initiative report with the aim of setting out some general principles regarding how air transport agreements should be evaluated .
Comprehensive agreements with neighbouring countries or significant global partners can provide substantial benefits by offering passengers and freight operators improved services - in terms of both variety and cost - while allowing airlines new opportunities and a competitive edge .
Indeed , regulatory convergence can do much to promote fair competition , particularly with regard to state subsidies , social and environmental standards .
It is unfortunate that the Council has yet to grant the Commission a mandate to open negotiations on a global air transport agreement with important trading partners , such as the People 's Republic of China and India , despite the proposal dating from 2005 .
The economic growth of this region enhances the value of such agreements .
I voted in favour of this own-initiative report because the increasingly important contribution of the aviation sector brings with it many advantages for the European economy , but also quite a few disadvantages .
I believe that the institution to which I belong , namely Parliament , should be given greater supervisory powers so that it has a full understanding of the types of agreement that do or do not deserve its consent .
The vote that we would cast would be the result of close monitoring of the outcome of negotiations , which must promote compliance with international legislation on social rights , full recognition of certification practices and procedures , exchange of safety data and joint inspections .
Only by giving our consent to ambitious agreements that respect the principles upheld by the EU could we make a valid contribution to the latter 's activities and improvement .
I believe that the possibility of regulatory convergence raised by certain international air agreements will be realised by creating conditions of fair competition .
This is not only beneficial to industry in the countries involved , but also constitutes an opportunity to standardise and strengthen social and environmental standards .
The services offered to passengers and freight operators will also see substantial improvements which would not be as visible through other means , such as bilateral agreements .
The conclusion of comprehensive agreements on air transport with neighbouring countries or significant global partners is of particular importance in terms of market access and of regulatory convergence , as it promotes fair competition , an equal level of social and environmental standards , and so on .
This benefits all parties : passengers , freight operators and airlines .
In terms of horizontal agreements , it is also important to align existing bilateral agreements with EU law , so as to ensure greater legal certainty , increase transparency and provide additional benefits in terms of simplification , while ensuring that all Union airlines will enjoy the same rights .
With the entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon , Parliament has come to play a more prominent role in this area , making its approval necessary for the conclusion of these international agreements .
I am therefore voting for this report , which seeks to set out some general principles and a consistent set of standards .
It also stresses the importance of keeping Parliament informed , so that it can monitor the process from the beginning , as this will give it the opportunity to express its concerns and priorities .
I voted in favour of this report for two main reasons .
Firstly , the report recommends increasing the role of the European Parliament , under new powers conferred on it by the Treaty of Lisbon with regard to the conclusion of international agreements with third countries .
In this respect , the report highlights the need to strengthen dialogue with the European Commission at the different negotiation stages and in the monitoring of agreements in force .
Secondly , the report stresses the need to conclude aviation safety agreements with third countries that have a significant aircraft manufacturing industry ; this is a crucial requirement considering the legitimate need to ensure ever-greater aviation safety .
Since the entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon , the European Parliament has had more powers to intervene in the conclusion of international agreements between the European Union and third countries .
Brian Simpson 's report adopted today will thus enable Parliament 's role in international aviation negotiations to be defined better .
I welcome the fact that Parliament is particularly pressing for agreements concluded by the European Union to include mutual recognition of aviation security and safety standards , as well as better safeguards for the protection of passenger rights .
I voted in favour of the report on international air agreements under the Treaty of Lisbon , as it highlights the importance of Parliament being ' immediately and fully informed at all stages ' of the process of negotiating agreements between the EU and third countries or international organisations .
The Treaty of Lisbon has given Parliament new powers on the approval of international agreements .
Of these , the international air transport agreements are of particular importance , given the various security and coordination needs involved .
Assessing an agreement requires criteria based on strict scrutiny and monitoring of the terms of negotiation .
I hope that the Commission and Parliament can cooperate actively so as to continually improve the quality and rigour of this type of agreement .
This report by Mr Simpson deals with international air agreements under the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union ( TFEU ) .
Since 1 December 2009 , with the entry into force of the TFEU , Parliament has seen its powers strengthened and has taken on codecision responsibilities in many areas , including air services .
In view of this , the Committee on Transport and Tourism has tabled this report , which appears to be extremely positive and timely , setting out some general principles with which I fully agree .
Parliament is thus able to monitor the whole process from the beginning , through the information given to it by the Commission , especially through the Directorate-General for Mobility and Transport , and to carefully appraise the agreements it is asked to vote on , whether they are horizontal , comprehensive or safety agreements .
The international air agreements provided for under the Treaty of Lisbon are supranational agreements intended to overlap with the existing bilateral agreements implemented by the Member States .
We have reiterated our position against this principle in successive agreements upon which Parliament has delivered opinions , along with criticism of the comprehensive nature of these agreements , which are , without exception , aimed at the liberalisation and privatisation of the sector .
The rapporteur - who , significantly , is from the Group of the Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats in the European Parliament - states that ' air agreements with neighbouring countries or significant global partners can deliver substantial benefits to passengers , freight operators and airlines ' .
However , the reality in this and in other sectors which have seen increased liberalisation , such as rail transport , belies these promises of benefits .
If there really is a winner from processes of monopolistic concentration in the air transport sector - which is what inevitably follows liberalisation and ' free competition ' - it is not the passengers , nor the workers , nor many of the so-called ' flag carrier ' airlines , but rather the major European companies in the sector .
Those are the reasons why we voted against .
This report relates to international air agreements under the Treaty of Lisbon .
These are international agreements intended to harmonise and overlap with the existing bilateral agreements implemented by the Member States .
The rapporteur states that ' air agreements with neighbouring countries or significant global partners can deliver substantial benefits to passengers , freight operators and airlines , by means [ ... ] of market access ' .
However , the fact is that putting these agreements into practice at EU level has already shown us that such promises of benefits ring hollow for both workers and passengers .
Most of these agreements have the implicit aim of opening the market and liberalising the sector , motivated by free competition , or of disregarding its distortions , the benefits which the most powerful companies can derive from it and the false environmental solution for the reduction of carbon emissions , and the inclusion of aviation in the emissions trading system .
After the Treaty of Lisbon entered into force on 1 December 2009 , there was an extension of the conditions under which the consent of Parliament was required for signing international agreements .
Air agreements currently belong to this category .
In the past , Parliament was merely consulted on such agreements .
The new powers given to Parliament by the Treaty of Lisbon , however , also bring new responsibilities .
In my opinion , Parliament must be capable of following the development of negotiations before being faced with the possibility of accepting or rejecting the final wording of individual international agreements .
Moreover , the relevant criteria for air agreements with third countries should include the possibility of a balanced approach to markets and investment opportunities , as well as fair economic competition in the area of state subsidies and environmental and social standards .
The new powers established by the Treaty of Lisbon mean that we , too , can have our say on aviation area matters in air agreements .
The report emphasises fair competition and , hence , the need to monitor , among other things , state funding , while having regard to environmental issues and ensuring a high level of passenger rights .
We are in favour of all these measures , and so the report has my vote .
I agreed with this document because the Treaty of Lisbon , which entered into force on 1 December 2009 , extended the circumstances in which Parliament 's consent was required for the conclusion of an international agreement .
Air agreements now fall within this category because they cover a field to which the ordinary legislative procedure applies .
In view of this change , the Committee on Transport and Tourism decided to draw up an own-initiative report with the aim of setting out some general principles regarding how air agreements should be evaluated , both in terms of substance and the procedures the Committee might adopt to ensure that it is well informed throughout the course of negotiations , and has an opportunity to express its priorities well before being confronted with the yes / no choice of consent .
During today 's sitting , I voted in favour of Mr Simpson 's report on international air agreements under the Treaty of Lisbon .
In fact , following the Treaty 's entry into force , on 1 December 2009 , Parliament gained the right to give its consent to agreements covering sectors to which the ordinary legislative procedure applies .
This is a significant step forward , especially in light of the EU 's supposed democratic deficit , if we consider that , previously , Parliament , a body democratically elected by the people of Europe , was consulted on such agreements only after they had been concluded .
We therefore expect the Commission to respond to our call for it to maintain the flow of information and to provide the responsible committee with comprehensive information about the intention to propose negotiations with a view to concluding and amending international air agreements , so that Parliament as a whole can express its opinion in full knowledge of the facts .
The Treaty of Lisbon introduces new parliamentary competences , thereby granting the European Parliament greater decision-making powers , along with responsibility for ensuring the smooth flow of business , providing information and guaranteeing citizens ' safety .
Regulatory convergence among the European Parliament 's relevant committees , reciprocal recognition of safety and security standards and ensuring the highest possible standard for international air transport agreements provide benefits to passengers and freight operators , in logistical and economic terms , as well as to airlines .
in writing . - I voted for this report which considers that comprehensive air agreements with neighbouring countries or significant global partners can deliver substantial benefits to passengers , freight operators and airlines , by means both of market access and of regulatory convergence to promote fair competition , including with regard to state subsidies and social and environmental standards , providing certain standards and conditions are met .
Under the Treaty of Lisbon , air agreements require the European Parliament 's consent , as they concern a sector to which the ordinary legislative procedure applies .
We agree with the Committee on Transport and Tourism 's idea to set out some general principles regarding how air agreements should be evaluated in terms of substance .
Moreover , the Committee should be well informed throughout the course of negotiations , so that it has an opportunity to express its priorities well before being confronted with the yes / no choice of consent .
Parliament therefore needs to follow the process from the outset .
Comprehensive agreements with neighbouring countries or significant global partners can provide substantial benefits by offering European passengers and freight operators improved services - in terms of both variety and cost - while giving airlines new profit-making opportunities .
Regulatory convergence can do much to promote fair competition .
Lastly , we maintain that it is important to open negotiations with important trading partners in Asia , including the People 's Republic of China and India , since the economic growth of that entire region makes such agreements ever more significant from the point of view of developing world trade .
The adoption of the Treaty of Lisbon has increased the number of cases in which Parliament 's approval is needed to conclude an international agreement .
Air services agreements now fall into this category , as they cover an area to which the ordinary legislative procedure applies .
The Committee on Transport and Tourism has therefore decided to table this own-initiative report with the aim of setting out some general principles regarding how air agreements should be evaluated in terms of substance , and of the procedures the committee might adopt in order to remain well informed throughout the course of negotiations and so that it has an opportunity to express its priorities well before being confronted with the final decision and merely being able to adopt or reject it .
Parliament 's new powers , provided for in the Treaty of Lisbon , bring with them a new responsibility to ensure that Parliament and its competent committee are well informed about the preparation of the agreements to which it will subsequently be asked to give its consent .
This implies a corresponding responsibility to monitor how negotiations are conducted more closely .
These assumptions therefore need to be borne in mind when international agreements are being negotiated in future .
in writing . - The report covers the framework to evaluate individual air agreements , taking into account the changes under the Lisbon Treaty , to be used for all future negotiations , conclusions and parliamentary approval thereof ( via consent ) .
Relevant criteria for air agreements with third countries include balanced access to markets and investment opportunities , as well as fair competition in terms of state subsidies , environmental and social standards .
I voted in favour .
Comprehensive air agreements with neighbouring countries or significant global partners can deliver benefits not only to freight operators and airlines , but also to passengers .
Above all , such agreements guarantee the same rights to all Union airlines .
Furthermore , high standards in terms of air safety and security will be applied and these are vitally important to passengers , crew and the whole aviation sector in general .
Given the benefits of the agreements mentioned , I believe that it is appropriate to lay down general principles to be used when evaluating air transport agreements .
It is important for every agreement to relax or eliminate restrictions on market access and investment opportunities , to maintain and enhance social and environmental standards , to provide adequate safeguards for data protection and privacy , to include mutual recognition of security standards and ensure a high level of passenger rights .
Attention should be drawn to the fact that the Commission must take immediate action to address the issue of Siberian overflights and begin negotiations on international air transport agreements with Japan and Russia .
The Treaty of Lisbon , which has been in force since 1 December 2009 , has increased the number of cases in which Parliament 's approval is needed to conclude international agreements .
Air services agreements now fall into this category , as they cover an area to which the ordinary legislative procedure applies .
Previously , it was only necessary to consult Parliament about these agreements .
In view of this change , the Committee on Transport and Tourism has decided to draft an own-initiative report with the aim of setting out some general principles regarding how air agreements should be evaluated by Parliament in terms of substance , rather than being confronted with the final decision and merely being able to adopt or reject it .
Parliament 's new powers , provided for in the Treaty of Lisbon , bring with them new responsibilities to ensure that Parliament and its competent committee are well informed about the preparation of the agreements to which it will subsequently be asked to give its consent .
This implies a corresponding responsibility to monitor how negotiations are conducted more closely .
The possibilities identified in this report , which I voted for , can be seen as forming a list of elements which can be adopted according to the particular circumstances of each agreement .
Following the entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon , Parliament has strengthened its role in the conclusion of international air agreements .
The Committee on Transport and Tourism decided to draft an own-initiative report with the aim of setting out some general principles regarding how air agreements should be evaluated , both in terms of substance and in terms of the procedures the Committee might adopt to ensure that it is well informed throughout the course of negotiations , and has an opportunity to express its priorities well before being confronted with the yes / no choice of consent .
These agreements can be split into three categories : horizontal agreements , which align existing bilateral agreements ; comprehensive agreements , which seek to ensure fair competition ; and lastly , safety agreements , which are intended to ensure a high level of civil aviation safety .
Furthermore , the report recommends a set of criteria for assessing the content of the agreements , including balanced access to markets and investment opportunities , and fair competition with regard to state , environmental and social subsidies .
I voted in favour so that a constant flow of information is maintained and the strengths and weaknesses of these agreements are analysed better .
As the Treaty of Lisbon has increased the range of Parliament 's powers with respect to the conclusion of international agreements , it is necessary , in the process of redefining its status , to offer new forms of legal framework for its action .
This report appears in this context .
As Parliament has also come to have powers in relation to air agreements , it is important to ensure that it has access to information throughout the negotiation process .
Indeed , it cannot simply be involved at the end of the process , whereby its activity is reduced to merely agreeing or disagreeing with the final solution , without having a range of relevant indicators at its disposal in order to make a considered decision .
Underpinned by the need to involve Parliament throughout the process , it is also necessary to draw attention , even if only in general terms , to aspects such as the terms under which information is provided or the stages at which it should be made available .
in writing . - I voted in favour .
The Treaty of Lisbon , which entered into force on 1 December 2009 , extended the circumstances in which Parliament 's consent was required for the conclusion of an international agreement .
Air agreements now fall within this category because they cover a field to which the ordinary legislative procedure applies .
Previously , Parliament had only been consulted on such agreements .
In view of this change , the Committee on Transport and Tourism decided to draw up an own-initiative report with the aim of setting out some general principles on how air agreements should be evaluated , covering both their substance and the procedures the Committee might adopt to ensure it is well informed throughout the course of negotiations , and has an opportunity to express its priorities well before being confronted with the yes / no choice of consent .
The report sets out some general principles regarding good communication between Parliament and the Commission when international air agreements are adopted and regarding the development of common methods for evaluating those agreements .
Thanks to the Treaty of Lisbon , Parliament has gained additional powers and corresponding responsibilities , and must now monitor the conduct of negotiations and the conclusion of air agreements more closely .
Given the importance of such agreements , especially in terms of guaranteeing better services for passengers and new opportunities for operators , it is a good idea for Parliament to inform the Commission of its concerns and its assessment criteria at the outset , without waiting until the negotiations have been concluded .
The Treaty of Lisbon gave Parliament greater rights , one of which is that Parliament 's consent is required for concluding international agreements .
The Committee on Transport and Tourism quite often has to assess and deal with various aviation agreements .
I think that this report will significantly aid and simplify the work of the Committee on Transport and Tourism because it highlights the general principles of how we should assess aviation agreements , both in terms of content and in terms of measures .
Moreover , this report will help clarify the various aviation agreements and process them in the simplest way , and it states which criteria we should pay attention to and which aspects we should keep track of .
In addition , this report will help in applying the process of how to move forward with these aviation agreements and what stages will be needed as the various institutions deal with them .
I think that this report is necessary , and I therefore supported its adoption .
in writing . - This report provides for a framework to be established in order that Parliament can undertake its obligations under the Lisbon Treaty in regard to international air agreements .
The Committee on Transport and Tourism were keen to ensure that in dealing with individual agreements with individual sovereign countries , Parliament used the same procedures and guidelines for rapporteurs to work with in order to give us a consistent approach and to give us the opportunity to consider important aspects , including relevant safety and social conditions .
I shall be voting in favour and would hope that Parliament can support my report so that the proposed framework can be put into operation
The entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon has institutionalised new areas in which Parliament 's approval is necessary for the conclusion of international agreements .
Agreements on air transport fall into this category , as they are part of the ordinary legislative procedure .
This requires Parliament to be kept regularly informed , in order to ensure a concerted evaluation of the whole negotiation process , and so that it can express its opinions and priorities at the same time .
This report contains guidelines on how air agreements should be analysed in terms of content and procedures to be adopted .
Three categories of agreement are presented which cover different objectives , namely , horizontal agreements , comprehensive agreements and safety agreements .
I am voting in favour of this agreement as I consider it essential that the position adopted by the European Commission , and stressed in this report , expresses the fact that Parliament should regularly monitor the entire process through the sharing of information , and that the Commission should submit a report analysing the strengths and weaknesses of the existing agreements at least every three years .
The agreements should be adopted through a fruitful interinstitutional agreement that enables the European institutions to participate actively in them .
I voted in favour of Mr Simpson 's report on international air agreements under the Treaty of Lisbon , bearing in mind that Parliament now has a greater share of responsibility when it comes to negotiating international agreements .
Furthermore , agreements on air transport with third countries help to develop international air transport and safeguard security of law .
in writing . - ( DE ) The result of the new competences given to Parliament under the Treaty of Lisbon is that this House will , in future , be presented with international air agreements to evaluate and approve on a more frequent basis .
The rapporteur therefore proposes that some general principles should be drawn up in order to make such evaluations easier , and also better .
Although he does recognise the benefits of such agreements in principle , the rapporteur does not forego a differentiated approach and , on several occasions , calls for a constructive dialogue between the Commission and Parliament .
I welcome the results of today 's vote , particularly in view of the fact that I was rapporteur for the document on the air transport agreement between the European Union and the United States , which was a document of particular importance .
Taken together , aviation markets in the European Union and the United States account for around 60 % of the world 's air traffic .
The future opening of the market to EU and US aviation enterprises on a non-discriminatory basis will offer better services to passengers and air transport carriers , will bring significant economic benefits and will create jobs .
Unfortunately , the European Parliament was not involved in the negotiations on the EU-US agreement and so was not able to influence the content of the document .
This is an unacceptable situation .
I agree , therefore , with the main thesis of the Simpson report on international air agreements , which has been adopted today .
The European Parliament should have been involved in the negotiations from the very beginning , or should at least have been kept informed as to their progress .
I support this report in view of the new elements that have been introduced by the Council , especially with regard to earmarking , greater transparency and incentives for fleet renewal , vehicle capacity and the possibility of more effective variation of infrastructure .
Eurovignette III will allow the Member States to charge road users , if they choose , for external costs , namely pollution , air and noise , so that the ' polluter pays ' principle is introduced to road transport .
In anticipation of the White Paper , the legislation now envisaged requires the Member States and the Commission to take the next steps towards a more sustainable and interoperational transport system , with a harmonised charging system internalising more external costs .
With the draft directive on the charging of heavy goods vehicles for the use of certain infrastructure ( the Eurovignette Directive ) , Member States will now be able to implement charges on air and noise pollution from road transport .
This measure , which applies the ' polluter pays ' principle , aims to encourage the progressive renewal of the lorries which travel on our roads .
It could also represent a new source of funding for cleaner forms of transport such as rail and waterways .
I therefore voted in favour of Saïd El Khadraoui 's report .
However , I call for Member States to exercise restraint when implementing the Eurovignette : this must not jeopardise the commercial and financial soundness of haulage companies or companies which use haulage .
Most Irish goods sold on the EU market are transported on the road network and therefore , I voted against the measures recommended in this report because they would impose excessive costs on Irish hauliers , exporters and producers .
The Eurovignette Directive already involves charges , but Member States are not obliged to impose these charges .
The Eurovignette is currently in operation on 15 000 km of European motorways , including half of the EU 's tolled motorways .
While I am in favour of addressing air and noise pollution and of encouraging people to use cleaner vehicles , if this directive were to be extended and tolls for noise and air pollution were to be included , Irish hauliers taking Irish exports to Europe would suffer greatly as a consequence .
Many Irish goods are exported internationally and the additional costs proposed in the report could inflict huge damage on Irish export and transport companies , and it could be a fatal blow to those small businesses that currently are achieving only a small profit margin .
I voted in favour of this joint position on the Eurovignette Directive presented at second reading by the Council and Parliament .
The directive 's main objectives are to allow Member States to charge road users for some external costs , in other words , to apply the ' polluter pays ' principle , and also to give Member States additional possibilities to make their national road charging systems more efficient .
I welcome the goals of reducing pollution and implementing the ' polluter pays ' principle in the area of road transport .
I also supported the proposal for revenue obtained from the Eurovignette charge to be earmarked for investment in road infrastructure and to be used to make transport greener .
The promotion of sustainable transport is a key element of the common transport policy .
To this end , we should reduce the contribution the transport sector makes to climate change and the negative impact of transport , in particular , congestion , which impedes mobility , and air and noise pollution , which damage health and the environment .
Although I welcome the agreement that has been reached on the Eurovignette Directive , I am nonetheless far from being fully satisfied .
By endorsing the compromise reached between Parliament and the Council , we are putting an end to long years of negotiation .
This is certainly a step in the right direction but it is a minimalistic agreement that lacks teeth !
Indeed , Member States will only have the possibility , but in no way will they be obliged , of making heavy goods vehicles pay for the external costs they cause .
The fact remains that the idea is now out there and that is the real positive point which enables me to vote for the compromise .
By introducing the ' polluter pays ' principle for heavy goods vehicles , the directive paves the way for the recognition in our public policies of the internalisation of external costs caused by transport .
The principle of transparency of revenue and investment is also on the record which , we hope , will be a precedent in assessing public policies : indeed , Member States will have to report to the Commission on a regular basis .
However , the low allocation threshold of revenue to the trans-European transport networks ( TENs ) ( 15 % ) is regrettable .
In addition , we will have to ensure that the commitment made by the Member States to invest revenue in sustainable projects has been kept .
The report we are discussing today is particularly important because it provides for the amendment of Directive 1999 / 62 / EC on the charging of heavy goods vehicles .
I believe that the submission of this proposal for a new directive , the fruit of the compromise reached between the Hungarian Presidency , the Commission and Parliament , is very damaging to the Italian economy , since Italy transports around a third - or approximately EUR 200 billion a year - of all the traded goods hauled on Europe 's roads .

Once the directive has been implemented in Europe 's countries of transit , goods imported to and exported from Italy will be more exposed to the burden of additional charges .
I share the Italian Government 's highly critical view : it believes that , at a time of great economic difficulty such as we are experiencing now , the political decision to strike at an economic sector that underpins our market is far from wise .
To my mind , the small breakthroughs that were achieved with the compromise have no real impact on a text that is highly detrimental to both the Italian system and the haulage industry .
What is more , the effectiveness of the measure has not been proven : road transport and its associated pollution costs will continue to increase until an intermodal infrastructure network has been developed .
in writing . - I voted against this amendment as it is imperative that the Commission is not permitted to establish revenue-raising capabilities , even via an indirect charge , particularly without the unanimous assent of the Council .
In the UK , we do not currently subscribe to the Eurovignette scheme .
However , the Westminster Government is looking into rolling out HGV charges in accordance with European law by 2015 .
The Commission , however , has reserved the right to make the carbon charge obligatory by 2013 .
I do not wish to see UK citizens in any way contributing to any form of EU tax .
The levying of a charge on heavy goods vehicles is a measure which penalises the outlying countries of the EU , such as Greece , Italy , Spain and Portugal .
In general , these are the countries hardest hit by the financial crisis , which has led to a fiscal and economic crisis .
In view of this , I am voting against the tabled report , as I believe the uneven application of such charges is unjust , given that outlying countries would generate most of the revenue , to the benefit of the countries of central Europe .
I voted against the El Khadraoui report on charging heavy goods vehicles as the proposal allows tariff barriers to be introduced , which will increase the costs for freight operators in the peripheral Member States .
The directive will also allow Member States to offer compensation in exchange for these charges , which could result in the distortion of competition between operators from different EU Member States .
Parliament has just given its go-ahead for new rules on road transport charges , thereby making it possible to ensure the development and funding of a more suitable transport policy with regard to environmental requirements pertaining to pollution and noise .
While road haulage companies will now have to pay the cost of air and noise pollution generated by lorries , Member States will , in return , be obliged to reinvest the revenues obtained from these charges in pan-European transport networks and , especially , in more effective and less polluting transport systems .
These charges are a step forward , but they are not enough .
It is time that Member States committed to implementing a genuine freight development policy and thus to making consistent use of all rail and road transport infrastructure .
The European Parliament has today approved the revision of the Eurovignette Directive by a large majority .
The text stipulates that heavy goods vehicles shall pay the cost of air and noise pollution .
The agreement approved today in effect authorises Member States to charge road haulage companies for the cost of air and noise pollution , in addition to charges on the use of motorway infrastructure .
While this is a significant revision , it only represents a small step in the right direction , because the regulations are non-binding .
I therefore still look forward to seeing new proposals which would make these new measures compulsory , which would include in them the cost of all the environmental damage caused and which would extend the ' polluter pays ' principle to all forms of transport .
The text also presses for use to be actually made of the revenues from toll collection .
In this regard , Parliament has obliged Member States to invest part of the returns from toll collection in the improvement of traffic flow and mobility infrastructure .
It should also be possible to allocate the proceeds of these charges to projects such as those which reduce air or even noise pollution .
I voted against the report on the charging of heavy goods vehicles as I believe that levying charges for the use of infrastructure could have negative repercussions for the European economy , particularly in outlying countries .
Bearing in mind that several taxes and charges are already levied on the road transport sector , especially excise duties on fuel , and in view of the current economic climate , I think that the internalisation of the sector 's costs should be considered so that these measures might merit greater consensus between the various players affected .
The revision of the Eurovignette Directive requires that heavy good vehicles circulating on European motorways be subject to the ' polluter pays ' principle , allowing the Member States to include the cost of noise and air pollution in national tolls .
This additional cost is likely to be between three or four cents per vehicle per kilometre .
At a time when the European economy is weak and competitiveness is more vital than ever , this principle may serve to make freight transport even more expensive , especially for outlying countries , for which the price of transportation is added to the cost of the goods .
These countries are not only forced to absorb the cost of fuel , but will now have to do the same with the additional costs of tolls , thereby losing competitiveness .
Without trying to underestimate the environmental issue , this does not seem to me to be the time to burden European companies with another charge .
The levying of a charge on heavy goods vehicles is a measure which penalises the outlying countries of the EU while , at the same time , providing additional revenue for the countries of central Europe .
The text that came out of the trialogue is less negative for Portugal than the proposal of the Committee on Transport and Tourism , as it reduces the variation to 175 % and the peak period for charges to five hours , extending the exemption of less polluting vehicles for another year , hence , to four years .
However , the levying of this charge will remain a reality and will bring an increase in the existing costs for the outlying countries of the EU .
These new provisions of the Eurovignette Directive will allow Member States to charge heavy goods vehicles an amount equal to the cost of noise and air pollution caused by traffic , in addition to the infrastructure charge , at the tolls .
This additional cost is likely to average three or four cents per vehicle per kilometre .
Less polluting vehicles will remain exempt .
I voted against this report 's proposal as I believe it will harm the outlying Member States .
The very high dependence on road transport is a real problem ; in Portugal , dependence on this mode of transport is even greater than the EU average .
This is the case for environmental and public health reasons , due to the high levels of pollution associated with it , and for energy reasons related to dwindling oil reserves and growing difficulty of access to this commodity .
It is therefore essential to promote the diversification of modes of freight transport , particularly with a strong commitment to rail .
Unfortunately , not only has this investment not been made , but in some countries , including Portugal , we have also seen divestment in this type of transport .
This divestment tends to increase following processes of liberalisation and privatisation .
This report addresses some of these issues , but it goes no further than seeking to levy a new charge on heavy goods vehicles , to be added to the existing charges , some of which have been recently increased in Portugal .
The effectiveness of these is doubtful in terms of pursuing the stated objectives , while they represent an additional burden and may result in many companies going out of business given the current economic and social crisis .
We are aware that the very high dependence on road transport is a real problem ; in Portugal , dependence on this mode of transport is even greater than the EU average .
This situation needs to change , whether for environmental or public health reasons , due to the high levels of pollution associated with it , or for energy reasons related to the dwindling oil reserves and growing difficulty of access to this commodity .
It is therefore essential to promote the diversification of modes of freight transport , particularly with a strong commitment to rail .
However , not only have some countries being failing to make this commitment , but in some countries , including Portugal , we have also seen divestment in this type of transport , which tends to increase following the process of liberalisation and privatisation .
This report address some of these issues , but it then limits itself to seeking to levy a new tax on heavy goods vehicles , to be added to the existing ones , some of which have been increased recently in Portugal , such as the ' shadow tolls ' .
The effectiveness of these is doubtful in terms of the effective pursuit of the stated objectives , while they represent an additional burden and may result in many companies going out of business given the current economic and social crisis .
Some time has passed since the adoption of the European Parliament 's opinion on the Eurovignette III Directive at first reading .
The directive should enable Member States - if they so desire - to collect fees from road users for certain ( limited ) external costs , so that the ' polluter pays ' principle can finally be introduced in the area of road transport .
It also provides Member States with additional possibilities for increasing the effectiveness of national systems for collecting road tolls , which is a better instrument for managing demand in the transport sector .
The opinion of the Council confirmed these objectives , and it is now also desirable for the Commission to take steps which will lead to the lasting sustainable development of transport , cooperation , a harmonised system of tolls and the further internalisation of external costs .
in writing . - The reality is that this proposal will have a disproportionate impact upon the peripheral Member States in the European Union , such as Ireland , as centrally located Member States have the option of switching to rail .
It is estimated by the Irish Exporters Association that a truck travelling from Ireland to mainland Europe via Holyhead and Dover will incur a road use charge of EUR 120 and an external cost of EUR 30 .
Therefore , a roundtrip will incur a fee of EUR 300 as a result of this legislation .
The main export sectors that will be affected include pharmaceuticals , ICT , medical devices , dairy and other food products .
Moreover , the road haulage sector employs over 30 000 people in Ireland .
The bottom line is that these new charges will increase the cost of transporting Irish exports into European markets .
I voted against this report as the EU should be seeking ways to improve our competitiveness in line with the Europe 2020 strategy instead of introducing legislation which threatens our competitiveness .
Parliament 's approval of the directive on the charging of heavy goods vehicles is a step forward in the protection of European citizens ' health , and a commitment to lessen the harmful effects of pollution caused by such vehicles .
The ' polluter pays ' principle has been introduced for the first time in this sector in order to encourage safer and more sustainable transport , and hence to promote alternatives such as rail transport .
Under the compromise reached , however , due consideration must also be given to the protection of the haulage industry , which must not be penalised excessively .
Member States must therefore strive to make more effective use of the revenues collected under the Eurovignette , for example , by investing in infrastructure improvements and encouraging the use of less polluting haulage vehicles , so as to ensure that the benefits of the directive are enjoyed by all the sectors involved .
I voted in favour of the report by my colleague , Saïd El Khadraoui , on the revision of the EU Eurovignette legislation , which will allow heavy good vehicles to be charged .
For the first time , the ' polluter pays ' principle will be applied to road transport , and it will be possible to charge heavy goods vehicles for noise and air pollution when they use the EU 's motorways .
This is an innovative initiative which I welcome , as it allows environmental and social costs to be taken into account and is not limited merely to infrastructure costs .
It is , nevertheless , regrettable that the European Parliament 's ambitious plans for stringent environmental requirements have been hindered by the Council of Ministers , under the pretext of overly high additional costs .
Despite all of this , this report is a genuine step forward in environmental terms .
I endorsed this document because its objective is to charge heavy goods vehicles depending on the time of day they are travelling , during or outwith rush hour , and depending on the sound emitted and cylinder capacity .
At least 15 % of the money collected in charges is invested in other projects related to CO2 reduction .
It is good that today , we are ready to reduce climate change and , in the area of road transport , we are finally striving to apply the ' polluter pays ' principle .
Undoubtedly , this will give Member States additional possibilities to make their national road charging systems more efficient , which means that a better transport-demand-management instrument can be developed .
However , I still believe that these instruments are only economically beneficial and favourable for a few central transit European Union Member States , and therefore completely unfavourable or much less favourable for a large number of European Union Member States , situated near the European Union 's borders , both in the east , the south , the west and the north .
I therefore believe that it would be worth us fully evaluating this aspect , weighing it up again , and only then adopting it .
I would like to give my full endorsement to the directive on the charging of heavy goods vehicles .
I would , in particular , like to support a provision which is very important for Europe 's environment .
I hope that the lower charges for vehicles which are less polluting will motivate owners of transport firms who have not done so to renew their fleets .
Furthermore , crops which grow in the vicinity of heavily used roads would be much less exposed to pollution from exhaust fumes .
I think the increased charges for driving at peak hours are another positive feature .
Thanks to these restrictions , we will achieve greater safety on the roads and better driving conditions for all road users .
These restrictions will also allow improvements to the state of the infrastructure , which suffers the greatest damage at those very hours of peak traffic .
I voted against the proposed compromise text , a position in keeping with that of the Italian Government , which has already voiced its opposition to the proposal in the EU Council .
Imposing a further system of taxation on hauliers will deal a very heavy blow to a sector which underpins Italy 's trading system .
Increasing the costs borne by this sector means increasing the burden on society as a whole and penalising our goods , for which there will be a corresponding fall in demand .
I do not believe that this compromise is the right answer , particularly for a country such as Italy , for example , which is a departure point for transport flows that create wealth for our national system and that need to be safeguarded through the identification of appropriate tools that will combat air and noise pollution , but which have due regard for its specific structural and logistical characteristics .
I voted in favour of the resolution on the charging of heavy goods vehicles as it ratifies an agreement which was difficult to reach , on the revision of the Eurovignette Directive .
This 1999 directive , revised in 2006 , aims to harmonise the charging of heavy good vehicles .
The adopted revision is a first step in internalising external costs in road transport and , hence , a step towards putting the ' polluter pays ' principle into practice .
Air and noise pollution from traffic will thus be charged electronically , at a rate of three to four cents per kilometre depending on the vehicle 's Euro class , the type of road and the level of congestion .
This revision will henceforth allow traffic to be managed better through increased charges in peak periods ( not exceeding 175 % over five hours ) , but also provides for a proportionate decrease in low peak charges to avoid penalising road haulage companies financially .
Finally , the resolution encourages Member States to use the amounts raised to finance certain types of sustainable transport projects .
I voted in favour of Eurovignettes because I think that solutions of this kind can ensure full harmonisation of the European system for charging heavy goods vehicles , thus facilitating efficient travel through Member States without unnecessary delays .
In my opinion , incorporation of the ' polluter pays ' principle will ensure a reduction of the pollution and noise caused by heavy goods vehicles not fitted with engines which comply with the Euro V and VI standards , as these engines are not subject to road charges .
In addition , the principle has been established that Member States will be able to specify the use to be made of revenue generated from tolls collected and that at least 15 % will have to be used for financial support for TEN-T projects .
This will ensure greater transport sustainability .
in writing . - I voted for this report revising ' Eurovignette ' road haulage tax rules , which will make it possible for Member States to charge hauliers for air and noise pollution costs , in addition to motorway tolls .
This directive will ensure that revenue from these charges is used to improve the performance of transport systems and cut pollution .
Directive 1999 / 62 / EC on the charging of heavy goods vehicles for the use of certain infrastructures allows Member States , if they so wish , to also charge road users for some external costs .
This offers them additional opportunities to make their national road charging systems more efficient , which means a better transport-demand-management instrument .
We believe that , at a time of great economic difficulty , the political decision to strike at an economic sector that underpins our market purely in order to make money is not very wise .
Furthermore , the way in which this approach penalises the geographically more peripheral Member States , countries of origin , departure or destination of goods , for the benefit of ' central ' and transit countries , is unacceptable .
Lastly , when establishing the principle , no thought has been given to the impact of this measure on traffic flows and , hence , on existing concessions , meaning that there is a risk of the traffic going elsewhere .
The effectiveness of the measure has not been proven : road transport and its associated pollution costs will continue to increase , which is why we , the Italian delegation of the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) , are against this measure .
This directive makes provision for Member States levying a toll on heavy goods vehicles which includes an amount equal to the cost of noise and air pollution as a result of traffic , in addition to the infrastructure charge .
I believe that the ' polluter pays ' principle is not a solution , as it limits itself to leaving the decision up to the market .
Authorising and legitimising pollution if it is economically viable for the company is not a path to sustainability .
I believe that the EU 's priority should be to impose more stringent measures on pollution caused by heavy goods vehicles and to commit decisively to rail freight .
Rather than solving the problem of pollution , this directive exacerbates the inequality between Member States by placing a greater burden on outlying countries such as Portugal , which are exporters but are not crossed by major transport routes .
I voted against for these reasons .
This report deserves credit for demanding accountability from Member States .
Firstly , for demanding accountability on the relief which Member States grant to small truck manufacturers .
This is a good thing since these irresponsible practices must cease .
Secondly , for demanding accountability on the revenues generated by the Eurovignette .
Opacity cannot be the rule there either .
These revenues must be exclusively destined for environmental policies .
It is , however , regrettable that the text does not go even further .
It includes almost nothing on the relief granted to the manufacturers of Euro VI vehicles .
What is worse , it promotes bringing the Eurovignette under the carbon emission trading scheme .
I am voting in favour of this text to encourage further work to be done and to lend my approval to the Eurovignette concept , whilst regretting these two serious shortcomings .
Environmental concerns can never be jeopardised , but at the same time , they cannot be detached from economic issues ; still less in this time of crisis that we are still experiencing , and which continues to buffet the countries of southern Europe , especially my country , Portugal .
In view of this , I cannot agree with the adoption of the ' polluter pays ' principle , as this situation will greatly affect those working in the freight transport sector in outlying countries , in particular , Portugal , but not in the richer countries of central and northern Europe .
in writing . - Eurovignette III will allow Member States - if they so wish - to charge road users for external costs ( air , noise , pollution ) , so that finally , the ' polluter pays ' principle is introduced in road transport .
Taking into account that the tax system is opaque and irrational , I voted against .
In times of increasing globalisation in which the volume of traffic is also rising massively , it is exactly those Member States with sensitive regions such as in the area crossing the Alps that have an interest in charging road users for certain external costs according to the ' polluter pays ' principle .
At the same time , this should also give rise to an instrument to better manage traffic demand .
This report takes a pragmatic approach in order to reconcile the numerous and varying wishes .
In this context , however , we must not overlook the various initiatives to pave the way for so-called giga- or megaliners , which are associated with high infrastructure costs .
It is also the case that , hitherto , lip service alone has been paid to moving freight traffic from road to rail .
We should also not forget these factors , including when it comes to the idea in the proposal of earmarking the revenue from infrastructure charges .
As far as the incentives for fleet renewal are concerned , we must also consider that we must not unilaterally burden our local carriers and fleet-owners with strict environmental and safety regulations , only for the low-cost competitors to come riding over the border in foul scrap vehicles .
However , since this report makes very reasonable arguments in this regard , I voted in favour .
I decided to vote against this proposal because it would have a very negative impact on the smallest haulage companies in particular .
Yes , it is right to combat pollution and try to ease traffic congestion , but introducing another tax increase is definitely not the best solution in my view .
By applying this ' Eurovignette ' , the chances are that only the largest haulage companies - that is , those with more resources at their disposal - will manage to survive .
Many small businesses , especially in Italy , risk having to leave the market because of the excessive charges they would face , and this would certainly have a serious impact on employment too .
My hope , therefore , is that other European countries will adopt the same position as the Italian Government , which has already confirmed that it will not be applying this measure .
The crisis has caused great damage to the haulage industry , and this new tax will certainly not contribute much to its recovery as far as I can see .
I do not agree with the proposal to charge heavy goods vehicles according to air and noise pollution .
I feel that it would be inappropriate to create yet another additional tax burden for hauliers , who have been badly affected by the financial crisis .
The charge will reflect not just road infrastructure costs , the vehicle 's pollution category and length of journey , but also the level of pollution , noise and congestion .
Moreover , the charge will not only be applied to motorways in the trans-European road network , but also to other motorways and important roads .
Attention should be drawn to the fact that such regulation will have a negative impact on European road hauliers ' revenue and increase delivery times .
Due to the reasons mentioned , there will be an increase in transportation costs and the price of freight transportation .
Furthermore , a toll may significantly reduce the demand for road transport .
The new Eurovignette Directive , which is intended to encourage the implementation of harmonised charging systems in the Member States in order to improve the efficiency and environmental performance of heavy goods vehicles , will end up penalising certain peripheral Member States , such as Italy , which are countries of departure or destination of goods .
This is why I voted against the report , which amends the 1999 directive .
Instead of increasing competition and laying down common rules for the Internal Market , the new directive distorts competition for the benefit of a few Member States located at the heart of freight traffic in Europe .
Under the pretext of reducing CO2 emissions , a tax is being introduced with the aim of discouraging road transport in favour of rail and intermodal transport .
The directive , as it is conceived , is very harmful to the entire haulage system , at a time of economic stagnation when we need to implement measures to revive the sector .
This report presents a pragmatic approach to not wasting any more time on the adoption of the so-called Eurovignette III Directive on the levying of charges on heavy goods vehicles for the use of certain infrastructures .
It is intended to achieve the best possible compromise between Parliament and the Council .
The proposed amendments are the result of consultations with the political groups .
In view of this , I voted in favour of this report , as it will allow the Member States , if they so wish , to also charge road users for some limited external costs , with the aim of introducing the ' polluter pays ' principle to road transport .
It will also give Member States more opportunities to make their respective national road pricing systems more efficient , which means a better instrument for transport demand management .
These objectives were confirmed by the Council 's position .
It is worth highlighting the proposal to earmark the revenue from charges on external cost and infrastructure to be used for sustainable transport and trans-European networks , in particular .
Effective earmarking of this revenue , which increases accountability and transparency , will not only increase public acceptance but will also ensure the reduction of external costs on road transport .
Under the amended Directive 1999 / 62 / EC , Member States will also be able to charge road users for some ( limited ) external costs , so that finally , the ' polluter pays ' principle is introduced in road transport .
This offers Member States additional opportunities to make their national road charging systems more efficient , which means a better transport-demand-management instrument .
Road toll charges for the transport sector will therefore reflect the cost of noise and air pollution , as well as infrastructure costs .
These costs will still admit of some exceptions , provided that the Member State requesting them has a good reason for doing so .
There will be incentives to promote the renewal of the fleet of heavy goods vehicles , derogations for heavy goods vehicles fitted with less polluting engines and , finally , the toll charge may vary according to the time of travel .
This is to ensure that heavy goods vehicles can avoid certain road sections during peak hours .
The revenues generated from this toll charge increase will have to be reinvested in transport infrastructure , with at least 15 % to be earmarked initially for trans-European transport projects .
For these reasons , and for the sake of a better road system in Europe , I voted in favour .
This directive makes provision for Member States levying a toll on heavy goods vehicles which includes an amount equal to the cost of noise and air pollution as a result of traffic , in addition to the infrastructure charge .
I believe that the ' polluter pays ' principle is not a solution , as it limits itself to leaving the decision up to the market .
Authorising and legitimising pollution if it is economically viable for the company is not a path to sustainability .
I believe that the EU 's priority should be to impose more stringent measures on pollution caused by heavy goods vehicles and to commit decisively to rail freight .
Rather than solving the problem of pollution , this directive exacerbates the inequality between Member States by placing a greater burden on outlying countries such as Portugal , which are exporters but are not crossed by major transport routes .
I voted against for these reasons .
The proposal for revision of the Eurovignette Directive , which is at issue here , is aimed at introducing the ' polluter pays ' principle to road transport , allowing the Member States to include the cost of noise and air pollution in national tolls , which means the levying of yet another charge on heavy goods vehicles .
This measure penalises the outlying countries of the European Union , which is particularly onerous in the context of the financial crisis that we are currently experiencing .
For these reasons , I voted against this report .
I voted in favour of this compromise on the revision of the Eurovignette Directive , which aims to set ' polluter pays ' road tolls for heavy goods vehicles .
Member States will then be able to integrate in taxes or tolls levied the actual costs incurred by traffic-based air and noise pollution , whereas up to now , only infrastructure-related costs could be charged .
The compromise deal falls short of the European Parliament 's ambitions and this alone will not revolutionise road transport , for which the industry and Member States are clearly not yet ready to shoulder the actual costs of their ecological footprint .
The average additional cost to hauliers should not exceed 4 euro cents per vehicle per kilometre , and the least polluting vehicles , driving during off-peak times , would be exempt .
And yet this reform had been consigned to oblivion before the Belgian Presidency put it back on the Council 's table .
I welcome the progress made as a positive first step towards a more sustainable road transport system .
The reason we have voted in favour is because we refuse to accept the fallacious arguments put forward by the Spanish Socialist Workers ' Party ( PSOE ) and the People 's Party ( PP ) on the industry 's competitiveness .
Any gain in competitiveness also requires generating incentives for investment in more efficient means of transport , fair rules of competition , and internalising the social and environmental costs of general economic activity .
The Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance has always strived for cost internalisation and for all goods to have a cost that is fair in social and environmental terms .
We are aware that the minimal proposal falls short of our aspirations by a long stretch , but our vote is also an expression of our confidence that the process will not end here and that an important step has been taken by acknowledging the need to internalise transport costs .
We also remind the Member States that they must go even further , bringing in legislation to introduce fairer and more efficient tax systems that include all the external costs mentioned , and we urge the Commission to continue to work so that its future proposal on this matter may prove more ambitious .
The recommendation is the last stage in the procedural process of amending Directive 1999 / 62 / EC on the charging of heavy goods vehicles for the use of certain infrastructures ( Eurovignette ) .
It is the fruit of lengthy consultations and compromises with the various political groups .
Charging users for some associated external costs enables Member States to make their national road charging systems more efficient , which means they are better able to manage transport demand .
Furthermore , the ' polluter pays ' principle helps to make users in the sector more aware of their responsibilities .
To conclude , the public will be more supportive if the additional revenue generated from infrastructure and external costs is allocated transparently and effectively , and this would also serve to reduce the external costs of road transport more quickly .
The taxation of heavy goods vehicles , which was debated today immediately prior to the vote , is another example of how what was originally a very good principle has , in the end , remained relatively weak and has lost much of its impact .
I think that the taxes collected should have been directed much more towards developing transport infrastructure , but unfortunately , as often happens , the Council really does not have any good ideas in this regard .
Many countries see in all this an opportunity to gain extra tax revenues which can be put to many other uses .
It is a very positive development that the adoption of this directive will end the situation in Estonia in which vehicles from other countries do not pay the tax in Estonia , but our vehicles pay in other countries .
Even though this report has become weaker in many respects during the proceedings , and that Parliament has had to give in on several provisions , this is still a big step forward , and I feel that I must give it my full support .
I voted in favour of the report .
It is a compromise based on the ' polluter pays ' principle , in other words , the principle of making it possible to charge for certain external costs of transport , in the form of pollution , noise and traffic congestion , for example .
Implementing the external costs of transport is a step in the right direction .
in writing . - El Khadraoui has done a great job on this report .
The only way that we can make progress in fighting climate change is responsible reports such as this one which hold those accountable who cause the most pollution and which is why I was able to support it .
The charging of heavy goods vehicles for the use of certain infrastructures , under the terms of the European Parliament document voted on in plenary today , represents an increase in costs related to the movement of this type of transport .
The Eurovignette is a measure which penalises the outlying countries of the EU at a time when those countries are undergoing a period of economic and financial difficulty , whilst , at the same time , providing additional revenue for the countries of central Europe .
The review of the directive in line with Parliament 's position will have considerable negative effects on competitiveness and economic development for several Member States , such as Portugal .
While acknowledging that the final text adopted today in Strasbourg is less negative than the text that was previously agreed in parliamentary committee , the imposition of this charge will still become a reality and will mean an increase in existing costs for the outlying countries of the EU .
For these reasons , as a matter of national interest and as a member of Parliament 's Committee on Transport and Tourism , I voted against the document tabled in plenary .
in writing . - I abstained on the Eurovignette vote today .
I abstained because , in the case of Catalonia , what is proposed would penalise a lot of small and medium enterprises that do not have the option of putting goods and products on trains - in particular , because of the difference of gauge , which constitutes a physical barrier to completion of the Internal Market - and would damage their business greatly .
Any new EU rules on charging heavy goods vehicles must maintain a balance between the environmental needs and economic interests of the new Member States .
Lithuania is a valuable transit country for Europe .
Freight transportation and hard working lorry drivers have become synonymous with our country .
According to data from the Lithuanian Road Administration , the number of heavy goods vehicles on principle routes has tripled in the last decade and they are helping to form the backbone of our economy .
Lithuania has already been racked by the financial crisis and a rise in transport costs would be a heavy blow .
I agree with the rapporteur that the Member States should be given opportunities to make their national road charging systems more efficient .
I am familiar with the issues of pollution mentioned in this report and I take them very seriously , but additional charges for air and noise pollution are not the answer .
The problem is much greater than the report suggests .
In many EU Member States , road infrastructure is in need of further development .
At the same time , in Lithuania , the funding earmarked for road management and development has dropped by more than 20 % in the last few years .
I endorsed adoption of the directive .
I think the decision to extend the financing of Eurovignettes by external costs , in other words , by the costs of environmental pollution and noise , is more advisable than the previous version , which was restricted only to covering the costs of road infrastructure .
The directive is favourable to transit countries , so MEPs from Poland should be particularly keen on its adoption .
It is also worth stressing the fact that the charges are to be lower the higher the ecological category of the heavy goods vehicle .
Fortunately , vehicles with a maximum permissible laden weight of 3.5-12 tonnes and car drivers will be exempt from the charges .
The structure of tolls will depend on the time of day , which , in my opinion , will help to discourage people from using sections of road which are at risk of congestion during peak periods .
Another important provision of the directive is the one which concerns the way in which income from tolls is spent .
This money is to be reinvested in transport infrastructure of any kind , while a minimum of 15 % of the revenues are to be earmarked for TEN-T projects .
I think we also need long-term measures which will bring about convergence in the methods which all charging systems of the Member States use to calculate external costs .
This could guarantee transparency in the signals given to the European road haulage sector .
In the light of positive experiences in Switzerland since the introduction of the performance-based HGV levy in 2001 , there are no objections to the new directive .
Journey numbers have fallen by 10 % in Switzerland since 2001 , while the quantity of goods transported has risen by 60 % and it has proven possible to reduce emissions - a win-win scenario .
The earmarking of revenues is aimed at promoting acceptance by the public and reducing external road transport costs .
I voted against the text presented by the rapporteur , Mr El Khadraoui , which permits the levy of a surcharge for air and noise pollution caused by heavy goods vehicles .
While I agree with the ' polluter pays ' principle , levying additional motorway toll charges on international road traffic , particularly without the obligation to use the revenues for investment in infrastructure improvements , is somewhat questionable at a time of economic crisis .
Moreover , the adopted text does not help those Member States , such as Italy , that suffer geographical barriers , making it more costly for them to transport goods for import and export .
This report has been adopted , taking into account the fact that , during the necessary negotiations , the rapporteur had the opportunity to ensure that a review clause would be included in the regulation , concerning the possibility of introducing new models covering a variety of environmental goods following an implementation report by the Commission .
This review should take place by 2013 .
In addition , the possibility of providing estimates was included , enabling gaps to be filled in cases where Member States have not submitted their data on time .
A scientifically sound approach to the shortage of resources and to the ecosystem is crucial to the sustainable economic development of the European Union .
Environmental economic accounts provide a significant database for environmental policy decisions .
The need for these accounts arises because of the crucial functions the environment has in terms of economic performance and ensuring the welfare of the European Union 's citizens .
These functions include providing natural resources for production and consumption activities , waste absorption by environmental media and environmental services offering life support .
It is of paramount importance that these economic and environmental accounts are actively used in all relevant EU policy making as a key input to impact assessments , action plans , legislative proposals and other significant products of the policy process .
I voted in favour of this report .
The environmental accounts show the interaction between business , household and environmental factors .
This is why they must contribute to policy evaluation , particularly by making available data about the environmental impact of economic activities .
Politics is all about finding the best possible solutions to any problems that arise ...
How can this be achieved , however , if the problems and their potential solutions are not fully understood ?
This is a fundamental issue in particular , but not solely , for environmental policy .
Political decision makers must therefore have at their disposal data that is both reliable and as exhaustive as possible on the modern world and the environmental situation .
That was the conclusion reached by the European Council in June 2006 , when it called on the European Union and its Member States to extend the national accounts to key aspects of sustainable development .
I welcome this initiative and the European Commission 's proposal , as it will help improve our knowledge of air emissions , environmental taxes , and so on .
I voted in favour of this report .
A sound assessment of European environmental policy is only possible if reliable data is available .
Hitherto at EU level , key policy initiatives for environmental accounts include the Sixth Environmental Action Programme , the EU sustainable development strategy and various sectoral policy initiatives related to the Cardiff process , covering areas such as climate change , sustainable transport , nature and biodiversity , health and the environment , natural resource use and waste management and the international dimension of sustainable development .
In its June 2006 conclusions , the European Council called on the Union and its Member States to extend the national accounts to key aspects of sustainable development .
National accounts should therefore be supplemented with integrated environmental economic accounts providing data that is fully consistent .
To this end , it is necessary for every Member State to collect harmonised and comprehensive data and for the system to be fully harmonised at EU level .
A sound assessment of European environmental policy is only possible if reliable data is available .
Consequently , mandatory data collection by Member States is necessary .
Environmental data currently available at European level should be expanded in the medium term by adding information to facilitate policy assessment .
Recycling and prevention of waste , air emissions and climate change , as well as sustainable consumption and production , would be monitored much more easily if high quality data were available about the interaction between environmental and economic factors .
While this information can be gleaned from environmental accounts , it is essential for this purpose to ensure the cooperation of all Member States and full data harmonisation at EU level .
The desired objectives should therefore be set out more coherently and the future direction to be taken clearly established with regard to the development of environmental economic accounts .
These accounts should contribute to policy evaluation , particularly by making data available concerning the environmental impact of economic activities .
The relevant information could provide an extremely valuable basis for the purposes of environmental policy making .
I welcome Mr Leinen 's proposal and voted in favour of it .
European environmental policy is becoming increasingly important in the light of the economic crisis and the EU 2020 strategy , and a sound assessment of that policy is only possible if reliable data is available .
Environmental data are the only means of assessing environmental policy , and they should be supplemented in the medium term by additional reliable data .
Furthermore , the data could be monitored more easily if high quality information were available regarding the interaction between environmental and economic factors : environmental economic accounts could contribute to policy evaluation by making available data concerning the environmental impact of economic activities .
Such information will be extremely valuable for the purposes of environmental policy making .
Member States will have to use common methods , classifications and rules laid down in a binding common framework , and in that respect , it is very much to be hoped that these new measures will not involve any additional costs or more red tape .
As the rapporteur maintains , this proposal for a regulation is a step towards more comprehensive environmental accounting .
For the sake of sustainable development , it is vital to make the right decisions on matters of environmental policy , namely , those based on reliable data .
I therefore support and welcome the proposal for a regulation of Parliament and of the Council on European environmental economic accounts , as I believe that this will contribute to policy evaluation , particularly by making data available concerning the environmental impact of economic activities .
Measuring the air quality in our cities and performing an in-depth analysis of that measurement would be a step towards more transparent policy making .
Although it relates to chemical and physical factors which , at first glance , are of little use in communication between politicians and voters , this indicator is , in fact , the result of numerous economic decisions : it indicates the concentration of polluting economic activities , the composition of the energy mix used for productive activities and for heating homes and offices , the use of motor vehicles and the management of road infrastructure and traffic , the insulation of buildings and the quality of the materials used , and the existence or otherwise of green spaces , to cite just a few examples .
Air quality also has a significant impact on health expenditure , and particularly on expenditure on respiratory and oncology units .
It is very clear , then , that an environmental indicator can be turned into an economic and political indicator .
Furthermore , it can point to new mechanisms for discouraging irresponsible behaviour and for financing worthy projects .
These links help politicians to take better decisions in the public interest .
The first step is to establish the correct methods , and it is good that it is being taken .
This proposed regulation dates back to a decision of the European Council in June 2006 .
At the time , the EU decided to extend existing national accounts , and the statistical data to be compiled , to key aspects of sustainable development .
To supplement national accounts and data , the Commission proposed a regulation to establish European environmental economic accounts .
In compliance with the Commission 's proposal , Member States should therefore be provided with a methodology , common standards , definitions , classifications and accounting rules , which should be put together within a binding framework for each of them .
While I think that priority should be given firstly to data already available ( that is , collected at regional , national and European level ) , I believe that if the need arises for additional modules , which does not entail unnecessary bureaucracy or additional costs , in this case , Eurostat should be allowed to gather data from Member States with a view to setting up environmental economic accounts at European level .
It is for this reason that I also welcomed the introduction of these new European environmental economic accounts , and proposed that their scope should be extended to other modules .
I voted in favour of the report on EU environmental economic accounts as I believe that there need to be indicators for sustainable development and public welfare , beyond gross domestic product ( GDP ) , that enable the evaluation of European environmental policy .
In the words of the rapporteur , ' Environmental economic accounts should contribute to policy evaluation , particularly by making available data concerning the environmental impact of economic activities ' .
This idea is important , and is indeed the only way of obtaining concrete data about the real impact of environmental policy .
If , on the one hand , economic growth cannot neglect the environment , it is also true that environmental policy cannot neglect or lose sight of economic activity and the competitiveness of European business and industry .
I always see the problem of sustainable development through this prism , whereby economic growth and respect for the environment are necessarily two sides of the same coin .
Europe cannot and must not forget this , especially at the present time .
On 28 September 2009 , the Commission released a communication entitled ' GDP and beyond : Measuring progress in a changing world ' , proposing measures for the creation of a database of EU environmental accounts , with a view to better public debate and better-supported decision making .
By the end of 2013 , the Commission should table a report addressing issues such as the situation of our forests and how depleted our fisheries resources are .
To this end , we need a credible and up-to-date statistical basis , to be created under this regulation .
The legal framework created with this proposal will allow the EU to assess environmental economic accounts , taking sustainable development into consideration .
It has never been so vital to pay attention to the dichotomy between the environment and the economy .
I voted in favour of this report because , besides making it possible to reach policy decisions that are more comprehensive and reasoned , it echoes the proverb ' we do not inherit the earth from our ancestors , we borrow it from our children ' .
It is vital that we bequeath a healthy environment to future generations .
The definition and provision of descriptive indicators and statistics that allow the development of economic and environmental factors to be monitored , along with possible interactions between these factors , is unquestionably a useful tool for supporting strategic planning , defining public policy and outlining ways towards sustainable development .
Moreover , as the rapporteur states , the data that is obtained can , and should , contribute to policy evaluation , enabling assessment of the environmental impact of economic activities .
The information obtained could be extremely valuable for the purposes of environmental policy making .
This proposal for a regulation provides only for the collection and compilation of data regarding air emissions , environmental taxes applicable to economic sectors , and economic material flow accounting .
More data could be gleaned from other areas .
The rapporteur also mentions something to this effect , suggesting that pilot studies into their practical application should be carried out .
It should , however , be borne in mind that the national statistical systems and their costs will need to be adapted .
The Commission seems to take this fact into account in its proposal , even if only partially , by providing for derogations to Member States if it is necessary to make major adjustments .
This proposal for a regulation only makes provision for the collection and compilation of data regarding air emissions , environmental taxes applicable to economic sectors , and economic material flow accounting .
More data could be gleaned from other areas .
The rapporteur also mentions something to this effect , suggesting that pilot studies into their practical application should be carried out .
However , the definition and provision of descriptive indicators and statistics that allow the development of economic and environmental factors to be monitored , along with possible interactions between these factors , is unquestionably a useful tool for supporting strategic planning , defining public policy and outlining ways towards sustainable development .
The data that is obtained can , and should , contribute to policy evaluation , enabling assessment of the environmental impact of economic activities .
The information obtained could be extremely valuable for the purposes of environmental policy making .
It should , however , be borne in mind that the national statistical systems and their costs will need to be adapted .
The Commission seems to take this fact into account in its proposal , even if only partially , by providing for derogations to Member States if it is necessary to make major adjustments .
Environmental economic accounts should contribute to policy evaluation , particularly by making data available on the environmental impact of economic activities .
Such information could be extremely valuable for the purposes of environmental policy making .
Recycling and the prevention of waste , air pollution and climate change , as well as sustainable consumption and production , could be monitored much more effectively if high quality data were available regarding the interaction between environmental and economic factors .
In my opinion , collection of the relevant data , which has been voluntary so far , should become mandatory .
Moreover , the introduction of a common framework in this area on the collection , processing , transfer and evaluation of European environmental economic accounts would facilitate the political evaluation of European environmental policy .
Under the Treaty of Amsterdam , a great deal of attention was paid to the interaction between economic policy and environmental policy .
That is why factors such as sustainable transport and energy resources have become key elements in other sectoral policies , too .
Indeed , back in 2006 , the European Council called on the Member States to extend the national accounts to key aspects of sustainable development , in order to provide the most consistent data possible .
I voted in favour of this proposal for a regulation because I believe it can facilitate the work of national statistics offices by enabling them to compile harmonised and timely environmental accounting data .
In this respect , the adoption of a European legal basis for the collection of data on environmental economic accounts will mean that estimates can be provided at European level regarding the existing interaction between economic and environmental factors .
Lastly , I hope that this instrument will be seen as further confirmation of the leading role played by the European Union internationally with regard to environmental accounts .
I voted against the Leinen report which , in the guise of so-called environmental statistics , unleashes an avalanche of information requiring a huge amount of bureaucracy , and all this in the name of green evangelicalism .
Environmental economic accounts should contribute to policy evaluation , particularly by making available data concerning the environmental impact of economic activities .
Such information could be extremely valuable for the purposes of environmental policy making .
In its June 2006 conclusions , the European Council called on the EU and its Member States to extend the national accounts to key aspects of sustainable development .
This Commission proposal for European environmental economic accounts is a valuable contribution to this political approach .
A sound assessment of European environmental policy is only possible if reliable data is available .
Mandatory data collection by the Member States is therefore necessary .
Environmental data currently available at European level should be expanded in the medium term to facilitate policy assessment .
Recycling and waste prevention , air emissions and climate change , sustainable consumption and production could be monitored much more effectively if high quality data were available regarding the interaction between environmental and economic factors .
I abstained from the vote on this document because I do not believe that such information can be gleaned purely from environmental accounts .
It is essential to ensure the cooperation of all Member States and full harmonisation at EU level .
in writing . - I voted for this report .
Environmental economic accounts should contribute to policy evaluation , particularly by making data available on the environmental impact of economic activities .
Such information could be extremely valuable for the purposes of environmental policy making .
A sound assessment of European environmental policy is only possible if reliable data is available .
Mandatory data collection by the Member States is therefore necessary .
We refer , in particular , to the collection of data regarding air emissions , environmental taxes applicable to various economic sectors and macro-economic material flow accounting .
In our view , environmental economic accounts should contribute to policy evaluation , particularly by making available data concerning the environmental impact of economic activities .
Such information could be extremely valuable for the purposes of environmental policy making .
We agree that a verification clause should be introduced and that the Commission should report regularly on the implementation of the regulation in practice .
We believe it is important to verify the reliability and comparability of the data in order to be able to make improvements and guarantee a high standard of environmental accounting .
Due account should also be taken of the development of new modules and experience acquired in the course of pilot studies .
The verification report should be regarded as an opportunity to adjust the regulation in the light of fresh developments and experiences .
I believe that a better range of statistics on the environmental consequences of the policies of Member States and the EU is needed , as well as on accounting for certain taxes that support environmental policies .
It is unfortunate that statistics and taxes are lumped together under ' environmental accounting ' .
The aim of this assimilation is to implement the climate market and its stock rights relating to pollution .
The delegation of powers to the Commission is also heading in this direction .
I voted in favour as I support the idea of the necessary statistical instruments , although I reject the policies that they serve .
There needs to be agreement on how to prepare model statistics on the environmental impact of EU and Member State policies as well as on tax accounting which supports certain environmental policies .
That much is obvious .
It is , however , regrettable that statistics and taxes are included indiscriminately in ' environmental accounting ' .
The reason behind such a lack of discrimination is the implementation of the climate package and its market trading in pollution rights .
The delegation of powers to the Commission is also moving in the same direction .
And yet I am voting in favour of it .
I want to validate the notion of necessary statistical instruments even if I reject the policies that they may serve .
It is vital that environmental economic accounts contribute to policy evaluation , making available data concerning the environmental impact of economic activities .
Such information could be extremely valuable for the purposes of environmental policy making .
We need to know how to define the aim and purpose of this proposal for a regulation , together with its contribution to the overall ' GDP and beyond ' strategy .
This regulation provides only for the collection and compilation of data regarding air emissions , environmental taxes applicable to economic sectors , and economic material flow accounting .
This is a first step towards developing more comprehensive environmental accounting since , according to the competent European and national statistics offices , it is only in these areas that data for the whole of Europe is currently available .
It is therefore necessary to continue to make advances so that statistical data on the environment is increasingly reliable and forthcoming .
in writing . - Recycling and prevention of waste , air emissions and climatic change , and sustainable consumption and production , could be monitored much more effectively if high quality data were available regarding the interaction between environmental and economic factors .
The relevant data collection , which , until today , was made on a voluntary basis at EU level , should become therefore mandatory .
Moreover , environmental data currently available should be expanded in the medium term to facilitate the necessary policy assessment of the European environmental policy .
I agree with the rapporteur 's position and I voted in favour .
A proper and sound assessment of European environmental policy is only possible if reliable data is available .
Recycling , air emissions , climate change , sustainable consumption and production must be monitored continuously in order to achieve progress in these areas across the whole of Europe .
A system for preparing environmental economic accounts is one of the measures that would aid the collection and compilation of data regarding air emissions , environmental taxes applicable to various economic sectors and macro-economic material flow accounting .
However , the binding nature of this system creates an additional administrative burden .
Therefore , when introducing such a system , it is necessary to properly assess the impact of its application , set out the desired objectives more specifically and establish clearly the future direction to be taken with regard to environmental economic accounts .
Attention should be drawn to the fact that Eurostat will be granted the main supervisory and liability functions in these areas .
The implementation of the functions mentioned requires sufficient human and financial resources .
However , we must consider whether the European Union budget is sufficient to allocate additional financial resources to increase and maintain the bureaucratic apparatus .
The aim of the proposal for a regulation on European environmental economic accounts is to provide instruments for use in achieving certain important objectives , such as developing a European environmental accounting strategy and extending the work of the statistics offices , which provide accounting data to administrative bodies .
I voted in favour of the text because I believe it is important for sustainable development purposes to incorporate environmental topics in EU policies and to have national accounts and a European programme with integrated economic and environmental accounting in the areas of transport , recycling and prevention of waste , air emissions , climate change , and sustainable production and consumption .
In 2006 , the Council invited the EU and the Member States to extend their national accounts to the main aspects of sustainable development , proposing short- and medium-term methods to develop global indicators that could lead to better public debate and contribute to decision making based on the economic impact of the environmental measures to be implemented .
I voted in favour of this report as I agree with this first step towards developing environmental accounting that is more comprehensive , since , according to the relevant European and national statistics offices , it is only in these areas that data for the whole of Europe is currently available .
New priority modules , on which work is currently in progress and for which relevant data is likely to be available soon , should be identified in a working plan , and this data should also be submitted , especially data on the environmental impact of economic activities .
Recycling and waste prevention , atmospheric emissions and climatic change , and sustainable consumption and production could be monitored much more effectively if high quality data were available regarding the interaction between environmental and economic factors .
These data could act as an important aid to taking decisions on environmental measures .
in writing . - ( IT ) In 2006 , the European Council invited the European Union and its Member States to extend statistical data to sustainable development and to existing national accounting data .
In its 2009 report entitled ' GDP and Beyond : Measuring Progress in a Changing World ' , the Commission itself proposed various measures to be adopted in the short and medium term concerning the definition of general indicators to create a more reliable knowledge base for better public debate and more appropriate political action .
In particular , it also touched upon aspects concerning Europe 's environmental economic accounts .
An in-depth assessment of European environmental economic accounts can only be made on the basis of reliable data and therefore , Member States should be equipped with common methodology and standards , definitions , classifications and accounting rules which should be developed in a framework which is binding on all States .
I am voting in favour of the proposal because the objectives to be pursued and the future direction to be taken regarding environmental economic accounts need to be clearly set out , and so that these accounts can constitute an indispensable basis for environmental economic decision making .
in writing . - In order to ensure sustainable development and appropriate environmental policies at EU level , it is essential that policy makers are provided with reliable data on the environmental impact of economic activities .
I support this resolution as it lays out a number of effective measures for the collection of more comprehensive data .
If the EU is serious about increasing recycling , reducing waste and limiting air emissions and climate change , then it must take action .
The most effective way to achieve European goals in relation to sustainable development and environmental policies is through full cooperation across all Member States .
Therefore , mandatory data collection on the impact of economic activities by Member States is necessary .
The more accurate and reliable the information provided is , then the better our environmental policies will be .
If a sustainable development policy is to have the desired effect , there needs to be enough information available for the decision-making process to facilitate the adoption of considered solutions .
The Member States therefore need to assemble a wide range of indicators that together provide an overall picture of the EU in terms of the environment .
This is the aim of the Commission proposal to Parliament and the Council , subject to assessment by Parliament .
For these reasons , I voted for this report .
in writing . - We voted in favour .
The proposal creates environmental economic accounts as satellite accounts to ESA 95 by providing methodology , common standards , definitions , classifications and accounting rules , intended to be used for compiling environmental economic accounts .
At the initial stage , the environmental accounts to be compiled within the common framework shall be grouped in the following modules : a module for air emissions accounts ; a module for environmentally related taxes by economic activities ; a module for economy-wide material flow accounts .
On the basis of our amendments adopted in the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety , the compromise negotiated with the Council contains , in addition to the accounts initially proposed , a requirement for the Commission to report by the end of 2013 and examine extension of the accounts to cover material stocks ( and not only flows ) as well as eco-system services .
Agreement on this requirement for Member States to provide data with harmonised methodology on environmental economy is actually a positive concrete step in the ' beyond GDP ' process .
National accounts cover environmental considerations based on economic performance and the creation of prosperity .
Under the Commission proposal , they are to provide a source of data on air emissions and environmental taxes .
The environmental accounts are intended to only show the interactions .
Sustainable development in the EU requires a reasonable behaviour when it comes to the ecosystem and increasing shortages of resources .
The citizens must be informed of environmental impacts resulting from economic activities .
I voted in favour of the report by Mr Leinen .
In fact , environmental and sustainability policies have recently taken on a particular relevance , making people pay greater attention to the integration of economic and environmental policies . Climate change , sustainable transport , nature , biodiversity , the use and exploitation of raw materials and natural resources , as well as waste management , have increased their importance exponentially in the policies of Member States .
For this reason , we can only assess European environmental policies and the related strategies adopted within the EU in a serious and rigorous way if reliable data are provided .
Corrections to votes and voting intentions : see Minutes
( The sitting was suspended at 13 : 15 and resumed at 15 : 00 )
Announcement by the President
Ladies and gentlemen , I would like to make the following announcement .
In connection with the evacuation drill which took place during voting time , today , all explanations of positions adopted at today 's vote will be heard tomorrow - they will be heard together with tomorrow 's explanations of vote .
Tomorrow , we will also complete the votes which were scheduled for today but were not taken .
This concerns the vote which was in progress when voting was suspended , which we will continue from exactly the same point at which it was suspended , so as to maintain complete continuity .
Approval of the minutes of the previous sitting : see Minutes
Question Hour with the President of the Commission
The next item is Question Hour with the President of the Commission .
Mr President , allow me to begin with a smile as I congratulate all the Members for having survived the fire alarm and managing to take our places , safe and sound , back in the Chamber .
As a representative of the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) , I would like to pose a question to the President of the Commission , who has been busy dealing with the pictures that we have been seeing in recent weeks from the Mediterranean , where many people fleeing from the situation in Africa have made it to Europe , while some have also failed to make it .
We have had to see the images of these stranded and dead people on the news .
We are all aware that it is a joint European challenge facing us to find an answer to this drama and this misery for refugees .
On behalf of the PPE Group , I would like to ask the President of the Commission to give us an appraisal of whether the Commission - and , above all , Frontex - has enough resources , whether we , the European Union , have enough capabilities to respond on the ground , and whether we have enough statutory bases to enable Europe to act together in the Mediterranean region .
I would also be interested to hear what form the discussions with the countries of origin ( Tunisia and Egypt , for example ) take and whether we Europeans are making headway in this area .
President of the Commission . - Mr Weber , we all regret recent events that have caused the loss of many lives .
I agree with you on the need to take more decisive action in this field .
There was an immediate response to assist the countries in North Africa - more than EUR 1 million for humanitarian assistance - and this assistance will continue .
Through the Hermes joint operation , the Frontex border agency is coordinating a response to the strong migratory pressure .
However , it is very important that Member States in the Mediterranean region , together with third countries , continue to cooperate and coordinate their efforts .
More needs to be done .
So my very direct answer to you is that , yes , we need more resources for Frontex .
The proposals to reinforce Frontex need to be adopted as a matter of urgency .
We also need Member States to show political will and , above all , solidarity among themselves by offering the requisite technical and human resources .
As you know , the European Union as such does not have all those resources , so we need the cooperation of the Member States in making them available .
Mr President , my thanks for your assessments of the situation .
Given that you state that we currently need more resources for Frontex , I would be interested to hear whether you are not also of the opinion that the Member States have hitherto been too unwilling to provide the resources to make Frontex strong .
We did have the toolbox already .
Was it the case that there was too little willingness on the part of the Member States to support Frontex accordingly ?
President of the Commission . - There is an ongoing debate about this .
In fact , it is one of the topics for the European Council this month , on 23 and 24 June .
Not only should the Member States adopt the proposal already put forward to reinforce Frontex , but it is also important to step up the logistical response : more planes and more ships are indispensable and we cannot currently provide them from our budget at European level .
I think there is a political will to do this but it needs to be done in a coordinated manner and this is where an effort has been initiated by the Commission : Commissioner Malmström is working on the matter with the Member States , and I hope the European Council later this month will confirm our thinking .
At the same time , of course , we also need the cooperation of third countries .
I myself was in Tunisia , where I spoke with the Prime Minister , and they have promised us cooperation .
In fact , they are cooperating and we are now trying to reach some form of pragmatic logistical agreements between the Tunisian authorities and our own agencies .
Not all MEPs are back in the Chamber after the fire drill .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Yes , I noticed that some of my colleagues are still on the fire drill .
Yesterday , Commissioner Olli Rehn announced a number of important steps in the Commission .
First of all , he asked for a number of changes to a rescue mechanism .
He said it is necessary for this mechanism to be able to provide countries with flexible credit lines .
He said that this mechanism has to be able to go to the secondary market and , most importantly , he said that this can be done by discounted swaps with its own AAA rated bonds .
This is very important because it means that you can swap bad bonds from countries in difficulties with the rescue mechanism 's AAA bonds .
Secondly , he also said that the Commission should start to examine the possibility of Eurobonds - finally , I may say .
My question to you , Mr Barroso , is can you confirm that this is also the position of the Commission ?
Secondly , as time is pressing , will you propose these changes to the rescue mechanism at the next European Council meeting in two weeks ' time ?
President of the Commission . - I want to confirm that all the ideas put forward by Commissioner Rehn have my full support and endorsement , so I will not repeat what he said .
Regarding the ESM , we are now in the process of establishing it .
As you know , I hope the governments will very soon agree on that and so I hope that there will be a political decision in the European Council confirming the decisions regarding the European Stability Mechanism and , of course , you know what our position is .
Regarding Eurobonds , this is not a new idea .
The Commission has , for many years , including one of my predecessors , put forward the idea of Eurobonds .
The reality is that so far , Member States have not accepted the idea ; namely , when we had the crisis with Greece , the Commission proposed some idea of mutualisation of the debt , which was rejected by most of the Member States in the euro area .
I think that there is now some progress in terms of accepting the idea of considering several options , and the Commission will , of course , present several options .
We have always thought that the idea of Eurobonds was an attractive one provided the Member States could support it , but we are not yet there , to be honest .
We are not yet there and I think what we have to do now is focus on the ESM .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - I do not think that the crisis concerning Greece and the euro is over .
It is not over .
So we have to find additional instruments .
One of the additional instruments is , in fact , what Olli Rehn is proposing - a swap of bad bonds from some countries for a smaller package of AAA rated Eurobonds .
That is the way forward .
These Eurobonds can be issued by the EFSF , by the ESM or by a new European agency in the future .
That does not matter .
It is the mechanism that is important and it is important that , for the first time , I think , Olli Rehn and the Commission recognise that it is the way forward .
President of the Commission . - Mr Verhofstadt , the Commission acts as a collegiate body .
I think you find it easier to agree with what Olli Rehn says than with what I say , but in fact , we are saying exactly the same thing .
In the annual growth survey , the Commission was defending and proposing collectively more intervention of this kind in the markets ; that was unfortunately not agreed to by the Member States .
So what I can confirm is that we are working along that line ; we are trying to have increased flexibility for intervention in the markets but , honestly , I think we should now focus on the ESM and consider , of course , options for the future of the Eurobonds if the Member States are ready to take that additional step .
Mr President , as you know , my group is composed mainly of non-euro area members , but we certainly do not wish to see the euro fail , as I have already said here several times .
Our economies are too interconnected for that , and I must say , therefore , that we have mixed feelings about what is happening .
We are getting mixed messages here .
The European Council says one thing , the European Central Bank says something else and the International Monetary Fund something else again .
Most of all , I have the feeling that political opinions are still prevailing over economic ones , as if it were possible to fool the markets with a few promises , and avoid a real solution to the situation .
I would like to ask what the position of the European Commission is regarding the restructuring of government debt .
You really do still seem to prefer pouring in more and more money and providing more and more endless loans to economies that are in serious trouble and on the very brink of collapse , or are we starting to see common sense here , and to consider seriously the possibility of restructuring their government debts , because , in my opinion , we cannot avoid this in the long term .
President of the Commission . - Mr Zahradil , first of all , unfortunately , the economic problems that we have in Europe are not only in the euro area .
Some Member States outside the euro area are also involved in balance of payment support programmes through the Commission and the IMF .
Regarding the euro area , as you say , there are discussions ongoing between the Member States , the Council , the Commission and the European Central Bank on achieving the best possible comprehensive response .
As you know , there is not always expert agreement on the best way to obtain that response .
This is still ongoing work .
It is fair to recognise that these issues are extremely difficult and complex .
The magnitude of the challenge is unprecedented and it requires some work of convergence .
That is why the Commission has been extremely prudent in the way it communicates on that matter because some of these issues are market sensitive .
One thing is clear : as we have said , restructuring is not an alternative to the painful fiscal consolidation efforts that all the Member States have to make if they want to correct their imbalances in terms of deficit and debt .

Mr President , Mr Barroso , it is true that we do not always understand the European Union 's position , but you have just answered that .
I would like to say three things .
Firstly , there should be no more restructuring .
We all know that at some point , there will be a restructuring of the debt , for instance in Greece , for the simple reason that the Greek Government needs to be given the chance to regain confidence and that Greek society needs to be restructured .
As things stand in Greece , nobody trusts anyone , least of all the government .
Until the government manages to give its people another outlook for the future , other than one of austerity , it will not manage to revive its economy .
The most important thing that needs to be discussed by the Commission and the parties concerned should therefore be the need to inject some confidence in the Greek people , without which no measures can be adopted at all .
Yet the prevailing austerity does not give Greek society time to stop and think .
That is why they are rejecting it , which could be extremely risky .
One final question : tax evasion .
Could not Europe also lend Greece a hand on this matter ?
Greek accounts are held in banks in Austria , Luxembourg , Cyprus and Switzerland .
Why not freeze those accounts , or at the very least , challenge banking secrecy so that the Greek Government can ascertain where the problem of tax evasion lies .
We ask them to put a stop to tax evasion and yet , at the same time , we are not offering them any help .
It is our banks , the European banks , which are actually covering up this tax evasion ,
Mr Cohn-Bendit , you are right when you say there is a problem with tax evasion in Greece , although , in my opinion , this has not caused the Greek structural problem .
We are currently addressing the issue of banking secrecy .
As you know , since March 2009 , all Member States as well as Switzerland have agreed to implement the Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development ( OECD ) standard which stipulates that a State cannot refuse to provide information if so requested by another State , on the grounds that this information is held by a bank or any other financial institution .
This principle was included by us , the Commission , in the directive on administrative cooperation in the field of taxation , which came into force on 11 March 2011 and which , unfortunately , will only be applied on 1 January 2013 .
The question of banking secrecy has therefore been dealt with at European level from a legal point of view and cannot constitute an obstacle to the full exchange of information on request between tax authorities .
I believe that all the criteria have already been met , on the basis of administrative cooperation , for Member States and the EU to now give Greece information about any fraud or tax evasion .
Mr Barroso , I have just one brief question .
I am pleased that the G8 summit and the e-G8 forum that preceded it discussed the Internet .
There are also concerns about why those with power are concerning themselves with the Internet .
We are aware of how sensitive this area is .
Is there any more you can tell us in this connection ?
Is this a one-off , or will there be further discussion ?
Will you be putting this on the agenda again ?
I think President Sarkozy 's idea was an excellent one because the Internet is a global phenomenon .
We all want an Internet that is open .
We think it contributes hugely to knowledge and freedom .
At the same time , the Internet is often open to abuse : there is exploitation , of children , for example , and crimes committed by taking advantage of the freedoms that the Internet offers .
We have therefore had a very interesting discussion with some of the big names in the creation of Internet initiatives , from the head of Google to Mr Zuckerberg , the head of Facebook , and others .
We talked about what type of regulation is appropriate for the Internet , while maintaining the freedom and potential for innovation that the Internet offers .
So there was debate followed by confirmation that this matter , the Internet , will appear on a future G8 agenda .
My curiosity is still somewhat unsated on this issue and I would like to ask you if you would be prepared to tell us , in general terms , about these further negotiations concerning the Internet , as this is an important and far-reaching measure for the future .
There was not really any negotiation .
It was more a very general exchange of views , a kind of brainstorming .
There was a conference beforehand specifically called e-G8 , attended by some of the big players in the Internet business and the authorities .
It was not exactly a negotiation ; I did not see it like that .
We asked these heads of major Internet companies to tell us how they saw the future of this industry and , furthermore , we shared our concerns , our interests and our perception of the Internet with the different members of the G8 .
However , there was not really any negotiation in terms of specific results .
on behalf of the EFD Group . - Mr Barroso , we have enjoyed a series of pantomime exchanges on the euro .
Every time I have predicted that a country would need a bail-out , you have come back and said , oh no , they don 't , everything is fine .
And now we face the fourth bail-out - the second Greek bail-out - unless , of course , today you are going to tell us that is not necessary either .
But the question I want to ask you today is perhaps far more serious than anything that has happened in Greece or Ireland or Portugal to date .
It is about the real sovereign debt crisis which we may face within the next few weeks , and which concerns the integrity of the European Central Bank itself .
Month after month , I have warned that you cannot go on buying up vast quantities of your own bad debt .
Mr Barroso , do you accept that the finances of the European Central Bank and its integrity are now in a serious and parlous state ?
President of the Commission . - No , I do not accept that .
I think the European Central Bank is a very credible institution that has been managed with great wisdom and intelligence .
The independence of the ECB is respected by all the Member States of the euro area .
Of course , we know that there are some difficulties in the euro area .
As I have already said , they are difficulties which , to be fair , concern not only the euro area .
Unfortunately , your criticism of the euro area is always ideological .
The debt problems are not exclusive .
On average , the debt in the euro area is lower than the debt in the UK , to give an example .
But , in fact , we have different problems because this is the first time we have had this type of monetary union without some more integrated institutional setting .
That is precisely why we are now trying to have a comprehensive response , and the ECB is part of the effort we are making to give financial stability to the euro area .
on behalf of the EFD Group . - Backing up some of my rhetoric , just yesterday , the respected think-tank , Open Europe , came out with some figures on this .
It said that a staggering EUR 190 billion of the ECB 's exposure is exposure to the Greek state and Greek banks .
Should the ECB see the value of its assets fall by just 4.25 % , its entire capital base will be wiped out .
Do you accept the findings of Open Europe , or do you go along with Mr Juncker 's assertion a couple of weeks ago that , with the situation in the euro being as serious as it is , you actually have to lie in public ?
President of the Commission . - First of all , I do not lie and the Commission has always been very consistent in the information it has given about all the situations .
The situation is difficult ; we have said it honestly from the beginning and we do not pretend the situation is a rosy one .
Having said this , the European Central Bank 's credibility relies on the absolute determination of the euro area governments to do whatever it takes to ensure the financial stability of the euro area , so I have no doubts about the system 's ability , of the efforts in the euro area and the credibility of the European Central Bank .
I have no doubts about the capacity of the European Central Bank to defend European interests , nor about the commitment of the Member States of the euro area to provide all the guarantees the European Central Bank needs to fulfil its independent role as our central bank .
In terms of exposure of central banks , there are other central banks in Europe and outside Europe which are in a much more difficult and vulnerable situation than the European Central Bank , which is a credible , internationally much respected body of the European Union .
The EU is becoming even wider and , with the advent of pan-European political parties , seemingly ever deeper , with this inability to achieve consensus being proved repeatedly .
The contrary position of Germany over Libya and Italian and French disagreement over the recognition of Schengen visas proved this .
Could you explain to me and to my electorate how it is possible to instigate common policy in important areas , such as international relations and security , without consensus , unless we dispense with the democratic rights of Member States to project their own aspirations unilaterally ?
President of the Commission . - Frankly , I do not understand the concern that is behind your question .
In fact , we are a Union of 27 democratic states and we have agreed that in common foreign and security policies , decisions should be taken unanimously .
If the Member States do not agree unanimously , it is not possible for us to impose a decision on those Member States , and thus we are fully respecting the democratic nature not only of our Union , but also of our Member States .
I believe that it is in our interest as Europeans , European citizens , that the Member States act together in external matters .
It is obvious that today in Europe , even the biggest Member States do not have the necessary influence or leverage to talk on an equal basis with the United States or China and other powers , but together , the European Union can make a difference .
So I hope that the process will lead to increased convergence in terms also of foreign policy matters between our Member States .
The first thing I mentioned was pan-European parties .
Could you explain to me why taxpayers should fund political parties at any level ?
Maybe you could explain to me how useful they are for the EU 's aims .
One other question I have is about Cathy Ashton .
I note her attendance at Commission meetings is very low .
Is the UK being correctly represented at the Commission ?
President of the Commission . - There are two questions here .
First of all , the European parties are , as you know , recognised as important entities by the Treaty that was ratified unanimously by our Member States .
So there is a reason to support the European parties because they are , in fact , European entities , recognised as such by our Treaty .
Secondly , regarding Cathy Ashton , she is not only Vice-President of the Commission , but also High Representative of the Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy .
She has a very challenging job in which she has to represent the European Union , so of course she has more travel assignments than most of the members of the Commission .
She makes a great personal effort to be present at almost all the Commission meetings .
She cannot be at all of them .
However , I wish to point out that members of the Commission are not there to represent countries .
They are nominated by countries but they are there to represent the European Union .
All of us take an oath , when we assume our duties , saying that we are not there to represent countries , and , in fact , the credibility of the institution comes exactly from that fact - that we try to be independent and to serve the general European interest .
I can tell you that the Member States , including the UK , are very well represented in the European Council by their Prime Ministers and in the Council by the various ministers .
Mr President , my apologies for the delay in my arrival .
I waited until the end as a result .
Mr Barroso , I have a question to ask you that relates to the grave situation in which we , in the European Union , find ourselves .
2008 was the year of a deep crisis in banking .
In 2009 , this banking crisis led to a deep economic crisis in the real economy .
The assumption of the costs of banking deficits by the public purses ultimately led , in 2010 , to a deep crisis in national budgets .
This deep crisis of the national budgets is being accompanied by an orgy of cuts , which is leading to dramatic situations in several Member States of the European Union , in part as a result of measures demanded by the European Union .
There is a risk that , following the banking crisis , the economic crisis and the crisis in the national budgets , 2011 and 2012 will be the years of social crisis in Europe .
I would therefore ask you , Mr Barroso , is the Commission prepared to discuss with us how we can improve the underfunding of the social welfare net - social security systems - in the Member States of the European Union , in particular , in those Member States hardest hit by the budgetary crisis ?
Moreover , are you prepared to have a definitive discussion with us about Eurobonds in order to obtain the resources that we need to be able to invest in the economy to facilitate growth and jobs in the hardest hit Member States ?

Mr Schulz , only today , the Commission adopted country-specific recommendations for each of the 27 countries , and there is also an introductory note in which we express in very clear terms this concern that you have just mentioned , which is very important for us .
We are well aware that austerity , which is necessary at present because of the need to reduce deficits and debt , is truly very difficult .
At the same time , we believe that each euro being spent now on debt interest means one euro less for the hospitals , public health services , public education and social security .
This is , therefore , real austerity .
This is why we must engage in serious budget consultation in order to restore confidence and , at the same time , implement the structural reforms needed to guarantee competitiveness , whilst still protecting the most vulnerable .
I think you will like the document we adopted today .
It looks at all the issues affecting the labour market : how do we attract more people into the labour market , how do we incorporate this social dimension into all our policies ?
We now need to see how much room for manoeuvre each country has for guaranteeing these goals .
However , I think we are agreed on the goals .
( IT ) Mr President , to be honest , I did not want to participate in the discussion on the G8 , but I did want to put a question to President Barroso regarding culture .
In the European Union , there are many programmes to encourage youngsters - and others - to meet , so that this becomes a real Union .
For many youngsters and professionals , programmes such as Comenius , Lifelong Learning , Youth in Action , etc. have represented the true coming-together of the European Union , inspiring truly European sentiments .
( The President interrupted the speaker to explain that the debate was on another subject , but then invited him to continue ... )
I would like to know , therefore , what is to become of these programmes , at least as far as the Commission can tell , seeing that they are approaching their expiry dates and we should already have confronted the matter within the Committee on Culture and Education .
How does the Commission intend to develop the next programme , from 2014 on ?
I believe that this subject is of particular interest to many people active in European Union affairs and many of the youngsters in our countries .
The Commission has a keen interest in everything relating to the promotion of this cultural dimension in Europe and in exchanges of every kind .
I have a strong attachment to it myself and have already met some of the main parties involved in this area .
At the end of this month , we will be putting forward proposals on the future financing of all sectors , including culture .
We will , of course , be making substantial proposals in this area .
We are thinking in terms of rationalising the instruments while protecting the aims of programmes such as the ones you mentioned .
These are flagship programmes and are extremely important for a citizens ' Europe and a Europe that recognises the value of culture .
I will stick to the topic .
The Commission yesterday adopted a strong package of reports and measures on fighting the corruption that is costing the EU EUR 120 billion per annum - roughly equivalent to the total EU budget - but eight Member States score less than five out of ten on the Transparency International index .
The Commission says implementation of anti-corruption instruments is unsatisfactory .
So would it not have been a good idea for corruption to be raised at the G8 summit ?
The only reference that I can find , and it was an oblique one , was about developing countries .
There was no reference at all to how rich countries need to show the political will to tackle the problem of our own backyard and show leadership on this .
Was not this an opportunity missed to talk about corruption and bribery at the G8 , especially as one of the members , Russia , is 154th out of 178 and many of our own Member States show poorly on the Transparency International index ?
President of the Commission . - The issue of corruption was dealt with when we had this outreach meeting with African leaders , but I can tell you that anti-corruption issues are going to be high on the agenda of the G20 meeting in November .
Having said that , I think it was a useful discussion because , when there is corruption , someone is corrupted but there is also someone doing the corrupting , so in a way , the G8 members were also scrutinised when we discussed the issue of Africa .
By the way , I gave them very good news because I announced that the Commission is going to put forward initiatives relating to transparency for raw materials - good or bad news depending on perspective : less transparency makes it easier for some regimes to use revenues from their national resources and raw materials in a non-transparent way , sometimes with the complicity , we have to say , of the so-called developed world .
That was the angle taken on the issue at the last G8 meeting .
( NL ) Mr Barroso , you were just talking about the European Central Bank ( ECB ) , which you described as independent .
The point is that the ECB is not independent in the Greek crisis ; it has chosen sides .
The ECB , as a commercial bank , has bought up tens of billions of weak bonds and is now holding up the necessary restructuring of Greek debts .
My question is specific , and it is as follows : what are you doing to prevent the ECB , with its two hats , from standing in the way of the difficult but necessary steps to restructure the Greek economy ?
President of the Commission . - The European Central Bank ( ECB ) is certainly independent , and not only is its independence recognised by the Treaty - so it is therefore legal and Treaty-based independence - but I can also tell you that I have had some seven years ' experience in this position , dealing very frequently with the ECB and being present on many occasions when the ECB has shown it does not need our support to affirm its independence .
I want to reassure you on that point .
Regarding the issue of restructuring , various options are , as you know , under analysis .
We are considering the whole debate , but the position of the Commission has already been clearly stated : we believe that the restructuring is not an alternative to the efforts that Member States have to make in terms of fiscal consolidation and structural reform .
That has been our consistent position and we will maintain it .

( PT ) Mr President , Mr Barroso , also on the matter of the G8 summit , I would like to know whether the whole issue of regulating the financial markets has been postponed once again , in particular , with the implementation of a tax on movement of capital , capital gains , the abolition of tax havens , the end of derivatives and ratings agencies , given their total lack of credibility at present and their utter lack of transparency .
Lastly , I would also like to ask you about an issue related to what is happening here in the EU , with Greece , Portugal and Ireland , whereby a process is being imposed that is chiefly aimed at forcing instruments and processes that exacerbate exploitation and economic decline on workers and countries , and which , in the short or medium term , will contribute to greater poverty , unemployment and inequality .
Do you not think that this contradicts all the principles that have been expressed , including by the Treaty itself ?
Firstly , Mrs Figueiredo , in relation to issues of global financial regulation , as you know , since the G20 was established as the principal economic forum for global governance in financial matters , it is the G20 that is given precedence on these issues .
Some of these points have been addressed to a certain extent . I myself ...
I can tell you ... I launched the debate at the G8 about a financial transactions tax , when we were also discussing the problem of development aid , and my position is clearly in favour of this tax .
We are working on this in the Commission and will table some ideas very soon .
As for the general issue you raised , the situation of the euro area was also discussed .
Here , we may have completely different points of view .
We believe that without budgetary consolidation and structural reforms , there will be no chance to promote our objective : a social market economy .
Mr Barroso , at the G8 summit , the participants debated their commitments to the neighbourhood policy in the Mediterranean .

You yourself , on behalf of the European Union , have committed EUR 1.24 billion saying it is for the neighbourhood , which might have been understood as being just for the south .
We know from the interim versions of the Commission 's document that in an initial phase , within the EUR 1.24 billion , EUR 150 million was for the east and all the rest was for the south .
That contradicts the principle of symmetry and equal attention being paid to both neighbourhoods .
How would you explain this ?
What did you really and factually commit to the southern Mediterranean neighbourhood policy within the context of the only amount of money that has been mentioned by you ?

President of the Commission . - Mr Saryusz-Wolski , my friend , let me tell you very frankly that I understand the concerns that you have with the Eastern Neighbourhood , but I think that the most important issue is not to place East and South in competition with one another : we need both .
What is important now is to help those who want us to help them , and to do that in an effective way .
In fact , the approach we have put forward in the revision of the Neighbourhood Policy is clear .
We are not allocating resources on an East-South cleavage but based on conditionality according to each partner 's progress towards reform , or , if you like , more for more .
Those who do more , those who show that they deserve more , will receive more .
So we do not have a previously prepared envelope - this is for country A or for country B - the country has to show that it deserves to be supported .
I think this is the right approach , and in that case we will , of course , fulfil our commitments both to our Eastern European partnership - that is extremely important - but also to our neighbours in the Mediterranean .

( FR ) Mr Barroso , my question actually has a link with the last question and with your answer to it .
You spoke just now about the aid that you pledged during the Deauville G8 summit , in particular , to the emerging Arab economies : USD 40 billion , mostly in the form of loans from the International Monetary Fund ( IMF ) , the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development ( EBRD ) and the European Investment Bank ( EIB ) , plus approximately EUR 15 billion from the European Union and Member States .

You mentioned conditionality , which is what my question relates to .
This aid is indeed conditional upon certain criteria with which you are very familiar : regular , free elections , freedom of association , freedom of the press , freedom of expression , combating corruption , independence of the justice system , reform of the army and reform of the police .
I would like to know who will actually assess whether these criteria are being complied with , especially as regards these emerging Arab democracies .
Will our Parliament be fully involved in assessing compliance with the conditions that have been established , or will this be a discretionary power of the Council 's ?
Our idea , and I hope you will agree with it , is that it should be the Commission that coordinates the exercise .
I am actually very proud of the fact that it was the Commission , together with the High Representative , that presented the blueprint for our response immediately : a partnership for democracy in North Africa and the Southern Mediterranean and also a partnership for shared prosperity .
The Council now recognises that it would actually be a good thing for the Commission to coordinate the exercise , and the Commission must , of course , report to Parliament on the matter .
Therefore , I can only welcome all expressions of interest and the efforts made by Parliament to be closely involved .
The events that are currently unfolding in some Arab countries are , in fact , of great strategic importance , not only for those countries , but also for global democracy , for the evolution of the Muslim world and for us here in Europe .
Therefore , anything we are able to do to mobilise not only EU institutions but also our societies to help our neighbours ' transition to democracy is very important , and I can only welcome the interest shown by the European Parliament .

( EL ) Mr President , on the subject of the G8 summit , according to some financial information I was reading , global GDP was USD 58 trillion and the money supply was USD 615 trillion in 2009 .
At the same time , on the subject of ' monetary policy ' that concerns you , it confirmed that the USA is issuing new money , new dollars , while our Union is not issuing new money .
Economists disagree on many things ; however , history has taught us two things : firstly , that you cannot save a bankrupt by giving him expensive loans and , secondly , that extreme austerity can never reduce the deficit of a macro-economy in recession which is unable to depreciate its currency .
The Eurobond is urgently needed , Mr President .
Do you see it as a means of counterbalancing the spiralling increase in new money being issued by the USA ?
President of the Commission . - In fact , this question should be in the first part of our debate , but I can respond to the distinguished Member by saying that , over the years , the Commission 's position has been very open and , in fact , sympathetic , to the idea of Eurobonds .
One of my predecessors was the first to put forward the idea of Eurobonds .
The reality is that there was no agreement between the Member States .
What the Member States have agreed now was the creation of a European stability mechanism .
When it is created , it will become the number one international financial institution in the world - the most important in the world in terms of financial strength .
I think that is where we should now concentrate our efforts .
At the same time , we are open to discussing with the Member States - and with the Parliament of course - several options regarding the possibility of Eurobonds , provided the Member States are willing to consider that possibility .
That is , of course , a very important and decisive one .
The recent G8 summit wanted it to be known that it was providing USD 40 billion to Egypt and Tunisia for overthrowing dictatorships and embracing democracy .
However , the G8 statement said that it would support countries in the region that move towards not just democracy , but also a market economy .
It wants these countries to ' reap the benefits of globalisation ' and to engage in ' investment integration ' , which means making it easier for G8 countries to make money in these countries and then take the money out again .
I would not object to recipients of aid being expected to implement and retain democratic institutions and procedures .
That would be quite right .
However , is it not sinister that recipients should be told which economic policies they should choose and which they should discard ?
Surely donors have no right to instruct these new democracies as to which democratic choices they should make ?
President of the Commission . - I agree with the perspective which was adopted by the G8 .
I think it is in our common interest to have not only open societies but open economies .
These countries are our neighbours , and I think the best way to help them is through trade .
We will never be able to provide the amount of money they need if they stay closed .
For instance , in the Maghreb countries - as you probably know - the reality is that trade among themselves is almost insignificant .
They are asking us to open up our markets , but they do not trade among themselves .
I think it is important that we say : yes we are ready to support you , but you should also open up your economy and integrate into the global economy .
In fact , we see that a country 's progress is very clearly linked to its capacity to integrate in a global economy .
Just look at Asia with countries that are not yet democracies ; it is because they were able to open up that they could participate in the global economy and reap some benefits for their peoples .

( IT ) Mr President , President Barroso , the final declaration of the G8 summit regarding the Middle East states : ' Negotiations are the only way toward a comprehensive and lasting resolution to the conflict . We call on Israel and the Palestinian Authority to abide by existing cooperation agreements and to abstain from unilateral measures that could hamper progress and further reforms ' .
Does the European Union - an important interlocutor of the G8 - support this statement ?
If it does , have you told the Palestinian side , which is planning to take unilateral action during the United Nations General Assembly meeting in September ?
President of the Commission . - Regarding the Middle East peace process , I do not remember a single international meeting in the last 30 years where this issue was not mentioned .
We have restated our urgent call for resuming the peace process and we have urged both parties to re-engage in substantive talks to bring the Middle East peace process to an effective conclusion .
We all commended the new US vision on reaching a framework agreement as groundbreaking and forward-looking .
However , there were different reactions to the details of this new vision .
To be honest with you , there are different approaches among the G8 partners to the Hamas-PLO cooperation and to the issue of the 1967 borders .
There were also some concerns around the table about the risks entailed in a potential Palestinian endeavour to unilaterally seek recognition at a United Nations General Assembly .
I can tell you that we are also discussing this with the Member States and that I hope that we in Europe will have a common position on the matter .

( FR ) Mr President , Mr Barroso , the G8 countries decided to grant the sum of USD 40 billion to Tunisia and Egypt , as has already been said .
However , the European Union must present the case for greater transparency , visibility and traceability ; in short , better governance of this aid .
We need to focus on four key points : first , ensuring that development cooperation is in keeping with the principles of democracy and absolute transparency ; second , guaranteeing respect for human rights ; strengthening the role and capacities of civil society organisations and reforming the system of governance that applies to aid , with stronger involvement by the European Parliament .
Mr Barroso , the EU must be able to guarantee that this aid reaches the people it is intended for .
What concrete measures is the EU planning in this respect ?
Honourable Member , what you said reflects my own thoughts precisely .
I agree with you completely .
We are now going to do this with the help of several instruments , so that we can check that the undertakings made by all the partner countries are adhered to and implemented with determination .
I am able to tell you that all of these programmes will be followed up not only by the Commission 's offices but also by the High Representative , who will be appointing a special representative for the region in question .
We think it is precisely through this kind of dialogue that we will be able to help these countries , especially by increasing participation by civil society .
I was in Tunisia recently , where I met not only with the government and the President of the Republic , but also with representatives of civil society , women 's organisations and trade unions .
I saw how important they see our commitment to be , not only in the shape of support from governments , but also that of civil society .
Once again , as I said to Mrs Sarnez , the European Parliament 's commitment would also be very important in this respect , in the context of relations with the burgeoning parliaments and political parties in these young and new democracies .
( EL ) Mr President , at the recent G8 summit , you discussed the global economy and agreed that efforts should focus on the objectives of the viability of public finances , economic recovery and action to address unemployment .
All this is being pursued for the benefit of society and the public .
However , if we take the example of Greece , tens and hundreds of thousands of citizens recently took to the square and the streets around the Hellenic Parliament quite spontaneously , without being directed to do so , angrily calling for a decent standard of living and prospects .
You must agree , Mr President , that no policy can be effective if it is not backed or , at the very least , tolerated by society .
The policy in Greece is basically confined to a dilemma between exhausting austerity or bankruptcy .
Do these social developments worry you ?
They are a major political issue .
What message do you have to send to these people who are seeking , in a dignified and peaceful manner , prospects and a better future for themselves , their families and their children ?
President of the Commission . - First of all , I would like to express my solidarity with the Greek people .
I understand how difficult these times are for Greece .
But I also believe that the responsibility of political leaders at European or national level , whether they are in government or in opposition , is to show what countries have to do .
In fact , without fiscal consolidation , without structural reform , Greece will not come out of this crisis .
The reality is that some painful measures are unavoidable in Greece and anyone who claims otherwise is lying to the Greek people .
My appeal to the Greek leaders is to explain in honest terms to the population of Greece the difficult choices that the country has to make .
We will all support it .
In the European Council , it was I who proposed a reduction in interest rates on loans granted to Greece .
But , at the same time , let us be honest .
Greece has to make some of the effort itself because one country cannot live forever with such high levels of debt .
This is the honest message that we should convey to the government and the opposition in Greece , and that we in Europe must accept if we really want to help that country .
Mr President , I am glad that you raised at the G8 summit the issues of the problems of the eurozone .
It is a crisis , and we all know it is a crisis .
As the previous speaker mentioned , many Member States are concerned .
We had issues in Madrid recently when people were protesting on the streets .
There were protests in Lisbon , of all places , and we have also seen what has happened in Greece .
Isn 't it time , Mr Barroso , that you stood up - you mentioned telling lies a few moments ago - and told the truth and said that there is an option : that these countries should be allowed to leave the eurozone ?
That is the only way out of it .
President of the Commission . - I have great respect for all our democratic states , so it is not up to me to tell them what they should do in this matter .
But we know that Greece has no intention of leaving the eurozone .
I am in constant contact with both the Greek authorities and the main opposition party and I know very well that they do not want to leave the eurozone .
Probably some of you , distinguished Members , would like the country to leave the eurozone , or perhaps your country is not in the eurozone and we respect that , but Greece is very committed to the European project .
Greece has difficulties , and we are trying to support it , but please do not attack the euro on ideological grounds .
The reality is that there are countries outside the eurozone that have at least comparable problems .
Iceland is not a member of the eurozone and Iceland went bankrupt .
Let us put it frankly : Iceland was one of the richest countries in the world in per capita terms before the financial crisis .
In the European Union , we also have countries that are facing the same kind of difficulties because of very high levels of expenditure .
So the reality is that the euro is not the problem ; the problem is a very high level of debt or a very high level of deficits in the economies .
The Question Hour with the President of the Commission is closed .
Sudan and South Sudan ( debate )
The next item is the declaration by the Vice-President of the Commission and EU High Representative for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy on Sudan and South Sudan ( 2011 / 2717 [ RSP ] ) .
I think Mr Piebalgs is standing in for her .
Thank you , Mr Piebalgs .
Commissioner , you have the floor on behalf of the High Representative and the Commission .
Member of the Commission , on behalf of the Vice-President of the Commission and EU High Representative for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy . - Madam President , the six-year transition period of the Sudanese Comprehensive Peace Agreement will come to an end in about a month 's time .
This is a historic moment for Sudan , and indeed for the whole African continent .
The people of Southern Sudan have waited a long time for this moment , when their country 's independence will be declared on 9 July .
The European Union will be represented at the Independence Day ceremony by the High Representative and Vice-President of the Commission .
Following a credible referendum at the beginning of this year , we commended Sudanese parties on the remarkable job they did in organising the referendum .
We welcomed that President Bashir had publicly said that North Sudan would be the first to recognise an independent South Sudan .
But the positive momentum of the immediate post-referendum period has vanished .
There are worrying tendencies towards increased tensions and conflict .
The recent violent clashes in and around Abyei could well lead to another military confrontation between North and South Sudan .
We discussed Sudan in the Foreign Affairs Council , both in January and in May , and will revert to it at the 20 June Foreign Affairs Council .
At the Council , the High Representative intends to present a comprehensive EU strategic approach for Sudan , mainly focusing on an independent South Sudan , but also including elements for constructive engagement with North Sudan , including the Transitional Areas , Darfur and the East .
In fact , we will be witnessing the birth of not one new state but two .
The comprehensive approach will be a political strategy document , setting out all the key strands of our policy towards Sudan .
The EU 's main objectives are to support peace between the two states and democratisation and prosperity within both of them .
We want to see two viable states coexisting as good neighbours sharing an open border , allowing for cross-border exchanges of people , goods , capital and ideas .
South Sudan will need all our attention in terms of stabilisation , state- , institution- and capacity-building and long-term development .
Our utmost concern would be to avoid state failure .
As part of a possible response strategy , we will be looking at a number of important elements : stepping up the EU presence in Juba by establishing an EU delegation ; initiating comprehensive political dialogue ; stabilising South Sudan and the joint border through specific measures and instruments - including the Common Security and Defence Policy and the Instrument for Stability - and increasing development assistance .
With regard to the latter , the EU has just made additional funds totalling EUR 200 million available for South Sudan , making our envelope today roughly EUR 300 million .
We are working together with the Member States in a joint EU programming exercise to maximise the impact on the ground .
At the same time , we will continue humanitarian assistance and we will work to ensure that trade is part of the comprehensive approach .
North Sudan , on the other hand , will suffer some losses .
We need to support reform-minded elements in the North , promote an inclusive political dialogue and enhance our efforts to promote human rights .
We are trying to step up our political dialogue with the government in Khartoum .
My recent visit was intended to signal EU re-engagement following Khartoum 's positive response to the outcome of the referendum .
We are , however , extremely concerned about the recent violence and , as I said , the military occupation of the city of Abyei , which constitutes a clear violation of the Comprehensive Peace Agreement ( CPA ) .
We urge the parties to abstain from any further provocation and to negotiate the conditions for the long-term peaceful coexistence of local communities living in and around Abyei .
We also continue to have concerns about the detention of human rights defenders , journalists , opposition politicians and peaceful student protestors .
One of the basic principles of the CPA was the establishment of democratic governments based on respect for diversity and basic freedoms .
We want to see respect for fundamental freedoms and genuinely inclusive democratic governments in both North and South Sudan .
I must also mention Darfur .
The European Union remains deeply concerned about the continued violence in Darfur , leading to displacements , and the severe impact this is having on humanitarian operations .
There is positive news .
The three European citizens who were held hostage in Darfur for several months have been released but , at the same time , we know the situation in Darfur is as it has been previously .
We will need to continue to support efforts to achieve a comprehensive and just peace in Darfur , trying to secure a positive outcome from the peace negotiation process and create enabling conditions on the ground for a Darfur-based political process .
We welcome the outcome of the recent All Stakeholders Conference in Doha and hope it will provide for such important developments towards lasting peace in Darfur .
Lastly , I must mention justice .
A lasting peace in Darfur cannot be achieved without justice and reconciliation .
There has to be an end to impunity .
The Council has repeatedly recalled the obligation of the government of Sudan to cooperate fully with the International Criminal Court , pursuant to United Nations Security Council Resolution 1593 .
The Darfur people deserve to achieve what they have been longing for for so long - lasting peace and justice .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , what struck me most at the time of South Sudan 's referendum on self-determination was the inhabitants ' enthusiasm and joy , even exultation .
People were happy because for once , they were having their say .
For once , after more than 20 years of war , they felt that what they had to say would be listened to .
We must not disappoint these six million South Sudanese people , but we must not forget the inhabitants of the North either .
It is important that , amid the democratic impetus brought about by the results of the referendum , negotiations should be as transparent as possible , so as to provide a solid base for the future development of each of the new states , as well as the future development of relations between them and with the international community .
The viability and stability of both North and South are crucial .
It is vital for solutions to be found at last to problems that have hitherto remained unresolved .
I am talking about the problems of citizenship , sharing debt and oil revenues and the difficult matter of undefined borders .
In addition , the referendums must go ahead in the Abyei , South Kordofan and Blue Nile regions , within the framework of the Comprehensive Peace Agreement .
The situation in Abyei is becoming worse every day .
It is most worrying .
Abyei must not reach a point of no return that would undo more than six years of negotiations .
Tensions that are turning into open conflict are threatening to overshadow South Sudan 's independence and plunge the region once again into chaos .
However , the situation in Abyei must not make us forget the situation in Darfur .
In this respect , the conclusions of the Doha conference must be taken into consideration , as you have just said , Commissioner , and we must not lose sight of the ongoing need to channel humanitarian aid and guarantee the safety of aid workers .
Transparent negotiations are a guarantee of two viable states , as are the cessation of violence and effective cooperation between the two states .
This is the framework , of course , that was already outlined during the referendum process It is important that this continues , so as to ensure that the political will of both states and of the international community is put into practice in the form of genuine development projects for citizens of both countries .
It is these citizens and their well-being that should be the main focus of democratisation , political pluralism , and respect for human rights and for religious , cultural and ethnic diversity in both South and North Sudan .
Madam President , on 9 July , South Sudan will celebrate its new-found independence and dignity , and it is indeed in terms of dignity and emotion that the Sudanese people are talking about this event .
Mr Piebalgs , I had prepared a three-minute speech .
However , while listening to you , I wondered if I should actually speak .
I must complement you : I think Parliament has reason to be proud of the action by the whole of the European Union and of the way in which this Sudanese affair has been conducted , and like the Sudanese people , I am keeping my fingers firmly crossed that this will continue into independence and beyond .
You spoke on the main issues , that is to say , the Abyei issue , which is still unresolved , the political decisions that were supposed to have been made on citizenship , debt , currency , etc .
Above all , you mentioned everything you are hoping to do in terms of development , humanitarian action , the fact that justice must be done and that we must not sell the International Criminal Court short .
In fact , you covered all the most important points .
I will just add a few points .
As regards the problem of development and humanitarian action , it is true that so much still remains to be done in South Sudan and that we must continue to develop the North and , most importantly , not to isolate it .
So much is still to be done because the country has lived purely off oil .
It has not developed a diversified economy ; there is no education ; there are no roads , no hospitals , and so forth .
The needs and expectations of the people are huge , and if we do not want these people to be disappointed with independence , then development and humanitarian action must continue for a long time yet .
We must keep this firmly in mind .
As regards the issue of human rights , women 's rights and political pluralism , polygamy still exists , even in the South .
Women are bought along with cows ; 80 % of women are illiterate ; children 's rights have yet to be introduced and political pluralism does not exist : there is no culture of political pluralism , as we saw during the elections and the referendum .
At the same time , it is exciting and wonderful .
I met with both the South Sudanese and North Sudanese electoral commissions , though especially that of the South .
They want to create laws .
They want a good constitution , they want to build their country , and they are telling us , ' we will have money , don 't worry , but help us - be there ' .
I think that in this respect , you have fulfilled their request .
Your visit and that of Mrs Georgieva in the past and the probable visit of Lady Ashton for the independence celebrations are all major events .
Your wish to present a strategic plan for South Sudan is what we call for after every election .
We do not want it to be a flash in the pan , but to have proper follow-up and a future for the countries we visit .
I completely changed the text of my speech for all of this , Mr Piebalgs .
I would like to thank you , because as I said , it is good to be able to be proud of the European Union , especially during this difficult time .
Madam President , Commissioner , when the independence of yet another African country , South Sudan , is proclaimed on 9 July , another chapter of colonial heritage on this continent will be closed .
We want to believe that , once a democratic decision is taken in the referendum , South Sudan will resolve its outstanding issues with its northern neighbour by peaceful means , that is , through negotiation .
We want to believe that the region will avoid the risk of disputes and clashes erupting because of the borders , demographics and migration patterns due to oil and other natural resources , which are plentiful in both countries , statistically poor though they may be .
I call your attention to the need for continued cooperation on the part of the international community , the UN , the African Union and the European Union in consolidating both countries , in securing peace and the building of institutions for a democratic and pluralistic South Sudan .
Ladies and gentlemen , this is a challenge we face now , at a time when the entire wider region is experiencing a revival and opening up to the requirements and standards of modern times .
Sudan is once again facing a major historical turning point .
All the agreements reached at the end of the bloody civil war have not yet become reality .
The situation in the Abyei province is closer to a crisis than to peace , there is violence in Darfur , and Sudan needs our attention and generous help .
Another important fact is that the UN Security Council has renewed the mandate of the UNMIS mission in Sudan and will deploy additional peacekeepers in Sudan .
Our message to the governments in Khartoum and Juba is that they should welcome the UN peacekeepers as friends and ensure their security .
on behalf of the ECR Group . - Madam President , Commissioner Piebalgs is right .
We also have one of the greatest challenges facing the European Union in front of us .
As rapporteur for the European Parliament report on nation building , I have to say that this is an extraordinary opportunity for us to partner South Sudan , one of the poorest and newest ' countries-to-be ' on 9 July , and make nation building - that we keep talking about in this Chamber - a reality on the ground .
This is a country rich in natural resources , but it is also a country with the most awful social indicators .
A child born in South Sudan today has a higher chance of dying in infancy than attending primary school .
What a statistic that is .
Food products provided by aid agencies and intended for distribution to the poor for free are now being sold on the market .
We need to build capacity from the bottom up .
They do not have a civil service .
They do not have trained administrators .
They do not have the infrastructure that is required for a modern ' state-to-be ' .
They need the rule of law , they need good governance , they need transparency , they need our expertise as partners .
They need to invite us and we need to provide our partnership of know-how .
Madam President , you would want to raise the flag and a glass of champagne because , when a populace is able to vote through its own independence , that is only right and proper .
The unpleasant thing here is that South Sudan is actually inheriting a legacy from the past and that the raising of the flag or of a glass of champagne is possibly somewhat out of place , given the situation in which the South Sudanese find themselves .
Now that Abyei has been incorporated into the North , the South Sudanese should be praised for taking a stance of refusing to be provoked .
However , the question , of course , is how long that will last .
The fact that we , the international community , looked on as the issue of Abyei was left unresolved in the referendum is actually highly irresponsible and a recipe for war to start up again in future .
The fact that UN troops will have to be sent again to re-establish peace is also something that we can safely assume .
What I find particularly difficult is the issue of what do we talk about and what do we not ?
Let us consider the fact that Sudan is trying to influence the forthcoming referendum in Abyei by insisting that those herdsmen who spend part of their time there and part away from there are included in the count .
Is it justified for South Sudan to argue that , no , they should not be counted , as they are not permanent residents ?
If that is the view you take , are you not then denying the herdsmen 's right to exist ?
It is a Catch 22 situation for which no answer can just be plucked from the air .
There are two other factors to mention , too .
Is South Sudan to be given a fair start ?
If so , the South Sudanese are surely , in fact , entitled to debt cancellation ?
The debts in question were run up by the regime in Khartoum , and no one can say that these debts served the people of the South well .
The other factor is how are we to deal with the riches beneath the ground in South Sudan ?
While we are at it , is South Sudan covered by the Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative ( EITI ) , which audits freedom from corruption and examines which oil assets benefit the population ?
If not , how can we in Europe help ?
The one thing , after all , that really helps when it comes to European help for South Sudan - and , in fact , for the North - is actually trade and getting fair investments off the ground .
We are all watching developments anxiously and I hope that we will once again be able to toast the liberty of South Sudan with the flag and a glass of champagne .
Madam President , we all look at this region of the world with great concern and we are well aware that the risk of a civil war is far from banished .
The ultimate fragility of the peace process that has been set in motion is demonstrated by current events in Abyei .
The conflict that has broken out is dramatic .
The Northern army has occupied Abyei and 15 000 people have taken flight .
I believe that we , the European Union , must help in a very tangible way as we did before and that this must take the form of getting food and humanitarian aid for the refugees moving as soon as possible and preparing the emergency humanitarian aid for the refugees .
Even without this escalation of the conflict , in South Sudan , over 40 % of the population are already dependent on food aid .
South Sudan will be one of the poorest countries on earth , and if we want the Millennium Development Goals to also take effect here , it is urgently necessary that the funding made available by the Council - EUR 200 million - should actually be spent on food security , education and health in this part of the world .
My group advocates the immediate withdrawal of the armed units of the North and the South from Abyei , adherence to the comprehensive peace agreement and recognition of the demilitarised zone .
With a view to the extension of the UN mandate , which has been discussed , we are calling for the risks and problems , such as those that came to light in connection with the MONUC mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo , to be taken into account and evaluated .
We are disappointed that no really strong call for debt cancellation and for an examination of foreign debts made it into this resolution .
I find that regrettable .
Madam President , there are two points I would like to put to the High Representative or her substitute in relation to the current situation in Sudan .
First of all , I call on the High Representative to urgently press the Sudanese authorities to release the Christian , Hawa Abdalla Muhammad Saleh , who was arrested by the security service in a refugee camp in Darfur on religious grounds on 25 May .
According to reports , Saleh was tortured after arrest and then taken to an unknown location in Khartoum , a personal tragedy that requires Europe to get involved .
My second point is that , as a Member of the European Parliament , it hit me hard to read the sharp rebuke from an authority on the situation in Sudan who is an international observer in the so repeatedly troubled conflict region of Abyei that the diplomatic pressure from Europe on the murderous and war-hungry regime of President al-Bashir was ' zero and badly coordinated ' .
This is a crushing rebuke , in fact .
Is the international community , including Europe , giving President al-Bashir , after occupying Abyei , a feeling of invulnerability once again ?
At this particular point in time , it is worth pointing out how weak a position al-Bashir is in domestically and that it is a more than opportune moment to apply international pressure to the regime .
I hope , therefore , for European pressure on al-Bashir .
( IT ) Madam President , Commissioner , with the greatest respect for the pragmatic approach you took in your speech , I wish to make two recommendations , in which I would also like to highlight the work of monitoring the referendum that Mrs De Keyser recently carried out so thoroughly , which , in my opinion , has been invaluable for our institutions .
I refer to a very specific matter : personally , I was not at all surprised that the referendum and its result were followed by an increase in hostilities - almost - caused by the Sudanese institutions and authorities , particularly in the Abyei region .
It is typical of the constant stop-and-go Khartoum politics to hint at a solution and then to withdraw it , without any warning .
This is what has produced the disaster that Sudan has become .
Allow me to make a suggestion : within the European External Action Service , we have created a department which deals specifically with humanitarian crises .
This department must be alerted to Abyei now and not when we are faced with a huge disaster .
It must be mobilised because it is a credible department , which has proved its worth , in the Libyan crisis for example .
I believe that this department should be encouraged , today , to prepare a plan and to present it to the Committee on Foreign Affairs , explaining how it intends to act , to enable us to understand how valuable European Union foreign policy can be when we all work together towards the best result .
My final recommendation concerns our relations with China ; we hear from all quarters that China plays an important role in Sudan , making it sound like some kind of ghostly presence that we have to fear .
Personally , at this particular moment , I advocate the need for very cautious yet favoured relations with China , through which we can assess whether , in addition to economic interests , it is also interested in getting to the heart of human rights issues .
Madam President , the EU must keep up pressure on the government of Sudan to withdraw troops from the border town of Abyei .
A solution to the Abyei problem is needed urgently to prevent the escalation of armed conflict between Sudan and South Sudan .
This conflict is jeopardising the peace process that should have followed the referendum of January 2011 .
The firing of shots by militia men at a UN helicopter at the end of May was an outrageous and cowardly act ; as outrageous as the call by the Khartoum government for UN Peacekeepers to withdraw after 9 July .
The UN presence is more necessary than ever to help observe the parties and stabilise the region , thus preventing the conflict from expanding .
Ensuring a peaceful transition to independence in South Sudan also requires that the fight against impunity remains at the top of the EU agenda for both countries and for their unhelpfully meddling neighbours .
The EU should not be tempted to make any potentially ' convenient deals ' with President al-Bashir in exchange for forgetting that he and his henchmen must be brought before the International Criminal Court ( ICC ) to answer for the war crimes and the crimes against humanity committed against the Sudanese people in Darfur .
( FR ) Madam President , South Sudan 's recent referendum on independence has ushered in a new era for political dealings with this new state .
With the creation of this young state , what was previously considered an internal matter for Sudan has become an international affair .
All relations with Khartoum , especially concerning security matters , will now be international affairs and it follows that they will come under international law .
We therefore applaud the way in which various parties are carrying out their tasks and , in this respect , it is worth mentioning some of the biggest immediate challenges that the newly created state will encounter .
Firstly , among these parties , I must mention former South African President and President of the African Union , Thabo Mbeki , and the mediation he performed , and I think we should also emphasise the mediation role that our own special representative to Sudan , Rosalind Marsden , has played .
Secondly , the new state 's adhesion to the Cotonou Agreement opens up new prospects for development cooperation and relations with the European Union .
I think this is imperative and we must do everything we can to promote speedy ratification .
Thirdly , there is the need to develop capacity to manage the mammoth problems that the new , still very fragile state is faced with .
This also calls for attention from the international community .
Fourthly , there is a need to also contribute to development in North Sudan , which we must not forget , and which is preparing to draw up a new constitution .
Lastly , there is the dreadful security situation in the Darfur region and the government 's unilateral wish to organise a referendum on its status on 1 July 2011 .
Naturally , I welcome the personal involvement of our Commissioner for Development and his staff in this crucial phase .
He has understood that this decisive period for the future of South Sudan also constitutes a test of strength for the European Union and others as well .
( NL ) Madam President , the glorious date of 9 July approaches .
South Sudan will officially become independent - a nation that openly stands up for the key values of the Christian faith , but also a nation that will be very tested , as the sly , old fox , Omar al-Bashir , may have almost lost his hair , but he certainly has not lost the tricks up his sleeve .
In the Abyei region , he has started to massacre citizens .
The ethnic cleansing of the southern Ngok Dinka people seems to have begun .
The lives of United Nations staff there are not safe .
Baroness Ashton knows that she has our support in her human rights policy , and in respect of the rebels in Benghazi she made clear choices , and rightly so .
Do the same now in connection with Omar al-Bashir , as the people of South Sudan deserve our strong support .
( DE ) Madam President , in February , many people , including in this House , were full of both hope and concern about the future of Sudan .
There were differing views on the continuing risk of violent clashes .
It was clear that the people of Sudan faced major problems and need support .
Now , the situation in Sudan is making the headlines again .
The cause of the most recent events is the unresolved issues linked to the forthcoming independence of the South , and these problems cannot be resolved through guns .
I therefore welcome the recent agreement between the North and South Sudan , brokered by the African Union , on a demilitarised zone along the future border between the two states .
A 7 000 strong UN force modelled on MONUC could cause more harm than good , however .
If we just look at the Congo , we can see what MONUC troops can get up to .
Aid for Sudan must be impartial and not tied to any one interest group .
It must put the interests of the people of the South and of the North at its heart , and this applies to both material and diplomatic aid .
In order to prevent further fuelling of the conflict , all supplying of weapons must be halted .
We are calling for an end to all civil / military collaboration and to the military training mission .
( FR ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , we certainly welcome the peaceful and credible manner in which South Sudan 's referendum on self-determination in January was conducted .
As has already been said , South Sudan will proclaim its independence on 9 July 2011 .
The challenges are huge , both in terms of the new State 's internal organisation and in terms of its relations with Sudan at their shared borders and in the oil-rich Abyei region .
Both Sudan and South Sudan have enormous humanitarian needs to deal with .
The primary challenges are security , reaching inhabitants in distress and respect for humanitarian principles .
The crisis is far from over .
It is vital that the international community maintains its presence and a very high level of humanitarian involvement .
We must be very watchful of how the situation develops , as it is already dreadful but could get worse and pose a threat to stability in the region .
It is also vital that the development aid that is organised for South Sudan is coordinated with and complementary to humanitarian aid .
The real importance of the link between urgency and development is highlighted in this context , in which state infrastructures are very weak and the humanitarian crisis is set to last .
Development aid must therefore provide support for state infrastructures and increase the population 's access to basic services that are organised at the moment by non-governmental organisations ( NGOs ) and international organisations .
Lastly , the events in South Sudan and the Abyei region must not make us overlook the situation in Darfur , which is considered to be the worst humanitarian crisis in the world .
The lives of millions of people still depend on outside aid .
Finally , since I have a few seconds left , I would like to applaud the work done by Mr Piebalgs , which I think has been exceptional .
Madam President , I want this afternoon to strongly emphasise the need for the EU to work with South Sudan in democratisation and institution-building .
Yes , this will be a country with one of the highest infant mortality rates and lowest educational indicators in the world , necessitating fast-track accession to the Cotonou Agreement , with access to the European Development Fund and fair debt alleviation .
But , just as the EU should be proud that we have contributed to a largely peaceful and credible referendum process - and I pay tribute to my colleague , Veronique De Keyser , for her personal leadership - the EU must give priority to helping South Sudan with its constitutional review process , entrenching a multi-party system and preventing corruption from taking any root from the start .
Madam President , for South Sudan , the 9 July date goes before everything else ; for North Sudan , although the comprehensive peace agreement may be coming to an end , its obligations do not .
The threat of violence remains , not just in South Sudan itself , but in the neighbouring Blue Nile and South Kordofan provinces of North Sudan , and still in Darfur .
Indeed , I want to ask Mr Piebalgs in his reply to explain what the EU is doing to combat continuing and deteriorating human rights violations , in particular , concerning human rights defenders such as Hawa Abdulla from the AU-UN peace-keeping mission , who has been subject to arbitrary detention and beaten .
I was privileged to be present in East Timor at the birth of the world 's first new state of this millennium .
I hope that South Sudan can achieve its independence while averting the tragic transition suffered by the people of East Timor and providing peace and prosperity for the Sudanese people , who have suffered too much during the longest running civil war in Africa .
( IT ) Madam President , it is difficult to oversee the final steps in the formation of a new country along a peaceful path .
The ultimate objective - peace - must be safeguarded , but without losing significant pieces of the global agreement .
Khartoum 's military action in Abyei appears to be jeopardising the good overall outcome of this journey , though not the founding of the 54th African state on 9 July .
The South must not react to provocation and not lose sight of the final objective , which is not only independence but also the constitution of credible institutions and the advancement of its population , 90 % of which lives below the poverty line .
The people are unlikely to benefit from foreign investment , which already promises to be transparent and not predatory .
I believe that this - the problem of foreign investment in South Sudan - will soon be a new front line that the European Union must monitor and on which it must assert the credibility it has earned in recent years in this region .
Madam President , on 9 July , South Sudan will declare independence as an English-speaking new African state .
The EU has rightly supported the CPAP 's process and referendum in South Sudan .
However , the next few months will remain critical .
South Sudan must be enabled to establish itself as a viable sovereign state .
Even without a hostile neighbour to the north , South Sudan faces enormous developmental challenges .
Infrastructure is largely non-existent .
There is widespread intercommunal hostility .
Health care indicators are amongst the worst in the world and the economy is almost completely dependent on oil exports .
It is therefore essential to increase EU developmental and humanitarian aid to South Sudan .
However , South Sudan also needs the EU 's unequivocal support politically .
The recent seizure of the disputed border region of Abyei by the Khartoum government suggests that President Bashir is still not fully reconciled to his country 's partition .
Lastly , I am also hopeful that South Sudan will live up to its promise and be the first African Union country to re-recognise the stable and democratic Republic of Somaliland as an independent country also .
( EL ) Madam President , recent clashes in Abyei illustrate just how unfounded celebrations by the USA and the European Union were following the referendum .
Once again , we have seen that imperialist peace is as bloody as imperialist war .
Obviously , North and South , which are on the imperialist route and victims to infighting and the ' divide and rule ' policy , will find it hard to avoid direct conflict .
Various imperialist powers have been trying to exploit the oil and gold , copper and uranium deposits in Abyei for 20 years .
This infighting is responsible for the risk of a new , even bloodier war , now that NATO , the USA and the European Union are directly involved , which is what the Euro-unifying forces seem to be seeking after the war in Libya .
We urgently need an end to any imperialist intervention in Sudan and to any act of hostility and opposition between North and South .
We also believe that the people of Sudan , in both North and South , need to take their fate into their own hands .
That is the only way to avoid war and the only way to control the wealth of their country and move towards a different sort of development .
( DE ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I had the opportunity to experience the independence referendum in South Sudan as an electoral observer for Parliament and I was impressed by the major backing given by the South Sudanese people to the idea of deciding on the fate of their country themselves in future .
I also witnessed the major expectations of the people who decided on the liberation of their country from bondage .
Thousands , perhaps tens of thousands of what are known as internal displaced persons , who the decades-long fighting in the South had pushed into the refugee camps of the North , set off back to their former homes in the South .
Of course , alongside the independence of their country , the people of South Sudan want , above all , to live in peace and find a way to a happier future after the decades of war in which millions of South Sudanese were forced to sacrifice their lives .
The new state of South Sudan is due to officially become independent on 9 July , extending the family of states in our world .
The starting conditions are as bad as can be conceived , and much has , of course , been said about this already .
70 % of the population live as nomadic cattle farmers ; 80 % are illiterate ; the dispute over Abyei is widening into a military conflict .
There have already been deaths and woundings .
As if that were not enough , the rivalries between the tribes and armed groups in South Sudan are also on the rise , and observers estimate that more than a thousand people have already lost their lives since January .
The wounded and violated are hardly even counted .
Sudan was a failed state .
There is a danger that the state of South Sudan will be a failed state from the very outset .
I am of the firm conviction that , given the colonial history of these countries , Europe has a major obligation to this region .
Together with the United Nations and the African Union , this situation calls for Europe 's common foreign policy , and it is also that policy 's chance to prove itself .
This is not only about money , but also about supporting the frail and nascent civil society .
We need to negotiate hard with those who hold the future of the country in their hands , namely , the tribal chiefs and the heads of the military groups , so that they do not dash the hopes of the people of their country .
( RO ) Madam President , in less than a month from now , the independence of South Sudan will be declared , which received massive approval in the January referendum .
Unfortunately , during this time , the disputes relating to the delimitation of the border and sharing the income from oil extraction have not been settled .
Therefore , the new state is coming into being under the shadow of conflict .
This is why I believe that diplomatic efforts need to be stepped up , including by the European Union .
We welcome your visit to Sudan and that of our fellow Members , including Mrs De Keyser 's activities .
However , as you are aware , the situation has deteriorated drastically recently .
More than 80 000 people have left their homes , which is a sign of the imminent risk of a humanitarian crisis .
My question for the Commissioner is about the possibility of having a peacekeeping force present in the area , given the statement made by the UN yesterday , acknowledging the failure of its forces , which have been passive in response to the recent tensions .
( FR ) Madam President , a few hours ago , the Sudanese Government informed the United Nations that the necessary conditions for the return of thousands of inhabitants who had fled the disputed Abyei region on the border between North and South Sudan would be put in place .
As we know , although displaced inhabitants always leave very quickly , their return takes time and is all too often a source of considerable humanitarian and social problems .
I therefore propose that the European Union should organise a monitoring mission as quickly as possible , along the lines of the work we did in the Balkans .
Naturally , this mission could be carried out with the help of the African Union , and there is no reason why third countries could not be involved also .
Lastly , a word on the rumours circulating about the possibility of ' ethnic cleansing ' in the region .
If what is suspected proves to be true , the international community will , of course , need to act swiftly , with impetus from the European Union .
Under no circumstances must the tragedy of the former Yugoslavia be allowed to repeat itself .
( RO ) Madam President , the outcome of the referendum on the independence of South Sudan was welcomed by quite a few people .
It was to mean the creation of a 54th state in Africa .
However , the events taking place at the moment have sort of dampened the enthusiasm .
We must be very realistic and acknowledge that , at the present juncture , the peaceful division of Sudan is in jeopardy .
The occupation of the disputed Abyei region by Sudanese government forces on 21 May and the violence which continued yesterday , as well in Kadugli , show us that the civil war between north and south can reignite at any time .
This must , of course , be avoided at all costs and our message must be loud and clear .
The military operations being carried out by the Sudanese Government and the militia in Abyei mark a serious violation of the Comprehensive Peace Agreement .
I sincerely believe that we are all definite about one thing : any escalation of violence must be avoided , as it could result in further human casualties .
The security situation must be resolved according to the Kadugli and Abyei agreements from the start of the year , including , in my view , through the intervention of a mixed security force commissioned by the UN .
If these obstacles are overcome , numerous question marks still remain about the viability of the two states which should coexist on the territory of the former Sudan .
Political will and readiness for dialogue are needed because there is a whole series of issues which remain unresolved : common borders , citizenship , international obligations and , of course , the oil resources .
On the other hand , I want to highlight the deterioration in the human rights situation and rule of law in Sudan where we have recently seen an increase in arbitrary arrests .
I cannot help but remind you that Omar al-Bashir is still subject to an international arrest warrant , a fact which the authorities in this country ignore .
I will end on a positive note .
I want to welcome the release of the three Bulgarian hostages who worked for the UN Humanitarian Air Service and were abducted from Darfur in January .
( SK ) Madam President , the bloody civil war which has lasted more than two decades in Sudan has devastated the country and destroyed or otherwise tragically left its mark on millions of its inhabitants .
The atrocities committed during the civil war finally ended with the signing of the peace agreement , an integral part of which was the holding of a successful referendum .
Prevention is the best cure , and I therefore firmly believe that the EU resources earmarked for Sudan should be allocated not only for humanitarian and development aid , but also for supporting democratic control and the rule of law , which are fundamental preconditions for implementing the basic human rights of the war-ravaged Sudanese people .
The results of the referendum clearly show the longing of predominantly Christian South Sudan for independence .
If this happens - and I believe it already is happening - South Sudan , as the youngest state in the world , will need help and support .
( SK ) Madam President , I fully agree with the statement and declaration of Baroness Ashton but , at the same time , I share the concerns over the future development of this country .
The Abyei region of Sudan has been riven by conflicts for many years .
The civil war ended just under six years ago , after continuing for more than 20 years .
This region was the key to the conflict and , according to the statement of the International Crisis Group , developments in this part of the country will influence the fate of the whole of Sudan .
Will the country remain at peace or will it sink into another war ?
If the southern part secedes , it will be necessary to show support for as peaceful a transition as possible .
I would therefore like to express support for the Commission , which has roundly condemned the use of force against innocent civilians , who have been , and still are , the victims of intervention by the Sudanese army occupying this region .
The EU has the opportunity to be a peacemaker , to assist stability in the region and to strengthen its position not only as the largest donor in the world , but also its political position , and , above all , to help the inhabitants of this country .
( PL ) Madam President , I would like to draw attention to what is , in my opinion , a very important factor .
We in this Chamber are all pleased that as a result of the referendum , a new state will soon be established - South Sudan .
However , it needs to be stressed that this is only an opportunity , because that state today is lacking in basic attributes which should be a feature of every state .
It lacks structures and competent officials , and does not have a judicial system .
In other words , the way also lies open for the action of various forces which could undermine peace and security there .
In this context , I think that as well as the very important humanitarian aid , it is also necessary to safeguard security , and that the current UN forces are still needed there .
( RO ) Madam President , I , too , would like to welcome the statement made by the Vice-President of the Commission against the background of the deepening conflict between both sides .
I think that the political leaders must respect the will of the people expressed through the referendum on independence .
Sudan has a long history of violent internal upheaval and recent developments indicate a return to this past .
I want to stress the particularly difficult situation facing the population in the conflict zones .
There is the risk of triggering a humanitarian disaster if members of the international community are not going to intervene .
In addition , attacks in the areas defended by UN troops have been reported , which jeopardises the lives of soldiers and the return of the refugees .
I must highlight the importance of the gradual disarming of the groups blocking the implementation of the referendum 's results .
Arms trafficking in the region also encourages more rebel unrest , while compromising the process of establishing independence .
Madam President , today 's discussion on Sudan and South Sudan is encouraging and positive in a world where there is more bad news than good news .
The European Union has both an opportunity and a responsibility to nurture the new state along and to ensure that democracy , the rule of law and respect for human rights are established in Sudan and South Sudan .
Particularly , I think the record of the European Union - because of the founding principles of Schuman based on peace and prosperity - puts us in a position in which large states worldwide could not be , because they might be seen to be using Sudan to exploit it for their own internal and external policies .
We can do a great deal , working with the UN , to establish these new states , particularly South Sudan , and to ensure that they do not have civil wars , as often happens when new states occur .
( SK ) Madam President , after the independence which is due to arrive in precisely one month , South Sudan will immediately have to confront a number of humanitarian and socio-economic problems .
In view of these circumstances , external assistance to support South Sudan in the fight against extreme poverty , to strengthen local organisations , and to speed up the benefits of peace for its inhabitants , will be more important than ever for a long time to come .
Although it is expected that South Sudan will apply for accession to the Cotonou Agreement , the 10th European Development Fund will not be available until sometime after accession to the agreement .
There is therefore a risk of a funding gap appearing in the period immediately after the referendum , when South Sudan will be very vulnerable and at considerable risk of national collapse .
It is clearly necessary to prevent this because of the threat of a humanitarian catastrophe , and we should therefore do everything in our power to help the Sudanese get through this critical period and to prevent a repeat of the bloody conflicts .
( DE ) Madam President , the Northern army forced out 15 000 supporters of South Sudan from the city , and then suddenly , they definitely want to hold a referendum in Abyei in double-quick time in the shadow of an army , when previously they had been unable to even agree with the South about who was entitled to vote .
This is a truly grotesque undertaking .
It is not only the differing views on property and belonging that made Abyei the bone of contention of a civil war that lasted for decades ; there are also the differing religions , namely the Muslim North versus the Christian and nature-based religions of the South Sudanese , who were forced together by the haphazard borders drawn up by the former colonial powers .
When considering the most recent escalations , this should not be forgotten .
It would never have been possible to push the referendum through while the status of the voters of Abyei remained unresolved .
Similarly , we must not forget the equally disputed regions of Blue Nile and South Kordofan with the Nuba mountains .
In my opinion , to do so would be gross negligence and it must not be allowed to happen .
( SK ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I never trusted President Bashir and I do not trust him even now .
It is quite clear from this that I am a pessimist regarding the chances of anything happening in Sudan .
I firmly believe that this President is endeavouring , through military force , to intervene against the South , whether by occupying certain parts of the territory or important towns or sources of raw materials .
It would be very interesting from this perspective to see what preventative actions or preventative steps the Office of the High Commissioner has prepared in order to avoid this happening , perhaps in cooperation with the UN or the African Union , on the one hand , and it would be very interesting , of course , to see the method or steps the office would like to take if that does happen , and in the event that North Sudan does not comply with the peace agreement which was signed , and which I basically believe in .
( SK ) Madam President , South Sudan is a country which has voted for independence , and it will be the newest member of the United Nations .
It is a country which has voted for independence but which is dependent in virtually all respects .
It is dependent on its northern neighbour , and it is dependent on aid , whether from Europe or from surrounding African countries .
It is a country in which the men have not learned to work .
The men wait for a sign that a war is beginning , in order to take up arms and begin fighting each other .
It is a country where only the women and children work , where children do not go to school and are therefore not educated .
It is a country which has no workers , no teachers and no doctors .
It is a country where everything has to be built from scratch , and it will therefore be very difficult and very demanding to build a proper political system here and to put the country on its feet .
It is a difficult task , not just for Europe , but also for the UN .
Member of the Commission , on behalf of the Vice-President of the Commission and EU High Representative for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy . - Madam President , first of all , I am very grateful for your broad support for the strategy that was presented to you .
I will just run through a couple of elements that were raised in the debate .
The people of North and South Sudan are undoubtedly the masters of their countries .
We are supporting the process , but the referendum definitely represents a watershed : it is a completely new qualitative situation .
It is not the same situation as before .
Yes there is violence , there are difficulties , but the situation is different .
Now we see a light at the end of the tunnel .
So that is why I would say that it is a great victory for us because we supported the process politically , both through our own actions and in financial terms .
So that is a completely new situation .
We never compromised on human rights or International Criminal Court issues .
Our position is very clear with regard to both the ICC and human rights .
Whenever there is a violation of human rights , the High Representative makes very strong and clear statements and puts pressure on the authorities .
It has been said that there is no immediate response , but changes are being made .
It is not an easy process and we will continue to deal with it .
On Abyei , the situation is difficult , but again the European Union position will be a very clear and strong condemnation of the occupation calling for the situation to be resolved immediately .
It is basically up to the United Nations Security Council to decide on the situation .
It will decide if there is to be another mission and if there is a United Nations Security Council resolution , we will be its greatest supporters .
But what we need to bear in mind is our strong political stance and declaration and our support for civilian operations .
I believe , as I said to South Sudan , that we should not expect all the issues to be resolved by 9 July .
Independence will be declared , there will be ongoing discussions , and the important element is that the African Union Panel , chaired by Thabo Mbeki , has support from both sides , North and South .
We are very firmly behind the Mbeki panel .
So we have every reason to believe that all the difficult questions will be answered .
With regard to the debt issue , work is under way as part of the Heavily Indebted Poor Countries Initiative .
This takes time and the Abyei issue certainly did not help .
But that issue has not been forgotten .
China , in as much as we can involve it , is a fully-fledged member of the Security Council and it would be a great help in finding solutions in the country .
At this stage , I cannot claim that there has been a lot of activity with the Chinese .
They are in oil , they are in the North of Sudan , but it is definitely a great help when the broader international community tries to find a solution to the issues .
Last but not least , I am very grateful for your interest in Sudan .
On the one hand , it is rather far from us but , on the other , it is very close .
If things go wrong , if people are dying in Africa , the European Union cannot stay on the outside saying ' well , it is too far ' .
Your broad interest in the issues definitely encourages both the High Representative and myself to put together efforts to help people build peaceful lives .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Thursday , 9 June , at 12 : 00 .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
Sudan , the largest country in sub-Saharan Africa , is a crossroads between the Arab and African worlds , as well as a mosaic of many heterogeneous ethnic groups .
It has seen numerous conflicts since its independence from the United Kingdom in 1956 .
With the signing of the Naivasha Agreement and the Comprehensive Peace Agreement ( CPA ) ( 2005 ) , 20 years of conflict between the north and south formally came to an end .
In January 2011 , as provided for in the CPA , a referendum marked the last leg of the road towards the independence of the south from northern Sudan .
In this extremely delicate transition phase , we must keep a balanced approach to both north and south , with particular attention to the needs of the south regarding institution building and governance .
The aid given by the EU to South Sudan must be measured in terms of the effective capability of this new state to absorb it .
Indeed , we must ensure that future flows of funding to Juba do not end up being used inappropriately or , worse , adding to the already widespread corruption .
Europe should also increase its commitment to protect the Christian minorities in the north of the country , who are increasingly the targets of persecution and discrimination .
Application of Schengen acquis in Bulgaria and Romania ( debate )
The next item is the report by Mr Coelho , on behalf of the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs , on the draft Council decision on application of all the provisions of the Schengen acquis in Bulgaria and Romania ( 1412 / 2010 - C7-0369 / 2010 - 2010 / 0820 ( NLE ) .
Madam President , Mrs Győri , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to make six brief points .
Firstly , on strengthening Schengen : the free movement of people is one of the greatest successes and achievements of the EU , and Schengen is one of the Union 's major pillars .
We are therefore among those who believe that it should not be weakened , but rather preserved and strengthened .
I agree with the remarks that Commissioner Malmström made to this effect a little while ago .
The five original Member States have given way to the current 25 : 22 within the Union , and three outside it .
Free movement is thus guaranteed within a territory of almost 43 000 km of external maritime borders and more than 7 700 km of land borders , covering 25 countries and 400 million people .
Secondly , on mutual trust : the abolition of internal border controls requires a high level of mutual trust between the Member States .
There needs to be a rapid and adequate exchange of information through the Schengen Information System ( SIS ) , good police cooperation and effective controls in place at the external borders .
The security of the Schengen area depends on the rigour and efficiency with which each Member State carries out checks at its external borders .
If this does not happen , the security of the Schengen area is weakened , the credibility of the European Union is undermined and mutual trust is destroyed .
Thirdly , on equal rules : there should also be trust in the procedures , which must be clear and fair .
Candidate countries must be able to implement and enforce all the Schengen criteria effectively and correctly : the same criteria that were demanded of previous candidate countries ; no more , no less .
Fourthly , on transparency : we need to ensure greater transparency , in the interests of both freedom and security .
I regret that , once again , the Council has not acted as it should in relation to Parliament , denying Members of this House access to the evaluation reports .
The problem could only be overcome thanks to the diligence of the ambassadors of Romania and Bulgaria , who requested the declassification of the reports and their submission to Parliament , so enabling Members of this House to have access to the content of the evaluations , recommendations and final conclusions .
Unfortunately , the Council has failed to respect Parliament once again .
This very transparency is needed to address the outstanding problems that have been pointed out , as although these are not an obstacle to the two countries ' full membership of Schengen , they should be subject to monitoring by the evaluation committee so as to verify that the recommendations have been acted upon , along with any changes that are still ongoing .
Parliament demands access to this information .
Fifthly , on European citizenship : how often do we invoke the value of European citizenship during our speeches ?
Since their accession to the EU , in 2007 , both Bulgaria and Romania have had a legitimate expectation that their citizens would become fully fledged EU citizens and that they would be able to enjoy the same rights as other EU citizens , including freedom of movement within the Schengen area .
This is the European citizenship that we are strengthening by extending the Schengen area .
My sixth and final point is that they have worked hard .
It is clear that both countries are to be congratulated on the efforts they have made towards meeting all the requirements of Schengen .
This is clear in the evaluation reports and in subsequent observations by the expert missions that made the evaluation .
It was also clear during the mission that we made to Bulgaria and Romania , and for this I would like to thank my fellow Romanian Members , Mr Marinescu , Mr Enciu and Mrs Weber , and my fellow Bulgarian Members , Mr Kovatchev and Mrs Nedelcheva .

We are therefore able to welcome Bulgaria and Romania into the Schengen area , and I hope that the Council will adopt the same position as soon as it receives our positive opinion .
President-in-Office of the Council . - Mr President , I am particularly glad of the opportunity to participate on behalf of the Council in the debate on the extension of the Schengen area to Bulgaria and Romania .
This has been a consistently high priority for the Hungarian Presidency .
I am therefore especially pleased that by now , both Bulgaria and Romania have received positive evaluation of their technical preparedness to apply the entirety of the Schengen acquis .
We welcome the fact that the assessment by this Parliament has also led to similar conclusions .
I particularly commend the work of the rapporteur , Carlos Coelho , for his professional and personal dedication .
For a moment , allow me to deviate from the protocol for the sake of a historic reference .
When the accession of Hungary and other new Member States from Central Europe to Schengen was hampered by a technical difficulty related to the development of the Schengen Information System , the SIS II , it was the then Portuguese Presidency that helped us with a generous and inventive solution .
I would also like to thank the Chair , Mr López Aguilar , and all the members of the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs , for their commitment to this issue .
The Hungarian Presidency has made considerable efforts to take this dossier forward .
The Presidency became aware early on that there was a need to address persistent reservations on the part of a number of Member States vis-à-vis the process .
The Presidency therefore put the state of play of the accession of Bulgaria and Romania to Schengen on the agenda of the JHA Council meeting on 24 and 25 February .
On that occasion , the Council endorsed the Presidency 's conclusions on the progress made and the need to continue to work in close cooperation with all Member States towards a solution acceptable to all parties involved .
Both Bulgaria and Romania have taken very significant steps to bring their countries ' policy and practice up to the Schengen standards . These include areas such as data protection , police cooperation , the control of external air , sea and land borders , the issuing of visas and the appropriate implementation of the SIS and SIRENE functions .
In the meantime , the Schengen evaluation of Romania and Bulgaria on all chapters was completed in March with a positive outcome .
Following the adoption of the relevant reports by the relevant Council working party , the Presidency submitted draft conclusions on the completion of the evaluation process to the JHA Council scheduled for 9 June .
I know that this will be good news for most in this House , not least those Members from Bulgaria and Romania .
It will mark an important step on their way towards full participation in Schengen .
The Council will continue to monitor further progress in all areas since proper follow-up is an ongoing exercise in all Schengen countries .
In this respect , I can assure the honourable Members that both Bulgaria and Romania will continue to report regularly on the steps taken to remedy the remaining shortcomings .
They will , in particular , be looking to reinforce further the controls at their borders and to improve cross-border police cooperation as well as their systems for the issuing of visas .
When Parliament adopts the report prepared by Mr Coelho and the Council adopts the conclusions drafted by the Presidency , only the very last step - adopting the decision of the Council which , as we all know , requires unanimity - will be left .
In this respect , I would like to underline that the Council may return to this issue very soon to reflect on how it can further the process , possibly in September this year .
The report prepared by the rapporteur touches upon the subject of access to classified documents - as was also mentioned by the rapporteur in his introductory remarks - which was an important question in dealing with this dossier .
Parliament 's access to classified documents is one of the outstanding interinstitutional issues between the Council and Parliament that the Hungarian Presidency is aiming to resolve .
While we have managed to agree on the way forward with Parliament 's delegations , the implementation of the solution found still requires some time .
However , the Hungarian Presidency looked , right at the beginning of its term , for an immediate solution in order not to delay the accession of Bulgaria and Romania to the Schengen area .
In that context , it was at the proposal of the Hungarian Presidency that the Council gave its assent so that Parliament could have access to documents pertinent to the accession of the two Member States to the Schengen area .
All in all , the Hungarian Presidency is convinced that the enlargement of the Schengen area to include Bulgaria and Romania , now that they meet all the technical and legal criteria , would be beneficial for the entire Schengen cooperation and for Europe as a whole , where one could travel from the Black Sea to the Atlantic without being stopped to show a passport or identity card .
We all know that this free movement is one of the fundamentals of our European Union - something which is really tangible for our citizens and something of value which we all have to safeguard .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , Schengen is indeed a fantastic achievement .
It is one of the most tangible gifts that the European institutions have given to Europe 's citizens - the fact that , as the Presidency said , you can actually drive from Finland to Portugal without stopping at any border control .
We must safeguard Schengen and the latest debate on reintroducing borders must be stopped .
We have already discussed on many occasions how we should strengthen Schengen , and not weaken it .
We need more Europe on this , and not less Europe .
We need better evaluation , better tools and better guidelines and recommendations on how to interpret the Schengen acquis .
This will be discussed with Member States in the Council this week , but also later at the European Council at the end of June .
I would like to congratulate Romania and Bulgaria on the considerable efforts they have made .
I have seen with my own eyes that they have done a lot of hard work .
One of the advantages of being late is that you can benefit from the latest technology .
I have been impressed by the technology and the work that has been put in place by Romania and Bulgaria and I would like to congratulate them on these investments .
The result is that they both now meet the technical criteria of Schengen and they are committed and deserve the trust of the European Union .
The Commission welcomes this report on the work by Romania and Bulgaria and I would like also to thank Mr Coelho and the shadow rapporteurs for this report and this approach .
The Commission has always taken the line that there is no formal link between the CVM mechanism and Schengen accession .
But , of course , we all know that access to Schengen is also based on trust , and trust , or lack of trust , has been very much debated in the last weeks .
The decision to lift internal border controls with Romania and Bulgaria must not only be based on the technical evaluation but also on this trust , and unfortunately , that trust is not there today .
That is why it was so important , as the Presidency outlined , to work with Member States to find a swift solution to this so that borders could be lifted as soon as possible .
This must remain a priority .
The Council , which has the say on this , must define a clear framework with clear timetables related to border control so that Romania and Bulgaria can see a way forward .
They have demonstrated that they are ready to join , that they have made the necessary progress , and hopefully there will very soon be a possibility to achieve a way forward and a decision by the Council .
Mr President , I should like to congratulate Mr Coelho , and I do this because his work is consistently rigorous .
I now add that we must help Bulgaria and Romania .
I trust Bulgaria and Romania .
They have worked well and hard and they should receive what is theirs by right - this is no gift .
The Presidency-in-office of the Council and the Commissioner , Mrs Malmström , have both stated that these two countries comply with the technical and legal requirements , and I add my voice to theirs .
I believe we should not consider any criteria other than the strictly technical and legal .
These criteria essentially number five .
They comply with the following : they comply with the data protection requirements , they comply with the Schengen Information System ( SIS ) , they comply with police cooperation , they comply with the issue of visas and they comply with the control of external borders by air , sea and land .
Strictly speaking , they also comply with the SIS and with the Supplementary Information Request at the National Entry ( SIRENE ) .
In view of all this , this House should send an unequivocally strong message to the Council and , notably , to the permanent representations of five countries that I shall refrain from mentioning but which are in the minds of all of us here today .
I do believe , ladies and gentlemen , that in including Romania and Bulgaria in the Schengen area , which comprises more than four hundred million human beings , we are adding , not subtracting ; we are building a stronger Europe .
Furthermore , we should avoid double standards .
Nor should we set conditions for Romania and Bulgaria that we do not ask of the other Member States in order to form part of this area of freedom .
Thus , to end my speech , I fervently express my wish for a strong , majority-endorsed message to be sent from this House to the Council .
Congratulations once again , Mr Coelho , and congratulations to Romania and Bulgaria .

Mr President , I express my thanks to Mr Coelho for his effort , commitment and the particular expertise he has applied to this report .
I also thank the Hungarian Presidency and Commissioner Malmström for the support they have given to this report .
The debate about Romania and Bulgaria joining the Schengen area has been hijacked so much for political purposes that we have almost forgotten what it is we are really debating .
I want to remind everyone that we are actually talking about very clear , specific criteria which any candidate country has to meet to become a member of the Schengen area .
There is no moral or legal argument which will make us change the rules for joining now at the end .
The rules can be improved when approving the new Schengen evaluation mechanism applicable to all Member States , without resorting to double standards .
It is time for us to be honest and acknowledge that Romania and Bulgaria are being held responsible for everything that is going wrong at EU level and internally in some Member States .
This notion is completely unacceptable .
It is not Romania and Bulgaria that are at fault because the European Union and certain Member States are unable to manage immigration and their borders , nor are they responsible for the extremist and populist deviations of a few governments , applying anti-immigration policies and regarding the mobility of European citizens , especially of Roma citizens , as a crime .
Last but not least , Romanian and Bulgarian citizens have to suffer because of the bad personal relations the national authorities have with certain influential leaders .
The EU institutions must be the voice of reason and combat this distraction which some are attempting to create .
The European Parliament and Council must comply with European legislation , while the Commission has to oversee this as Guardian of the Treaties .
Mr President , we are debating a dossier today which has put on our agenda in recent months a number of issues of principle .
I would like to thank the rapporteur , Carlos Coelho , for the extremely professional manner in which he has carried out his job in the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs , so as to ensure that these principles are respected .
It has been a pleasure for me to work with Mr Coelho , whose constructive attitude has left its mark on the whole dossier .
On the one hand , we are dealing with an issue of principle when we examine whether two EU Member States fulfilling the criteria for joining the Schengen area should be admitted to this area .
The answer according to the rules is ' yes ' .
Both countries have been assessed regarding their technical preparation for this accession , with totally positive conclusions .
Our rapporteur has gone even further and organised off his own bat working visits to the countries , also accompanied by the shadow rapporteurs , so that they can see how both the command centres and some border points look technically .
On the other hand , another issue of principle has been to do with the institutional relations between the European Parliament and Council when it came to MEPs accessing documents on the basis of which they had to vote .
The Council 's viewpoint that only some MEPs could have access and vote on a fully informed basis , while the others ought to raise their hands to copy them , was sharply criticised by the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs .
I am pleased that our viewpoint won the day .
Institutional cooperation must be fair , logical and democratic .
I hope that tomorrow 's vote will send a clear , positive message to MEPs about the accession of Romania and Bulgaria to the Schengen area .
on behalf of the ECR Group . - Mr President , I would like to say to the Commissioner that European citizens are losing confidence and trust in more and more European programmes .
It is important that we do not push further forward at a speed and rate we are not fully prepared for .
This is a feeling felt by many Member States with regard to the Schengen area and we should not rush with further expansion before all involved are fully and sufficiently ready and prepared .
Of course , I must stress that this debate should not be used as an excuse to criticise either Bulgaria or Romania , who we know have been working very hard to meet the technical criteria that the Commission has set .
Although there may well be disagreement between us as to whether those criteria have been met , much has been done .
But this is an opportunity to talk about renewing faith in the Schengen system and the integrity of the European Union itself , and an opportunity to improve a completely outdated and ineffective evaluation mechanism .
We are currently dealing with a system which is not able to deal with the current or future challenges Europe faces or the political views of its Member States .
Now is the time to set criteria which not only deal with the technical aspects of the Schengen system , but assess the impact of organised crime and corruption , also within the assessment of existing Schengen Member States , and I would like to see Europol and Eurojust involved in those assessments .
Perhaps such a new evaluation mechanism would help prevent some of the differences of opinion and lack of confidence in the current system which we are hearing not only in this Chamber but right across Europe at the present time .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - Mr President , the issue at stake is whether we grant assess to the Schengen area for Bulgaria and Romania .
I myself come from a new Member State and I remember how it wanted to join the area .
I therefore very much welcome the accession of Bulgaria and Romania to that area .
There were some shortcomings on the road to Schengen , but now the problems are resolved .
Bulgaria and Romania are fully prepared to join the area of free travel in 2011 .
I understand the concerns about corruption and organised crime .
That is why cooperation within the framework of the mechanism for cooperation and verification should be continued .
However , we cannot invent new criteria for joining the Schengen area and we cannot undermine the certainty that a state is part of that area as soon as current criteria are met .
The debates in Parliament have revealed a clear need to avoid double standards when evaluating the implementation of the Schengen acquis in existing and acceding Schengen Member States .
The file on that evaluation is thus crucial .
We find it unacceptable that several Member States have suggested , in the Council , changing the legal bases for the proposal so as to exclude Parliament from the decision-making process .
I hope very much that our rapporteur , Mr Coelho , will defend Parliament 's prerogatives , as he always does very successfully , with our full support .
I would like to thank him for his work and hope for further good cooperation in the future .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , it is time that Bulgaria and Romania were included in the full application of the Schengen acquis .
Think about it - the abolition of controls on the internal borders and the creation of freedom of movement are some of the most important achievements and values of the European Union .
For that reason , I find the blocking tactics of a number of Member States - including my home country of Germany - totally incomprehensible .
The arguments used concern the fear of uncontrollable floods of refugees and how corruption must be countered .
Given the opinions that have been presented , I cannot understand these arguments .
A dangerous game is being played with Bulgaria and Romania here .
For that reason , we have also supported the rapporteur , Mr Coelho , from the start in his view that the same standards must apply to all Member States , including when it comes to Schengen .
Like the other Members on the Committee , we were extremely alienated by the Council 's impossible behaviour towards Parliament and by how , at the beginning , it even refused to allow us to review the documents .
Overall , the opinion on the table is a positive one .
We expect that Schengen area accession will become a reality and that we will not have to wait until September .
To close , I would like to quote the Bucharest-based journalist , Sabina Fati . She stated , ' The Romanians are euphoric citizens .
They look upon Western Europe as a place whose standards they absolutely want to achieve . To turn your backs on them now could lead many of them to become eurosceptics ' .
That is not something that we want in either Romania or Bulgaria .

Mr President , Article 4 ( 2 ) of the Act of Accession of Bulgaria and Romania to the European Union states that verification , in accordance with evaluation procedures , that the necessary conditions for the application of the Schengen acquis have been met by the new Member States is an essential requirement for the Council to decide to abolish internal border controls with those States .
Now , we believe that there would be an urgent need to establish regulatory and operational conditions preventing undesirable elements , who could undermine the security of Member States , from slipping into the EU unnoticed via Bulgaria and Romania , but our assessment is that those conditions do not exist today .
The reports being discussed in Parliament are not reassuring because of the grave deficiencies which still exist at air , land and sea borders , starting with the performance of border controls .
It is not surprising that our police forces are faced with numerous cases of illegal immigrants coming from those two countries every day .
I suggest that we need to suspend the entry process to the Schengen scheme for Bulgaria and Romania as a precaution , not least in view of the foreseeably enormous pressure on the external borders of these two countries , which are becoming the holes in the Swiss cheese that is the European Union system regarding the entry of illegal immigrants .
( NL ) Mr President , I will get straight to the point .
Bulgaria and Romania , our corrupt eastern European nests of thieves , absolutely do not meet the conditions for accession to the Schengen area .
I repeat : absolutely not .
Commissioner Malmström may well idealistically muse how sacrosanct the Schengen acquis is , while the majority in Parliament may well drily consider how marvellous it would be if Bulgaria and Romania were to join the Schengen area , but it is just not realistic .
It is naive , in fact , it is childishly naive .
The facts just do not back the idea up .
Bulgaria and Romania themselves have long since demonstrated that they are not worthy of accession to the Schengen area at this point .
According to Transparency International 's Corruption Perceptions Index , corruption is the order of the day in both countries .
When it comes to trustworthiness , Bulgaria scores just 3.6 on a scale of 1 to 10 , while Romania comes in at 3.7 .
In a school report , these figures would be interpreted as a fail , a downright fail .
Yet we are supposed to allow these countries into Schengen ?
Of course we should not - never !
The facts just do not back this idea up , either .
In January of this year , a few dozen Bulgarian customs officials were arrested due to corruption .
In February of this year , nearly 200 Romanian customs officials were arrested , also due to corruption .
Both countries also have worryingly high scores when it comes to human trafficking .
Last year , dozens of victims of Bulgarian and Romanian human trafficking were discovered in the Netherlands alone .
Yet we are supposed to allow these countries into Schengen ?
It would be an outrage , and completely irresponsible .
You can want something to happen - you can want something to happen very badly - but you need to see the reality .
Take the blinkers off !
Bulgaria and Romania are absolutely not ready for Schengen .
They are not ready now , and they never will be .

( BG ) Mr President , I wish to thank Mr Coelho for the objective and fair assessment of what has been done by Bulgaria and Romania .
I also thank the Presidency and Commission for their support on this report .
The process for evaluating these countries and their accession must be completed according to the same criteria with which it started .
It was already established in 2007 that , once the technical criteria were fulfilled , Bulgaria and Romania would join the Schengen area in 2011 .
This is already done .
The same evaluation has been reached by the Council 's experts : Bulgaria and Romania fulfil the membership criteria .
All the reservations which we have recently been hearing relate to the foreign policy debates of some Member States .
Instead of looking at the short term , we need to take action in support of better protection for our external borders , of signing and complying with readmission agreements with our southern and eastern neighbours , and of solidarity with those Member States which are subject to the strongest immigration pressure in southern Europe .
This is particularly important at the moment when there are internal challenges from and fears among our citizens about illegal immigration , which may threaten security and social advantages in Europe .
We need effective , workable plans for dealing with the crises which we had in Italy and Malta .
We cannot allow double standards .
If we are going to debate and adopt new rules , they must apply to all countries - both old and new .
Fellow Members , Bulgaria and Romania have completed their job and they are building on these security systems in cooperation with their Schengen partners .
They have made and are making considerable efforts in the fight against corruption and organised crime .
At present , I will feel less concerned if the Schengen area 's Mediterranean border is guarded as well as Bulgaria and Romania guard their Black Sea borders .
The rapporteur and other fellow Members were there and they understand what I am talking about .
This is why the Council needs to decide to admit Bulgaria and Romania into the Schengen area this September , in order to strengthen security in this area .
Fellow Members , I call on you to support Mr Coelho 's report , which will allow us to give the Council a clear , strong political signal that Bulgaria 's and Romania 's rightful place is in the Schengen area this very year , in order to make external borders more secure and give our citizens greater peace of mind .
( SK ) Mr President , freedom of movement is one of the fundamental freedoms and achievements of the citizens of the EU Member States , and on behalf of our group , the Group of the Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats in the European Parliament , I would like to support the accession of Romania and Bulgaria to the Schengen area .
I have to say that both the inspection report and the opinion of the rapporteur himself are positive , and that we should thank them , while , at the same time , also expressing our exasperation .
Exasperation over the way that some MEPs from countries which themselves have problems with illegal immigration and corruption are looking at Romania and Bulgaria today .
Bulgaria and Romania are fully-fledged Member States of the European Union and our approach to them must be the same as to any other EU Member State .
So , if you think about the accession of Bulgaria and Romania , and if we vote on it tomorrow , I would be delighted if you could view it in the same way as you view your own countries .
( BG ) Mr President , we are concluding during this session our evaluation of Bulgaria 's and Romania 's readiness to join the Schengen area .
We will successfully achieve this because Mr Coelho 's report is successful .
The overwhelming expectation is that Parliament 's evaluation concurs with the positive position of the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs and that the citizens of both countries , Bulgaria and Romania , feel that their institutions have done what they need to do and that the light to proceed down ' Schengen Road ' is already green .
The discussions were lengthy , but the good news is that we did not permit the attempts to make ad hoc changes to the Schengen membership criteria .
The difficult times , of course , have not gone away .
The governments of both countries need to explain now all the reasons to those who are sceptical and who changed before our very eyes from being former allies supporting Bulgarian and Romanian integration to instigators of the waiting game .
What underlies these reasons ?
Objective fears or prejudice , situational prudence or disappointment ?
I hope that the interior and justice ministers will be at least just as frank with each other as we have been during the process of drafting the Coelho report .
( PL ) Mr President , I have the impression that in recent discussions in the European Parliament , we have been thinking increasingly in categories of defending ourselves along a Limes line - sometimes this runs along the European Union 's external border , but sometimes we want to erect and defend borders within the European Union .
I want to say firmly and emphatically : there are no substantive reasons , today , to delay Bulgaria and Romania 's joining the Schengen area .
We should oppose all attempts at restricting contacts between citizens , and we should oppose all attempts at restricting freedom to travel and be active in the European Union .
The discussion to which I am listening shows how very divided the European Union is today .
Those who today are raising artificial arguments against Bulgaria and Romania joining the Schengen area will have on their conscience responsibility for the destruction of the political project which is the European Union , and they will never now escape that responsibility .
Mr President , it is odd , is it not , that as the Schengen area comes apart in its core countries , there are plans to extend it to include Bulgaria and Romania .
There are over 900 000 gypsies in Romania and Bulgaria , many of whom would like to migrate .
Once they can travel freely within the Schengen area , many of them will inevitably find their way to Britain in order to take advantage of our generous benefits and public housing system , like so many before them .
Perhaps some enterprising British citizens might like to meet the Roma as they disembark at Calais and Heathrow and give them the addresses and location maps so that they can find their way to the homes of our Prime Minister , his cabinet colleagues and all the MPs in favour of EU membership .
Only when the Roma pitch their caravans on the front lawns of our out-of-touch political class might they change their views on the benefits of EU membership .
( NL ) Mr President , I fear that the European Parliament will once again be showing its most naive side by approving the accession of Bulgaria and Romania to the Schengen area .
It is clear , in any case , that there are various Member States that will oppose this . They have good reasons for so doing .
There is a recent report from Europol about organised crime which stated that criminal groups from Albania , Turkey and the former Soviet Union will exploit the opportunities that the accession of Romania and Bulgaria to the Schengen area will bring .
The report I mention also makes reference to the visa liberalisation for the Balkan States , which was also something of an imprudent measure .
There is the problem of illegal immigration via Turkey , which will occur in much greater numbers once Bulgaria is in the Schengen area .
What guarantees is the Commission giving that this problem will be tackled effectively ?
It is giving none whatsoever .
What steps is it taking to prevent additional problems in connection with the Roma gypsies and the nuisance and criminality associated with them ?
It is taking no steps whatsoever , either .
What is the situation when it comes to the judicial reform and anti-corruption measures that are still needed ?
Those citizens of Romania and Bulgaria who travel to Schengen countries with good intentions will , in any case - and I am convinced of this - understand that the inconvenience of border controls is outweighed by the necessity of protecting all other Europeans against organised crime and mass illegal immigration .
( RO ) Mr President , Romania 's accession to the Schengen area is a project which has involved major financial , institutional and human efforts , as it is one of Romania 's most important political objectives .
Romania has invested more than EUR 1 billion and the results have definitely been positive in all the evaluation reports .
All the Schengen acquis conditions have been met .
Romania manages one of the European Union 's longest external borders , as a result of which it has developed the most advanced , integrated security system , complying with the standards set by the Schengen acquis .
Romania and the agency Frontex have strengthened their partnership .
In the Frontex operations carried out in Greece , Romania was the second main contributor , after Germany , of equipment and human resources .
In the event of a huge influx of immigrants at the border , specialist immigration and asylum mechanisms have been implemented in partnership with similar institutions in other Member States , Germany and the Netherlands .
In terms of the efforts to combat illegal trafficking , every state-of-the-art method is used to investigate and collect information .
A unique application has been developed in Europe which allows data to be processed in both SIS I and SIS II .
The maritime border surveillance system has been presented as a model of good practice .
At the same time , the authorities have focused particular attention on the fight against corruption .
Constant cooperation as part of the special mechanism set up by the European Commission has produced the results showing that Romania has the necessary institutional capacity required and political will to achieve the justice objectives .
I think that accession to the Schengen area is not a gift being offered to Romania , but rather recognition of its merits and efforts , and will be an obvious asset to the security of the EU 's external borders .
Mr Coelho , thank you and congratulations on the way you have handled this dossier .
( SL ) Mr President , Bulgaria and Romania have fulfilled the conditions set and are acceding to the Schengen area on their own merits .
We cannot allow political arguments to delay the enlargement .
I am greatly concerned by the populist and extreme right nationalist rhetoric which is , in a very dangerous way , leading the Union to intolerance , racism , discrimination and the thoughtless closing of doors .
With each enlargement of the Schengen area , we are expanding the area of ​ ​ freedom , security and justice and I am confident that , as in the past , time will show possibilities for economic and other development .
It is unacceptable that some Members States of the Union should call today for the restoration of internal borders .
The mobility of European citizens within the Union , the freedom to travel , is one of the key European freedoms , and any restriction would undermine one of the most tangible benefits our citizens have obtained from closer European integration .
With the enlargement of the Schengen area to Bulgaria and Romania , we will prove that the idea of integration is alive and well , that Europe is heading forward , and that the countries which are knocking at its door have a clear future in the EU , including those of the Western Balkans .
Mr President , I may have changed my seat here to the ECR Group this week , but I have not changed my perspective on the European Union .
When it comes to Schengen , it has been the ECR view that this is generally a matter for Schengen area members to decide , including Switzerland , of course , which is in Schengen , but not in the European Union .
But the closure of the border by France to Italian trains , and Danish demands to mend Schengen shows it is in crisis .
Pragmatism dictates that the implications of Bulgaria and Romania joining are profound for those way beyond the Schengen area .
A leaky border will mean that many illegal entrants destined for the UK can reach Calais without hindrance , for example , and Bulgaria has not complied with its obligations on organised crime .
In summary , this proposal is simply a border too far .
( IT ) Mr President , while Europe pretends not to notice , the 2011 Europol report on organised crime affirms that , with the entry of Romania and Bulgaria into the Schengen area , the powerful criminal organisations of Turkey , Russia and Albania will be able to expand their activities across the whole of Europe .
Furthermore , and I quote : ' Illegal immigration from Turkey will spread to the coasts of Bulgaria and the trafficking of drugs and humans by Turkish and Albanian criminal gangs will increase ' .
Moreover , regarding human trafficking , ' Romania and Bulgaria 's entry into the Schengen area could give Bulgarian criminal groups and Roma communities new opportunities to increase their already significant trafficking to the rest of Europe ' .
In the final analysis , increased illegal immigration from Turkey and more drug and human trafficking mean less security for European citizens .
Europe wants to do organised crime an enormous favour .
The Lega Nord party is , and always will be , against this kind of iniquitous choice .
Whoever votes tomorrow in favour of this report will be responsible for having voted for the opening of a motorway bringing organised crime straight to the heart of Europe .
( HU ) Mr President , Mrs Győri , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I am glad that by voting on the Coelho report tomorrow , the European Parliament will give a clear sign that it accepts Romania 's and Bulgaria 's readiness and supports the accession of these two countries to one of the most important acquis of the European Union , the Schengen area .
This acquis means a lot to Eastern and Central European countries , also for historical reasons , because it provides the opportunity to travel freely without barriers .
The most important message of our debate today for Member States must be that Romania and Bulgaria meet the same accession criteria that the European Union expected from countries that have joined so far .
It must be emphasised that we cannot impose more requirements for Romania and Bulgaria than we have done in the case of the previous Schengen accession .
Member States should not use the institution of double standard , as it erodes the very foundation upon which the Schengen acquis is built : the institution of mutual trust .
It is exactly the events of recent months that prove that Europe 's most important acquis requires protection and support .
I would also like to emphasise that under no circumstances should we bundle two matters here , that is , link the Schengen accession of the two Member States to the matter of the supervision of the Schengen verification mechanism .
There is a great need for the latter , but the two cannot be connected right now .
And finally , allow me to congratulate Mr Coelho who prepared the report , whose constructive and consistent work has been truly important in this matter .
I would also like to thank the Hungarian Presidency for its commitment and the concrete steps it took to facilitate the accession of the two Member States as soon as possible .
( SV ) Mr President , tomorrow , we will vote on whether to allow Bulgaria and Romania to join the Schengen area .
For me as a Social Democrat , it goes without saying that all EU Member States that meet all of the stringent requirements for cooperation should be allowed to join .
It is , of course , important for us to lay down stringent requirements for joining Schengen , but the same objective criteria must apply to everyone .
Anything else is political hypocrisy .
Now that all of the experts deem that Romania and Bulgaria satisfy requirements , I think it is clear that they should be allowed to join .
Some objections have been raised this evening with regard to corruption in both countries , but that is not something that can be combated via the Schengen system .
Just recently , Commissioner Malmström presented a package for combating corruption that we can use as a basis for further work .
This is a matter for the whole of the European Union , not just for Romania and Bulgaria .
Likewise , the fight against organised crime requires more cooperation , not more closed doors .
( Applause )
( IT ) Mr President , Commissioner , Schengen is certainly an heirloom of civilisation of the highest value .
Today , we must welcome an important result , which is that we consider the citizens of Bulgaria and Romania to be among those who can benefit from this fundamental instrument .
The Schengen area should therefore be consolidated and strengthened further .
If ever there were concrete evidence of European civilisation , this is it : the right to European citizenship finds concrete expression precisely within the Schengen area .
The Schengen acquis is , therefore , a fundamental instrument for the legal economy , and I am convinced that on 24 June this year , the Council will take important points for reflection from what is intended to be a strengthening of trust and collaboration between Member States .
Of course , the evaluation mechanisms must proceed from being intergovernmental systems to being Union systems , as recently announced by Mrs Malmström , just as the governance of Schengen certainly produces increased cooperation and dynamic reinforcement , as well as modernisation , transparency and dialogue .
The requirements have been met by Bulgaria and Romania and I congratulate Mr Coelho on having combined freedom of movement with the security of citizens in his balanced report , which has been adopted by the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs .
( BG ) Mr President , the SCH-EVAL Working Group described the one thousand three hundred kilometre Bulgarian border as a secure external border of the European Union , something which several Bulgarian governments worked for .
The Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs recommends that the Council should approve the two countries joining the Schengen area .
I want to thank all fellow Members for the professional job they have done .
Some Member States are setting new political criteria which will delay the Schengen process .
The accession of Bulgaria and Romania was even described as gambling with European citizens ' security due to crime and corruption .
The results in this area are clearly not impressive .
However , this is why there are foreign policy criteria and possible resignations from Bulgarian ministers .
These issues are the subject of other evaluations , such as the European Commission 's Cooperation and Verification Mechanism .
I want to welcome also the suggestions made by Commissioner Malmström yesterday regarding a new package of anti-corruption measures .
However , at the moment , Bulgaria and Romania cannot be the scapegoats for unresolved problems relating to security in Europe : the wave of refugees from Africa , the forthcoming elections in some Member States , populist rhetoric and disappointment from the financial and economic crisis .
No one is interested nowadays in a two-track Europe .
This is why I call on you to support the Coelho report and urge the Council to take a positive decision .
( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I should first like to congratulate my colleague , Carlos Coelho , who has done a masterly job on this report , and goodness knows it was complicated .
Bulgaria and Romania have done a considerable amount of work on strengthening their border controls and have succeeded .
The latest assessments are very clear , in all areas from police and judicial cooperation to data protection and policies on visas and air , sea and land border controls .
All the technical conditions have been met .
We can accept this as an established fact .
Bulgaria and Romania are now in a position to implement the Schengen acquis in terms of their technical capacity and human resources .
Whilst there is now nothing to prevent us from enlarging the Schengen area , it is worth noting the recommendations that have been made to these two countries .
I hope these recommendations will be strictly monitored , especially as regards the borders between Bulgaria , Greece and Turkey , because as you know , mutual trust between the Schengen States relies on countries adhering fully to their reciprocal obligations .
If any of the parties does not abide by its obligations , this breaks the closed circuit and the whole system falls down .
I sincerely hope that the Council reaches an agreement so that these two countries can become part of the privileged circle of Schengen States .
All of us in this House are aware of the implications that decisions of this nature have for the citizens concerned .
Well done again to Mr Coelho on his report .
( RO ) Mr President , I think that the states which have expressed their reservations about Romania and Bulgaria joining the Schengen area must not forget that this process is a legal obligation stipulated by the Treaty of Accession to the European Union for Romania and Bulgaria , which all these countries have assumed by signing the Treaty .
At the same time , European Union countries must also be aware that it is in their interest for Romania and Bulgaria to join Schengen because they will be able to make their own contribution to the security of all Member States and extend the Schengen area , which is set to strengthen the integration process within the European Union and the common area of freedom , security and justice .
Acknowledgement from the European Union 's missions assessing the smooth operation and connection Romania and Bulgaria have to the Schengen Information System , which operates at the highest security standards , presents a strong argument in this respect .
This connection will allow all Union countries to have access to online data about stowaways attempting to reach Europe and ensure more effective control at the European Union 's external borders .
( DE ) Mr President , Mrs Győri , Commissioner , we are all aware that both of these countries - Romania and Bulgaria - have invested a great deal in securing the external borders of the European Union .
They meet the Schengen standards .
Objective reviews have all come to the same conclusion , namely , that the prerequisites for accession to the Schengen area have been met .
Our rapporteur also performed a review on the ground .
He carried out an objective evaluation and reached the same conclusion .
That is why we will not only be voting in favour of the report but we will also be giving our consent for both these countries to join the Schengen area .
The Schengen area is also an area of confidence , however .
That means that not everything is completed with a single , one-off action but that confidence must be built over the long run ; investment in security must be ensured over the long term .
The same applies to all States , I would point out , and not just to Romania and Bulgaria .
I hope that this confidence remains secure over the long term so that we are able to maintain this freedom of travel , this freedom of movement within the European Union as a major public good over the long term .
I am distressed by something that I heard today , however , although it is something that I am unable to verify , namely , that police wages in Romania are to be cut by around a third .
We all know that it is a prerequisite for incorruptibility , for reputable work by the police , that they must be well paid .
I therefore hope that my information is inaccurate and that the police , who are performing a service in the interests of these countries and of the security of the entire European Union , will continue to be well paid in the future , too , so that they are not susceptible to bribery .
( EL ) Mr President , Commissioner , according to the Coelho report , Romania and Bulgaria are , based on the evaluation reports , sufficiently prepared to apply the provisions of the Schengen acquis to their land , sea and air borders .
They satisfy the basic requirements and the same criteria as other Member States for full integration into the Schengen area .
In supporting the full integration of these countries , we are demonstrating our Community solidarity and supporting the European idea and the fundamental right of the freedom of movement of citizens within the European Union , thereby creating a stronger Europe .
As regards the concerns raised in the report about increasing migration pressure in the sensitive area of Bulgaria , Turkey and Greece , these are today 's challenges for the European Union and the Member States , which need to find global , pan-European solutions to effectively strengthen their external borders , to strengthen Frontex , to demonstrate due Community solidarity and to support the Member States in the south of Europe where immigrants land .
The topical dialogue on updating the Schengen Agreement must take account of the above challenges .
( BG ) Mr President , Commissioner , involvement in the Schengen area means assuming responsibility .
Bulgaria and Romania must be admitted so that they can assume their share of the responsibility , along with the other Member States , for protecting Europe 's borders .
I know that Schengen is a sensitive topic nowadays in many Member States and gives rise to numerous public debates .
It has taken on new significance in recent months with the influx of emigrants from North Africa .
In actual fact , even old and large Member States have been finding it difficult coping with the flow of emigrants .
However , these problems will not be resolved by not admitting Bulgaria and Romania .
Quite the reverse .
The correct response ought to be to strengthen the principle of solidarity regarding emigration policy and to get all Member States to commit to applying it .
We not only need to offer the opportunity , but also require Bulgaria and Romania to assume their responsibilities and fulfil their duties at the Europe Union 's external borders .
Commissioner Malmström mentioned trust .
This is the nub of it .
The governments of both countries must be given the opportunity to respond to the challenge and prove that they can successfully guard Europe 's borders .
Mr President , dear colleagues , one month ago , I came to Brussels by car and at the Hungarian border , I saw a huge queue of trucks .
I recall counting 87 .
They were from Germany , Italy , Denmark and Hungary , loaded with goods which people were waiting for .
They were delayed by a procedure which no longer applies in the rest of the European Union .
I would like to underline the importance of the accession of Romania and Bulgaria to this important space .
It is important for the interests of the whole of Europe because we have to rebuild the trust of our European citizens in the European Union and its institutions .
You said , Commissioner , that Schengen is an important gift for all European citizens , but it is also an important tool for not ' less ' but for ' more ' Europe .
I strongly believe that the European Parliament will adopt this report tomorrow and that the Council will act accordingly as soon as possible .
( Applause )
( HU ) - Mr President , the Coelho report determines that both Romania and Bulgaria have proven that they have prepared properly for the appropriate application of the provisions of the Schengen acquis .
However , the date of their accession to the Schengen area is still uncertain , as some Member States believe that despite the repeated assessments by various European Union institutions , their accession could cause problems in the Schengen system .
While acknowledging the deficiencies of the Romanian justice system , I would like to call to the attention of my fellow Members and the Council the fact that the decision they are making directly influences the everyday lives of 30 million EU citizens .
The abolition of internal border controls is an enormous success of European integration .
Romanian and Bulgarian citizens rightly expect to be able to enjoy the benefits of the Schengen acquis as full European Union citizens .
I strongly believe that all of Europe would be stronger if Bulgaria and Romania were to join the Schengen area this year .
( SK ) Mr President , I stand here today in order to give unambiguous support to the accession of Romania and Bulgaria to the Schengen area .
In my opinion , Mr Coelho 's report very much proves the opinion that these two countries are fully prepared and have fulfilled all of the conditions .
Bulgaria and Romania have been Member States of the EU for four years , but some fellow Members appear not to have noticed that , and some of their questions and racist remarks about these countries really concern me as an EU citizen , because if we talk about illegal immigrants from these countries somehow invading our territory , we are actually referring to members and citizens of the EU , and they surely cannot be illegal immigrants .
In my opinion , whoever meets the conditions should have the chance of becoming a member of the Schengen area .
This is a fundamental principle of equality on which the EU is built , and whoever doubts this doubts the fundamental principles of the EU .
( BG ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , following Bulgaria 's accession to the European Union , admission to the Schengen area is the next greatly awaited event .
It is justice which we are waiting for .
After Bulgaria and Romania have made great efforts and coped admirably with the Schengen technical criteria , delaying both countries ' admission would run counter to the rules stipulated in the European Union .
The conditions set in the Union are the same for everyone .
The same criteria which have also applied to the other Member States must apply to our countries .
Otherwise , this is discrimination .
Problems with corruption feature in many Member States .
Europe must combat this as a whole because four out of every five European citizens consider that corruption is a fundamental problem in their country .
Europe has problems with the rising number of emigrants .
We need to find common solutions to these issues , but while adhering to our values and upholding our principles .
( PL ) Mr President , much is being said in the European Union about the crisis .
Up till now , we have been talking mainly about the economic crisis .
Now , what is happening with the Schengen area is making people say that it is not just the economy which is under threat , but also the fundamental rights of the citizens .
Therefore , following the events related to the Schengen area in Italy , France and then in Denmark , I think we have to send a very clear signal which says that no , the Schengen area is not under threat , we do not want it to be suspended , we want it to be strengthened and enlarged , and that we very much want Europe to be open .
We have to show that we know how to overcome crises .
I would like to express my thanks to the Commissioner that when Denmark wanted to bring in border controls , a communication on common asylum and immigration policy was released very quickly .
However , a further step now has to be taken .
It is not just a matter of voting to accept the entry of Romania and Bulgaria to the Schengen area .
It is a matter of doing this as quickly as possible .
Mr President , today , the Schengen arrangements are coming under strong pressure .
On the one hand , given the current wave of immigrants from North Africa , where the EU is encouraging democratic change , some states have asked for , and obtained , a temporary suspension of those arrangements .
On the other hand , other states have decided , for reasons which would seem to reflect their own narrow interests towards the applicants , to exploit the fact that Romania and Bulgaria are not yet part of the area and to try to keep them out , once again .
Consequently , the rules of the game have been modified during the match , to the disadvantage of the two players .
I personally support the positive conclusions of the report and praise the author for them but , although I can understand the political reasons for amending the recommendation - the basis of politics is , after all , compromise - I cannot ignore the fact that the new conditionality suggested might facilitate a subjective interpretation of it .
I pray to God that I am wrong .
( RO ) Mr President , the report we have before us today is objective and fair , highlighting that Romania and Bulgaria are fully prepared technically to join the Schengen area .
On top of this , in certain aspects , Romania can be used as a model of good practice , as indicated in the assessment documents .
It is my firm belief that the accession of Romania and Bulgaria to this area will not have an adverse impact on the borders ' security .
Quite the opposite .
It will boost Europeans ' confidence in the Schengen area .
There is often talk about mutual trust , just as has been mentioned in this debate , too .
However , how can we talk about mutual trust when some Member States are changing the rules of the game midway by introducing new criteria for joining Schengen ?
The arguments being used today against Romania and Bulgaria joining the Schengen area were not taken into account for any other state which has joined Schengen in the past .
The only thing that Romanians and Bulgarians expect is fair treatment in relation to the other countries and an objective assessment based on the same criteria .
Parliament must send the Council a clear message in this respect and insist on a definite date for accession .
( RO ) Mr President , I wish to thank the rapporteur who , in this case , has drafted an extremely important report , but also extremely difficult at the same time , due to the fact that we have conflicting views on this matter regarding the accession of Romania and Bulgaria to the Schengen area .
Fellow Members , I also want to thank all those who have realised that the European Union expands on the basis of values .
Last but not least , the accession of Bulgaria and Romania to the Schengen area is part of assuming responsibility , which both states did in 2004 , to meet the conditions which have subsequently turned out to be fulfilled according to the European Commission 's evaluation reports .
Today , I asked a fellow MEP from a country which has a conflicting position on our accession to the Schengen area what reason he would have for opposing this .
The technical conditions seem to be met , but the reason would be because it is a controversial policy domestically .
This situation is unacceptable .
( EL ) Mr President , I consider that the credibility of the European Union rests on the uniform application of the rules .
I consider it obvious that the integration of Romania and Bulgaria into the Schengen Agreement must be accepted by complying with the same rules that were complied with when other States became parties to the agreement .
I welcome Mr Coelho 's report and his proposal on the need for Bulgaria to take additional measures , by preparing a special action plan with Greece and Turkey , due to the problem of illegal immigration on the Greco-Bulgarian border .
I repeat my firm position that Dublin II needs to be revised and the Frontex operational office in Greece needs to operate on a permanent basis .
( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , the Schengen Agreement , as we know , must not promote mass immigration into the social systems and the freedom of travel must not lead to an increase in crime and illegal immigration .
The fight against organised crime and the improvement of border protection must finally be more valued in the European Union .
If Italy and its border police 's security system reportedly lags far behind the ordinary Schengen standard , it is to be feared that newcomers like Romania and Bulgaria could soon also slacken in their efforts .
The overhasty accession to Schengen for these countries should therefore be rejected , as the main beneficiaries of this could be organised crime from eastern Europe and even from the Caucasus region .
I believe that , in combating asylum problems , Denmark has set itself up as a trailblazer for EU-wide rules .
That is probably why the Commission has reacted so strongly to the announcement of stronger border controls to fight rising criminality .
We should make clear that , although Schengen requires open internal borders , that is only the case where the external borders are truly secure .
( NL ) Mr President , everyone who has followed this dossier knows that admitting Bulgaria and Romania to the Schengen area is an extraordinarily difficult dossier in the Netherlands .
We also have a European responsibility , however .
That being the case , I have one question for the Commissioner : how does enforcement of the Schengen criteria fit in with general control under corruption policy ?
Just recently , we heard about border control between Bulgaria and Ukraine , where Bulgarian border officials had been bribed to allow people through the external borders of the European Union that have no business being here .
I have a second question , which Mr Pirker also asked , namely , what do the substantial police cuts in Romania mean for the enforcement of the Schengen criteria ?
There has been no consultation about this with the unions .
What is the current state of affairs ?
( SK ) Mr President , Bulgaria and Romania have , in three years , taken all the measures necessary to be able to join the Schengen area .
The criteria and the measures for securing the external borders are not simple .
Both states have fulfilled these and are entitled to be members of the common Schengen area , regardless of the fact that Europe is now facing a flood of immigrants from Africa .
It is important that the evaluation committee , members of which have visited both states in person , has stated that both Romania and Bulgaria meet the Schengen requirements .
I firmly believe that MEPs will approve this report and that it will then be clearly approved by the Council .
I wish the citizens of Romania and Bulgaria the rapture that I personally experienced in chopping down the border gate on 22 December 2007 , when Slovakia became part of the Schengen area .
( FI ) Mr President , the expansion of the Schengen area entails the fulfilment of standards , but it is also about trust .
The applications from Bulgaria and Romania have come at an interesting time , when the EU has begun to question the principle of free movement .
Formerly , internal border checks were obviously carried out , but the reason for these at the time was the holding of certain events , like sporting events , the European Football Championship , world championships , or certain summit conferences .
Now , too , many Schengen countries conduct police inspections within the framework of national legislation , on flights inside the Schengen area , for example .
Now , however , the debate has changed .
Now , checks should no longer be carried out because of special events , but because of a phenomenon .
It is a sensitive issue , because it questions the notion of free movement and ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
( BG ) Mr President , I congratulate Mr Coelho for his well-balanced , objective report .
The text not only reflects the findings made by the rapporteur when he visited Bulgaria and Romania , but also expresses the European Parliament 's desire to remain true to the spirit of Europe .
In other words , readiness for Schengen membership is based solely on fulfilling technical criteria .
This is the case .
Technical readiness , as a result of the good work carried out by Bulgaria and Romania , is a positive finding , which is also being made by us today .
Now it is important for us to send a two-fold message tomorrow during the vote with a convincing majority .
First and foremost , there is a message for the Council of Ministers .
By providing access to the relevant information , establishing a constructive dialogue and taking into account the view of Parliament , the Council will not only show its goodwill in terms of cooperating with us , but it will also send a powerful message about one of the guardians of European values , as well as about transparent cooperation and partnership .
A strong message will also be sent to Bulgarian and Romanian citizens .
What the European Union is saying to them is : ' Yes ' to equal treatment for all Member States , ' Yes ' to identical rules and ' Yes ' to the same consideration for the results achieved .
I am confident that the Council can heed positive efforts .
( BG ) Mr President , I would first of all like to thank Mr Coelho for the comprehensive report .
I am taking the floor because I am annoyed by the blatant attempts to use the case of Bulgaria and Romania to resolve internal problems and to respond to internal fears .
The lifting of visa requirements for Bulgaria and Romania more than 10 years ago was met with the same fears .
However , the European leaders at that time demonstrated courage and farsightedness even when Bulgaria and Romania were not members of the European Union .
Indeed , they were not wrong .
This is why we must remember today that the current debate is about rules which must be the same for everyone , about equality between Member States enshrined in the Treaty of the European Union and , last but not least , about Europe 's so widely acclaimed solidarity .
Europe is definitely more different nowadays to the Europe of 20 years ago .
This should not come as a surprise to anyone .
However , if there is a crisis in the Schengen area , this is a subject for another debate .
If this leads to a change in conditions , they must be changed for everyone .
Let us remember therefore that huge groups of illegal immigrants are crossing ...
( The President cut off the speaker )

( BG ) Mr President , I would like to congratulate the rapporteur , Mr Coelho , on an exceptionally balanced , positive report .
This is the result of the general attitude and vision which the majority of fellow Members present in this Chamber have , which is that Bulgaria and Romania deserve to and must be part of the Schengen area .
Obviously , problems should not be shifted to areas where there are none .
Corruption and crime are prevalent in all European Union Member States . However , success in tackling these problems will only be achieved when all 27 countries combine their efforts .
Responsibilities and burdens should not be shifted just on to one group of European countries .
Bulgaria and Romania proved that they can work for a united Europe .
I think that they will be worthy members of the Schengen area as well .
Mr President , Bulgaria and Romania proved that they can guarantee the safety of the EU borders and this is fully - I repeat , fully - documented .
By the way , the officers arrested in Romania and Bulgaria were arrested for corruption .
Can anyone in this House claim that , for instance , a Dutch officer , a corrupt Dutch officer , would not be arrested for corruption in the Netherlands ?
Secondly , Romania and Bulgaria did not compete to win the top prize of Transparency International .
They entered the judicial contract and fulfilled all its criteria .
Now , if somebody is trying to change the rules of the game during the game , I think this might be illegal according to EU law and is , anyway , unfair according to common sense .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , thank you for this very useful debate .
There is indeed a clear need to strengthen the trust and faith in Schengen by strengthening governance and by strengthening the evaluation mechanism - as the Commission proposed long before Christmas - with more involvement of independent experts and the Commission , and also increased transparency involving Parliament in all the steps that are taken there .
We also need to become much better in immediately assisting Member States which are in difficulties for one or other reason , and we need to clarify under what circumstances border controls might be reintroduced .
All this needs to be done .
We also need to fight against corruption and to increase the fight .
Yes , there is corruption in Bulgaria and Romania , but there is corruption in every Member State , and the Commission proposed only yesterday a report on how we want to enforce the struggle against corruption .
Some of you were kind enough to refer to this .
But , in the meantime , we must recognise the enormous efforts that have been made by Bulgaria and Romania in order to comply with the technical requirements of Schengen .
They are very clear , they are very transparent .
That is why these countries must be given a clear perspective , a clear framework on what is expected of them , so that Member States will feel ready to welcome them into the Schengen community .
President-in-Office of the Council . - ( HU ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , first of all , I would like to thank those who commented positively on the efforts of the Hungarian Presidency .
It was very important for us to feel your support throughout the entire past five months .
Today 's debate has also shown clearly that there is a strong majority in the European Parliament supporting Romania 's and Bulgaria 's accession to the Schengen area because they have done their homework .
During the past five months , and for the remaining time ahead of us , we will fight to express this , and for the Council to determine that as far as the technical standards are concerned , Romania and Bulgaria are ready to join the Schengen area .
Both countries have worked very hard and deserve the maximum amount of appreciation for their efforts .
Many have voiced their opinion during the debate - those who are for , as well as those who are against or for postponing the accession - that mutual trust is the key word in this issue .
I also agree strongly with this , and the Hungarian Presidency has aimed to build trust throughout the entire time .
How did we try to achieve this ?
On the one hand , we were engaged in continuous dialogue with both countries , watching their efforts and attempting to help them find ways to get a better recognition of their efforts .
On the other hand , we were continuously in touch with countries that expressed doubts about the accession of Romania and Bulgaria .
We then made efforts to encourage these countries to contact the candidate countries as well .
As a result , I can tell you that there was a continuous dialogue behind the scenes in order for the parties to better understand and trust one another .
This is the mutual trust upon which the majority of our policies are built in the European Union ; without it , Member States are unable to make this political decision that requires unanimity .
This is a time-consuming process .
We had six months to achieve this .
I trust that during these six months , we will reach the point where , in exactly two days , the Member States will say ' yes , the homework has been done ' .
What can help create mutual trust ?
On the one hand , the series of consultations , which I have mentioned .
On the other hand , that both candidate countries continue their efforts and keep proving that they are capable of defending the external borders of the European Union .
The conduct exhibited by these two countries , coupled with their enormous growth , pace and rhythm , must be continued in the near future as well .
On the other hand , I am convinced that the cooperation and verification mechanism - the famous CVM on which the Commission will release a report in July , dealing with the exact same issues that were voiced in this debate - could be helpful , even if officially , it is not part of the conditions for Schengen accession .
The Commission will issue a certificate concerning the fight against organised crime and corruption .
We have fought all along for this not to be laid down as a condition , but it will definitely support the building of mutual trust .
As such , I am convinced that a positive CVM will promote a positive political decision regarding the Schengen expansion as well .
If you ask me about the general mood regarding any type of admission into the Schengen area , then we all know that it would be difficult to say that the European Union is currently in a particularly welcoming mood .
Several comments have been made in this debate that aptly demonstrate this .
For instance , some are saying that with the Romanian-Bulgarian accession , the Roma population will begin to move from these two countries .
I would like to be very clear : freedom of movement is a basic principle of the European Union , it is effective and valid , it is what our policies are built upon ; this freedom is currently enjoyed by the Romanian and Bulgarian Roma population , just as by everyone else in every corner of the European Union .
Everyone can move freely , there are no visa requirements , and if anyone wanted to leave now , they could .
However , I am very proud of the fact that a Roma strategy was devised during the Hungarian Presidency which determines clearly the obligations of every Member State in connection with the community of this difficult fate .
The problem must be treated at its roots : by providing better employment and education opportunities for them , this internal migration pressure will also decrease within the European Union .
And allow me one more comment : if anyone were to deny one of our most basic freedom rights from the weakest , then these rights would be in jeopardy for all of us .
And finally , since the ongoing evaluation of the Schengen system has been discussed at length as well , I would like to say that the Hungarian Presidency has already stated this very clearly from the first moment , and this is something we continue to believe in .
The issue of the Schengen expansion must be clearly separated from the type of evaluation to which we will subject the Schengen system .
Let us not confuse the two .
We must preserve the acquis regarding the freedom of movement , and we must utilise our available means better , for instance , to ensure a better mutual control of our external borders .
This is why we are working on the Frontex Regulation ; this is why we are working on reducing the migratory pressure from North Africa by addressing its local causes ; this is why there is a new neighbourhood policy ; this is why we are working on increasing the lending capacity of the European Investment Bank .
We are in the final hour .
There is only one legal problem standing in the way of reaching an agreement with you : the usual ' delegated act ' problem .
It is only after this that we review the Schengen system and look at how it can be adjusted or improved , because we can see that there are indeed problems with it , but let us stick to this order of things .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I trust that the forthcoming session of the Justice and Home Affairs Council to be held in two days ' time will make important decisions concerning both the expansion and the verification aspects of the Schengen issue , but in a way that guarantees the freedom of movement of our citizens .
During the debate , one of our fellow Members said that letting Romania and Bulgaria join Schengen would be a childish decision .
I totally disagree .
I believe that when we become adults , we appreciate rational arguments , and if we have been well educated , we recognise when rational arguments are fair .
In order to act fairly , we cannot compromise ourselves with double standards .
We have to ask whether Bulgaria and Romania do or do not meet the conditions for entry into Schengen .
If they do meet them , then they should enter .
It is perfectly legitimate for their citizens to be seen as full European citizens .
The people of Bulgaria and Romania should not become hostage to populist rhetoric .
We know that not everything is as it should be with regard to Schengen .
We are therefore advocating a new system of evaluation for Schengen in order to be able to identify problems , respond accordingly , and make decisions if the problems persist .
However , debates on the new evaluation system for Schengen cannot hold the people of Bulgaria and Romania hostage to this legislative process .
These are different processes , and each has its own pace .
Finally , Mrs Gyõri , thank you very much for your kind mention of Portugal and the Schengen Information System ( SIS ) one-for-all scheme , which has facilitated the entry of several countries , including yours , into the Schengen area .
Thank you for reminding us of that and for making that nice mention .
I would like the Council to be given a summary of this debate and , I hope , an outline of our votes tomorrow , which I believe will be very enlightening .
I hope that Council will recognise that when the assembly representing European citizens says yes with a large majority to Bulgaria and Romania , as I hope it will , the Council should follow suit as soon as possible .
Dear colleagues , I believe that on the basis of the overwhelming majority of positive comments and evaluations in this Chamber today by Members of Parliament , as well as the evaluations of the Commission and of Council , warm congratulations are due to Bulgaria and Romania .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on 8 June 2011 .
Romania and Bulgaria have proved once again , if there was ever any need for them to , that they are capable of adopting all the measures required to guarantee a significant level of security at the European Union 's eastern border .
Given the financial , technical , institutional and administrative efforts made by Romania to join the Schengen area , I think that the positive assessment of this dossier must be shown in the period ahead by setting a definite deadline for joining this area .
The situation should not be unsettled by changing the rules during the game , stepping up the Eurosceptic rhetoric and bringing up a separate issue relating to the need to control illegal immigration .
Technically , Romania is more prepared than ever to police the European Union 's eastern border .
Yet , applying double standards in evaluating certain parameters is not a worthy and characteristic aspect of the United Europe project .
I firmly believe that once Romania has been integrated into the Schengen area , it will demonstrate to all Member States the serious and rigorous way in which it can guarantee the eastern border 's security .
Moreover , the results achieved will convince the whole of Europe that it has successfully enhanced the security of the entire Union .
Freedom of movement is one of the most important European Union values for all EU citizens and the Schengen area is characterised by the absence of controls at shared borders between participating countries and the introduction of freedom of movement within this area .
Therefore , we must respect the right of all European Union citizens without exception to move freely .
If Bulgaria and Romania are subject to more criteria than other EU Member States in order to join the Schengen area , then we will be creating double standards .
We must avoid a system based on double standards , which is very strict towards candidate countries and very soft on countries that are already members of the Schengen area .
The rules of the Schengen acquis must be the same for all countries and the assessment system must be based on the provision that rules should be met continuously , not only during accession .
Countries joining the Schengen area must continue to comply with all security requirements because the security of the Schengen area really depends on the rigour and effectiveness with which each Member State carries out controls at its external borders , as well as on the quality and speed with which information is exchanged through the Schengen Information Service .
Therefore , in order to remove controls at internal borders , it is necessary for the Member States to cooperate as much as possible and take the necessary action , particularly when increasing migration flows , because the security of the Schengen area depends on the rigour and effectiveness with which each Member State carries out controls at its external borders .
in writing . - ( HU ) According to the assessment of the European Commission , Romania and Bulgaria are prepared for Schengen accession , and therefore the Council must make a decision without delay to admit the two Member States .
We can neither apply a double standard , as it would undermine the authenticity of the European Union , nor can we lay down new conditions .
Joining the Schengen Agreement and dismantling borders is the step that citizens appreciate the most of the European Union 's acquis ; in addition to the euro , this is also the symbol of the European Union .
Freedom of movement is one of the keys to the success of the common market .
It is , of course , necessary to safely protect the external borders of the European Union , yet this objective is achieved not by keeping out Member States that are prepared but by introducing a continuous and transparent Schengen verification system , which - along with the common European migration policy and the refugee policy based on internal solidarity - represents a solution to many open questions .
Therefore , I am asking the Council to move forward as soon as possible in these areas .
Romania is prepared to remove its internal controls at its land , air and sea borders .
Following the visits made on the ground and the technical evaluations which were carried out , not only the rapporteur appointed by the European Parliament but the group of experts , too , concluded that Romania fulfils all the criteria for joining the Schengen area , which were provisions assumed through the Treaty of Accession in 2005 .
All the shortcomings identified in the past have been rectified .
Furthermore , my country has set an example of good practice in some areas .
With regard to the objections raised by some MEPs , I want to point out that they relate to topics which have no direct link with the Schengen acquis , which means that they cannot be used as reasons for blocking Romania 's access to this area .
I understand the concerns of certain fellow Members about making the EU 's external borders secure , especially as some states can be regarded as favourite destinations for the flows of emigrants .
However , I should remind you that European rules must be the same for all Member States and cannot be changed during the game as this would amount to discrimination against Romanian citizens .
In view of the positive technical evaluation , the Justice and Home Affairs Council must give the green light to Romania 's integration into Schengen , from this autumn on .
If you believe this report , everything is shipshape and Bristol fashion and Romania and Bulgaria have demonstrated that they are sufficiently prepared to implement all of the Schengen rules .
However , those of us who are familiar with the Europol report OCTA 2011 on the subject of organised crime will be asking ourselves whether the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs is deaf and blind , and why on earth we indulge ourselves in Europol at all if we simply ignore its warnings .
Europol reports that Romania and Bulgaria are transit routes for drug smuggling , gun running and human trafficking .
Organised criminal gangs , increasingly multi-ethnic , act with extreme violence .
Many have a paramilitary background .
These groups , and I quote verbatim from the Europol report ' are seeking to expand their interests in the EU , and may exploit opportunities in the possible accession of Bulgaria and Romania to the Schengen Zone ' .
Europol Director , Rob Wainwright , stated in an interview that ' The possible accession into Schengen of Bulgaria and Romania and visa liberalisation for Ukraine - one would see these as potential new opportunities for organised crime ' .
We have a duty to our citizens to take Europol 's warnings seriously .
The Schengen Agreement is already opening all the doors to Europe to organised crime and illegal immigration .
It therefore needs urgent repair before it is extended .
I thank the rapporteur , Mr Coelho , for his excellent report , which fits in with the recent debate on the implementation of the Schengen Agreement .
The existence of effective controls along our external borders must be an important factor inasmuch as the security of the Schengen area depends on the efficiency with which each Member State controls its external borders .
Although some problems remain unresolved , Romania and Bulgaria have proved to be sufficiently prepared to apply all the requirements of the Schengen acquis .
We have discussed at length the practical efficacy of the state machinery of these two countries , as well as their levels of corruption ; nevertheless , I believe that the application of Schengen should leave this out of consideration , given that - just as happened with the other Member States - it is sufficient to base a decision only on the efficiency of border controls and the preparation of police forces .
Adding further requirements would create a precedent of discrimination which has not existed before , not even after the great enlargement in 2007 .
in writing . - The real question is whether all EU citizens , irrespective of their national origin , are to be treated equally and granted equal access to EU fundamental rights .
Against the background of the global economic crisis , the EU is experiencing a crisis of democracy and solidarity .
We are seeing the renationalisation of Europe .
In this context , the debate on Romania 's and Bulgaria 's accession to the Schengen area has provoked stark reactions motivated by pseudo-arguments and double standards .
This is not about technical aspects , nor about the security of the EU 's external borders , nor yet about migration or efficiency of the judiciary .
It is a European political problem of a strategic character .
It is about EU cohesion .
To speak about a lack of preparation at our eastern borders when seeing the permeability of our southern borders is simply hilarious .
To promote national political agendas at the expense of the aspirations of EU citizens of Bulgarian and Romanian origin is outrageous .
Indeed , we need better defended borders , a better migration policy , better administrative capacity and honest public servants .
But this requires more and not less Europe .
One right step in this direction is the immediate enlargement of the Schengen area to include Romania and Bulgaria .
We can categorically say that Bulgaria itself , or Bulgaria 's citizens to be more exact , do not pose a threat , either directly or potentially , to security , order and peace within the Schengen area .
Our country has fulfilled , albeit late , all the technical requirements relating to external border controls .
However , there is a large degree of distrust suggesting that serious disruption may be caused when the control measures are implemented .
This distrust features in the reports from the European Commission on the Cooperation and Verification Mechanism , in the reports from Europol and in a series of statements made by senior representatives of various Member States .
With the unprecedented growth in smuggling activity and the informal economy , with the prevalence of corruption and the inability to cope with organised crime , there is no good reason for us to get angry at the fact that our membership is being blocked by additional obstacles .
The European Parliament must adopt a position on principle , which is that the rules of the game cannot be changed midway .
According to the formal requirements , Bulgaria and Romania are ready for membership of the Schengen area and the European Council must decide in favour of this as soon as possible .
I am counting on Mr Coelho 's report being approved by a large majority to give a clear political signal to Member States .
( The sitting was suspended for a few moments )
Question Time ( Commission )
The next item is Question Time ( B7-0407 / 2011 ) .
The following questions are addressed to the Commission .
Part one
Subject : Quality food schemes
In February 2011 , the Commission registered its 1 000th quality food name .
It is clear , however , that the number of applications to register under the protected geographical indication ( PGI ) , protected designation of origin ( PDO ) and traditional specialities guaranteed ( TSG ) quality food schemes varies considerably from one Member State to another .
Why does the Commission think there are such disparities between Member States ?
Can the Commission comment on the views expressed by some food producers that the registration process is long and bureaucratic and therefore discourages applicants ?
How can the registration process be made more user-friendly ?
Can the Commission provide information on consumer awareness of the quality food schemes ?
How can recognition of the PDO , PGI and TSG labels be improved and made more relevant to consumers , in particular , in Member States that have few registered products ?
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , when the European system of protected designations of origin ( PDOs ) , protected geographical indications ( PGIs ) and traditional specialities guaranteed ( TSGs ) was set up , equivalent systems already existed in some Member States .
The concept of geographical indications was thus familiar and names had already been registered at national level .
This explains why there are many registered names in certain Member States .
Nevertheless , growing interest in the system has been observed in many Member States .
The procedure for registering a name generally takes several years .
This is because the applicant group has to draw up specifications and have them approved at national level and then by the Commission .
The single document summary of the specifications for geographical indications or the specifications themselves for traditional specialties are then published in the Official Journal of the European Union in order to allow objections to be made .
The objection period lasts six months .
If there are no objections , the name may be registered .
If an objection is lodged , the interested parties have six months to reach agreement .
If no agreement is reached , the Commission issues a decision that is voted on by the Standing Committee .
This procedure explains the time required for registration to take place .
On the other hand , once a name has been registered , it enjoys strong protection and international recognition and benefits from communication tools , particularly use of the logo .
The Commission is aware of the need to speed up the registration procedures .
Proposals to this end have been made in the context of the Quality Package , including reducing the time for the Commission to scrutinise applications received to six months and reducing the objection period to two months .
Awareness of the system varies greatly from country to country , often depending on the number of registered names in a country .
The Commission makes funds for promoting quality products available to operators in order to raise consumer awareness of the system .
deputising for the author . - Mr President , I want to thank the Commission for its reply .
I think the labelling of food produce is something that is to be commended .
But the Commissioner has put his finger on it in relation to a number of issues : first of all , the fact that there are some diverse standards ; secondly , the long time that it takes from the time of application to actual registration .
If ever there was an example of bureaucracy at European level , this surely is it .
In my country , it takes the Department of Agriculture five years from the time that you actually make an application until you are registered .
Given the crisis in Germany , we need more food labelling , we need more standards ; we need more quality control .
So I would urge the Commission that we should have a much tighter timeframe .
( IT ) Mr President , I am continuing the discussion on quality food .
In the last two weeks , Italy has suffered economic damage amounting to EUR 20 million because of unsold vegetables - particularly cucumbers - as a result of the EHEC bacterium .
It has been said that a loss of EUR 4.4 million was the result of the suspension of Russian imports alone .
The entire fruit and vegetable sector is on its knees .
I therefore ask the Commission what measures it intends to take in defence of the fruit and vegetable market and what further measures it intends to take to avoid the spread of unreliable information on the origins of the EHEC bacterium , which is hitting the entire fruit and vegetable sector and throwing whole populations into panic .
We are talking of quality food !
Member of the Commission . - My response to the first question is that the Commission is aware of the need to speed up the legislation procedures .
Proposals to this end have been made in the context of the Quality Package , which I referred to in my first answer .
The Commission 's proposals include reducing the time for scrutinising the application it receives to six months and also reducing the objection period to two months .
If Parliament and the Council decide to adopt the Commission 's proposals , almost one year - or ten months at least - will be saved for the majority of applications .
As for the other question , there was a Health Council yesterday which dealt with the issue .
We shall follow up on it at a later stage while taking today 's extraordinary Agriculture Council into account .
I am not in a position at this moment to give further details but we will definitely follow up on it .
Mr President , I will be very brief .
I apologise that I did not get here in time for the Commissioner 's answer at the beginning .
I suppose my question refers to the fact that there is a low level of awareness among producers in many countries , and in some countries it is very low .
Is the Commission taking any steps to try and increase that level of awareness , not just amongst consumers but amongst producers ?
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , awareness of the system varies greatly from country to country , and the number of registered names in a given country also varies .
European funds for promotion are available to operators to promote quality products , with more than EUR 19 million being allocated to fifteen promotion programmes between 2006 and 2010 .
Moreover , the Commission wishes to re-examine the policy for promoting agricultural products and a Green Paper is planned for this summer .
This will be an opportunity to discuss the objectives of this policy once again , and to examine expectations with regard to promotion and quality of products and dissemination of information in this context .
Subject : Youth unemployment
The economic crisis has devastated employment levels among young graduates .
In November last year , unemployment among young people reached 21 % across the EU .
Youth unemployment stands at less than 10 % in only three countries - Germany , the Netherlands and Austria .
Elsewhere it is dramatic : in the Baltic States , Ireland , Greece and Slovakia , unemployment among young people stands at 30 % or above . And in Spain , it is more than 40 % .
What steps does the Commissioner intend to take to prevent an exodus of young people from Europe ?
How does the Commissioner intend to emulate the best practices of Germany , the Netherlands and Austria on an EU-wide scale ?
Member of the Commission . - High unemployment among young people is one of the Commission 's top priorities and is one of my foremost personal concerns .
Lack of jobs could conceivably generate an exodus of young people from Europe , but the vast majority of young people who change countries to find work will probably choose to move to another Member State .
That is why it is so important to promote freedom of movement for workers within the Union .
It offers a solution in regions where unemployment among young people is high , given the labour shortages in certain sectors in some Member States that are evident from the Commission 's new quarterly vacancy monitor .
Promoting mobility among young people within the EU is one of the aims of the Europe 2020 flagship initiative : Youth on the Move .
It outlines a wide range of measures to reduce the current high youth unemployment .
Let me give you a few examples .
Youth labour mobility will be promoted in particular through a new EU job mobility scheme , Your First EURES Job , which was launched with the support of this House and the Council .
Its aim is to help young people find a job on the European labour market and assist employers in recruiting young European mobile workers .
Your First EURES Job will provide advisory , job search , recruitment and financial support amounting , on average , to EUR 1 000 for more than 2 000 young job seekers and companies willing to recruit young EU workers .
The Commission also encourages the Member States to introduce a youth guarantee to ensure that all young people are in further education , training or work within four months of finishing their general education .
In Germany , Austria and the Netherlands , as the Honourable Member rightly points out , youth unemployment rates are relatively low .
This is due , at least in part , to the comprehensive vocational education and training systems in those Member States , which facilitate young people 's labour market integration .
The Bruges Communiqué of December 2010 on enhanced European Cooperation in Vocational Education and Training for the period 2011-2020 is an important European achievement in this area .
It outlines objectives and identifies the action needed to improve the quality of vocational training and make it more accessible and relevant to the needs of the labour market .
I would also , as another element to my reply , like to highlight the Youth at Work campaign .
Launched in Budapest on 29 April , Youth at Work will bring together small and medium-sized enterprises and young job seekers and will provide information and support to inspire young people to set up their own businesses .
Over 30 events are planned between now and the end of 2012 when this campaign will end .
Honourable Members , I hope that the avenues and initiatives I have indicated will be followed up with effective action within the Member States .
The figures are frightening : the Baltic States , Ireland , Greece and Slovakia , 30 % ; Spain , 40 % ; in your own country , Mr President , one million people under 25 with no prospects of a job .
In Italy , 76 % of youngsters say they are going to emigrate .
I would love to think that youth mobility within Europe is the answer , but most of the countries in Europe , barring the three you mentioned , have unemployment problems .
What we really need is to focus on the fact that Europe has an ageing population .
We cannot afford this brain drain .
These are highly educated , highly motivated young people and what we need is to hold them , to keep them , to introduce the kind of imaginative schemes that you have already mentioned in the three Member States , Germany , the Netherlands and Austria .
I welcome the fact that the Commission is recommending initiatives to the Member States .
I think that in some of the Member States , however , we need some financial assistance in terms of training people and keeping them at home , because I think that , rather than feeding the jobs market within the EU , they will be feeding the job markets of Australia and other countries further afield .
( PL ) Mr President , my question to the Commissioner is of a slightly different kind .
The Commissioner spoke about various measures which are intended to bring down unemployment , but did not say a single word about the fact that an important and more effective method could be for Member States to agree on the mutual recognition of qualifications gained in other Member States .
Young people today often look for work in other countries , where they have to pass exams which are the same as the ones they have already taken .
What is going to happen about this ?
( RO ) Mr President , the high unemployment rate means that the investments made by Member States in young people 's education are being wasted at a time when the latter feel obliged to emigrate to a state outside the European Union .
I want to ask you , Commissioner , given that the school dropout rate has reached 16 % , and even 40 % in Portugal , how will the youth unemployment rate look in 15-20 years ' time and what measures are you taking to ensure that this does not happen ?
Member of the Commission . - In my answer , I highlighted the measures that have already been outlined in Europe 2020 and already they are making their way towards practice in various Member States through effective Commission programmes .
It is also true that this is more of a horizontal issue for the Commission , and there are in other EU initiatives very relevant proposals including , for example , the country-specific recommendations which we just published today , very important references to the need to reform education policies and improve the performance of education and training systems in various Member States in order to better connect the substance of education and training with the needs of the labour market .
This can qualitatively improve the employment opportunities of young people in a number of Member States , including Spain and others where the situation is the most difficult and where the reform of the education system was either delayed or ignored in the recent period .
It is also important to highlight the Single Market Act which , among other initiatives , aims at promoting the recognition of qualifications and diplomas , thus making the European labour market more transparent and more efficient , highlighting and raising more opportunities than in the past .
It is also important to stress that many actions are supported by the financial instruments of the EU , especially in this context , the European Social Fund , but I should also mention the new Microfinance Facility that provides programmes and , in the latter case , entrepreneurship and self-employment opportunities , and I think these dimensions have to be reflected in the forthcoming MFF proposal as well .
I trust that the Parliament will be supportive in this area within the MFF .
Subject : Migration and the Schengen area
The principle of freedom of movement in the Schengen area is in danger of being compromised by the North African crisis , as reflected in talks between Italy and France concerning the relocation of migrants coming chiefly from Tunisia and the reintroduction of border controls . This is also confirmed by statements issued by French officials on the need to re-examine certain provisions of the Schengen Agreement .
What action does the Commission intend to take to prevent freedom of movement in the Schengen area , a cornerstone of European unification , being compromised ?
Given that the introduction of the Schengen area has shifted responsibility for EU external border controls onto a limited number of Member States , how will the Commission persuade Member States as a whole to show greater and more effective solidarity in the face of a mass influx of migrants and overcome their manifest reluctance to assume their responsibilities in this respect , so as to ensure that the burden is fairly shared ?
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , the question that has been raised by Mr Papanikolaou addresses - as do later questions - the different angles and perspectives of Schengen , the migratory crisis and the pressure put on Schengen .
So let me first answer Mr Papanikolaou .
Earlier , we discussed Mr Coelho 's report and the need to safeguard Schengen as one of the most beautiful achievements of the European Union .
The right to move freely is indeed a very important embodiment of the European project .
More than 1.25 billion cross-border journeys are made by tourists within the EU each year .
Free movement is also a great boost and a benefit for the Internal Market , so safeguarding this achievement is key to the Commission and an absolute priority for me personally .
Let me emphasise once again that the Commission 's approach is to reinforce Schengen , to improve the evaluation - as we already proposed before Christmas - to clarify the rules , to identify the tools , to assist Member States in need and , possibly , to introduce a mechanism which would bring a coordinated Community-based response to exceptional situations , for instance , when a Member State fails to control its internal borders .
The Commission 's main objective is to have a preventive approach .
The proposed changes to strengthen the monitoring mechanism , which is designed to maintain mutual trust between the Member States and their capacity to apply effectively and efficiently the accompanying measures , will make it possible to maintain an area without borders .
This will be done through more on-the-spot visits to check the application of the Schengen acquis to Member States .
These controls could lead to recommendations to the Member States for immediate actions and deadlines for implementing them .
Increased trust among Member States will also reduce the recourse by Member States to unilateral initiatives to temporarily reintroduce internal borders or to intensify police checks at internal border zones .
The spirit of Schengen is a spirit of trust and solidarity .
It is important that the EU show concrete solidarity to the Member States most affected by large-scale inflows of migrants and persons in need of international protection .
This solidarity can take different forms by assisting , for instance , where the external border is under pressure .
Frontex plays a key role here and we have shown in the recent RABIT intervention at the Greek-Turkish border , and in the joint naval operation Hermes , that Member States are ready to assist other Member States .
We must also foster daily cooperation between national authorities in the field of border surveillance .
This is the purpose of the European border surveillance system ( EUROSUR ) , which has been progressively developed since 2008 , and for which the Commission will present a legislative proposal during this year .
We can also show solidarity by showing financial solidarity .
There is a framework programme this year that takes into consideration the management of migration flows .
We have a financial mechanism to improve the management of these flows at the European level and to strengthen the solidarity between Member States .
Of course , we now have a large consultation process and we are under budgetary restraints , but you can count on me to ensure that there will still be money under this fund for the future as well .
Those Member States most exposed to migratory pressures and located at the external borders of the EU must receive adequate financial compensation for the tasks they are carrying out in the interests of the Schengen area as a whole - this by fair burden-sharing in order to support those Member States affected by large inflows of persons in need of international protection .
It must be clear that any decision on the relocation of irregular migrants and beneficiaries of international protection depends on the Council and on the willingness of the Member States .
The Member States have not yet expressed any support for such an approach on a general basis with , however , one notable exception - the pilot project on relocation to other Member States for persons who have received international protection on Malta .
In order to give a timely follow-up to this , I organised a pledging conference a month ago .
I am pleased to say that over 300 places were made available from Member States and associated countries .
Others will hopefully be offered in the future as well .
This is a sign of concrete solidarity .
I want to thank those countries and I hope that they can also contribute in the future .
( EL ) Commissioner , thank you very much .
I absolutely agree with you , as - I believe - does Parliament .
That much was also clear back during the debate on the accession of Bulgaria and Romania .
At the same time , however , as you well know , there are unanimity issues in the Council on the issue of Bulgaria and Romania .
You spoke about trust .
Yes , we want to keep building up trust .
Does Denmark , in the choice it has made , accept that statement on your part ?
You also commented on the question of the new mechanism .
In light of the summit , does this debate on the mechanism strengthen the perception of trust - I recall that , anyway , Article 23 of the Schengen Code makes provision for a mechanism for exceptional situations - or does it perhaps ultimately cause renewed concerns in the Member States and in all the States in the Schengen area ?
( IT ) Commissioner , before the end of next month , the European Commission will formulate the proposal for the new Multiannual Financial Framework for the period from 2014 to 2020 .
In addition to FRONTEX , which you have already mentioned , what actions does the European Commission intend funding to support those Member States that have been worst hit by asylum applications and , above all , to prevent the future intensification of the influx of economic migrants ?
In other words , what actions does it intend funding through the Mediterranean neighbourhood policies to prevent widespread immigration in the coming months and years ?
Member of the Commission . - Trust can never be commanded , it has to be deserved and earned .
We can only try to improve the trust between Member States by having a more vigorous governance over Schengen ; to make sure that we evaluate , not by the peer-review system we have today , but through an independent mechanism on a European communitarian basis with the involvement of the European Union in order to identify problems or weaknesses in the Schengen system very early on and also make sure that we have tools at our disposal to immediately assist Member States that are in difficulty .
Hopefully , that should allow us to increase the trust .
In answer to the other honourable Member , we are now negotiating the framework , so I am not in a position to give you any figures .
However , as we do today , we are seeking to increase the independence and the resources of Frontex .
We are also seeking to facilitate Member States ' access to the various funds under migration by simplifying and by making it easier when it comes to borders , asylum , integration , etc .
Of course we need to distinguish between irregular migrants and migrants in need of international protection .
As you know , the Council and Parliament are now negotiating to have the resettlement programme in place , and this is also an area where the European Commission could look at possibilities for financing quite a lot of it .
In relation to our immediate neighbourhood across the Mediterranean , in the mobility partnerships : we are looking to include all aspects of irregular , legal and international protection asylum under migration .
All this demands a lot of political will and some extra resources , and I will do my best to fight to make sure that there are resources under my responsibility .
Part two
Subject : Visa scheme for Kosovo
What is the Commission 's assessment of the current state of progress towards visa liberalisation for Kosovo ( visa facilitation scheme ) , and what is the timetable for action on this urgent matter ?
Member of the Commission . - The Commission is currently constantly monitoring all the steps taken by the Kosovo authorities to fulfil the conditions for the launching of the visa liberalisation dialogue .
We have said all the time that there are two key issues remaining in order to engage in such a dialogue : sound readmission , and reintegration policies in line with the EU standards .
Implementation of the law on readmission and of the bilateral readmission agreements with the EU Member States needs to continue in a good manner .
There have been two assessment missions in Kosovo - in June last year and in December last year - to assess the state of play in Kosovo regarding the integration process .
These have shown that there is a lot of progress , but there are still some things to be done , and we are in dialogue with the Kosovo Government in order to help and assist them to do these last things .
There must also be progress at the municipal level .
We receive regular updates from Kosovo , and I also meet with the responsible ministers , and once all these elements are in place , we are ready to launch a new mission to go there and see what steps can be taken in order to open the visa liberalisation dialogue .
We are not there yet , but there is a lot of progress in Kosovo and we are working very closely with the government in order to support them and help them make progress .
( DE ) Many thanks , Commissioner , for a very good answer .
I just wanted to ask whether you think it is possible that this mission could still make it to Kosovo this year , or is that something that you really could not judge ?
Would it not be important that a country so small that we are pouring funding and effort into supporting it could also give its young people the opportunity to really get to know Europe ?
It is certainly completely counterproductive to ' imprison ' the populace there .
I know that you sympathise with the idea of opening up borders , but do you regard it as realistic that this mission could perhaps still take place during the Polish Presidency ?
Member of the Commission . - Mr Posselt , I fully share your ambition to do everything to prevent Kosovo from becoming an isolated little island in this region , in which we are trying remove visa barriers one by one .
We are certainly not going to abandon Kosovo .
The timing is very much in the hands of Kosovo 's government .
We are working with the Kosovans , and as soon as they inform us that they have done everything we asked them to do , they can come to us and we will send that mission .
It is very much in their hands , but we have no time limits .
We can come whenever they call and whenever reasonable progress has been made .
Subject : Countering the use of the Internet by criminals
The rapid growth of technology and , in particular , the Internet , is making criminal organisations more and more difficult to penetrate .
Criminals are now communicating with one another via the Internet , rather than by mobile phone , which had been the method of choice until recently .
How does the Commission propose to combat the use of the Internet by criminal gangs across Europe ?
Member of the Commission . - Cybercrime is indeed a growing menace .
It is going increasingly mobile , and recent threat analysis suggests that organised crime is getting increasingly involved in criminal activities in cyberspace .
So the Commission is pursuing various activities in the field to improve overall cybersecurity and to prevent and to tackle cybercrime .
At the policy level , specific objectives and road maps have been set in recent policy documents .
We have the European digital agenda and the European internal security strategy .
In that strategy , cybercrime is clearly identified as one of the priorities for us to work on for the future .
Last year , we also tabled two legislative proposals : one in March , a directive on child online exploitation , was adopted by the Commission and I know it is now being negotiated , and also a proposal for directives on attacks against information cybersystems .
That was last September ; it is also being negotiated between you and the Council , and I know that a lot of progress has been made .
This , of course , strives to adopt European legislation in the face of recent threats in cyberspace .
We have , in particular , included provisions to penalise the use of tools such as malicious code that are used to create so-called botnets , which have been used by criminals .
International cooperation is also key to fighting cybercrime and that is why we are engaging with international partners on these issues .
We have the working group between the EU and the United States , created last November , where we have had a series of different expert meetings .
We will report on progress for the next EU-US Summit in November this year .
We also plan to set up a cybercentre where we could coordinate at European level the efforts that are being made in the different Member States .
Cybercrime is directly influenced by rapid technological advances , quickly emerging in new business models , but also by the ability of law enforcement and wider society to come to terms with such fluid environments as cyberspace .
Cybercrime is becoming a volume crime .
It is for this reason that we need jointly to get our systems in order and share intelligence in order to attack this issue .
If there is reason to believe that organised crime groups are behind more and more crimes on the Internet , the same investigative measures applied in the detection and prosecution of offline organised crime should be applied , coupled of course with an improved coordination mechanism .
Finally , ten years ago , the Council of Europe Convention - the Budapest Convention - on Cybercrime was adopted .
Ten years later , not all the Member States have signed and ratified that convention .
We are pushing , by all means , for ratification by the end of the year , the tenth anniversary , because it would prove an important commitment by all Member States to fighting these crimes .
Thank you for your reply , Commissioner .
I understand that there are people bragging and conducting so-called criminal business on the Internet , and that gang business includes drug trafficking , human trafficking , prostitution , weapons trafficking , smuggling illegal immigrants across borders , even murder , theft , fraud , armed robbery and much more .
This is all being done on Facebook , using the system , and it is being bragged about .
Surely it is possible for Europol and the service providers - perhaps even coordinated by the Commission - to identify some of these people .
The more they feel that they are immune , the more their numbers will grow .
I would ask the Commissioner to consider taking some special steps to coordinate a response to what some of these people are doing on the Internet .
( RO ) The number , scope and severity of cyber attacks have grown in recent years .
Their victims are ordinary citizens , companies or even public , local , national or European institutions .
The European Union needs to enhance its strategy for combating cybercrime .
I would like to ask you , apart from the legislative framework and extending ENISA 's mandate , what measures is the Commission intending to take to enhance its leading role in guaranteeing cybersecurity ?
Member of the Commission . - Yes indeed , ordinary crime is also now being carried out on the Internet because it is a useful tool , but there are also new kinds of crime that are facilitated by the Internet , such as identity fraud or the plundering of bank accounts or suchlike .
You can be assured that we follow this very closely .
Just recently , Europol made some quite remarkable attacks on some of these gangs , identifying cross-border European gangs involved in child pornography , for instance , but also in trafficking and drugs , so there are a lot of experts at Europol dealing with this .
Of course we need to do more .
We need to connect all the alert centres in the European Union , to share statistics , to share information and also to work more together with private companies in order to identify the solutions to this to a certain extent .
We are also planning - and conducting a feasibility study right now - to set up a European cybercentre by 2013 to coordinate this work , to work as an alert centre and to support the different national cybercentres that already exist .
We are following this very closely , and Europol , together with the national authorities , is doing its utmost to try to combat this increasing crime .
Subject : Schengen evaluations and the possible suspension mechanism
There is a danger that Commission proposals for governance of the Schengen zone are seen to be prioritising European procedure over European substance .
The Commission is suggesting a dominant lead for itself in a revised Schengen evaluation process , and Parliament proposes to modify that in order to allow a balance between the role of European and national experts .
In relation to Schengen suspension , the Commission is proposing an EU mechanism instead of Member State decision , but this has been widely ( mis ) interpreted to mean that the reintroduction of internal borders will actually be easier in practice .
Since it may well prove politically too difficult to implement a Community method for both evaluations and suspension , however worthwhile , would it not be better to make European substance the priority by launching infringement proceedings when necessary against Member States in breach of Schengen rules ?
Subject : Implementation of the Schengen Agreement
Freedom of movement for European citizens unimpeded by internal borders following the creation of the Schengen area is one of the basic principles of the EU and the cornerstone of European integration .
The reintroduction of border controls within the EU does not provide a solution to migration and will , on the contrary , make life more difficult for European citizens and lead to a nationalistic outlook .
In view of this and the statement by the EP President to the effect that freedom of movement is perhaps the aspect of the EU most appreciated by Europeans , what position does the Commission intend to adopt with regard to Denmark following its recent decision to reintroduce border controls ?
Is it willing to take measures further to strengthen external EU borders ?
Will it review the principle that the Member State of entry bears sole responsibility for illegal immigrants ?
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , I will take both questions at the same time because they are almost identical .
They address the challenge of maintaining and further developing Schengen in view of the migration crisis .
I did briefly touch on this in my reply to Mr Papanikolaou 's question , but these elements should , of course , be kept in mind in this context as well .
In the question , Ms Ludford expressed concerns that the negotiations on the new Schengen evaluation and suspension rules might be lengthy and difficult to agree upon and asked the Commission to prioritise launching infringement procedures against Member States in breach of Schengen rules instead .
Let me be very clear on this : infringement of Schengen rules cannot be tolerated , but one element does not exclude the other .
We are also planning to follow a parallel approach .
We are the guardians of EU law .
The Commission will continue to make sure that the Schengen rules are correctly applied and respected by everybody .
The basis of our work needs to be the existing legislation .
I am convinced that the current legislation can cater for a vast majority of the situations .
Where there are any differences in interpretation or implementation , the Commission should consult the Member States in question and clarify the rules .
This can be done by issuing guidelines or recommendations .
The Commission is ready to use all available means to ensure the correct application of EU law , including launching infringement procedures whenever such action is necessary .
At the same time , we will work on the preventive measures which should help us to avoid infringement procedures .
In this context , we now have ongoing negotiations between the Commission , Parliament and the Council with a view to establishing a more efficient evaluation system for Schengen .
We are currently considering whether and how to complement this evaluation mechanism in order to create mutual trust and ensure a coherent application of the rules .
Regarding the Danish Government 's plan regarding controls on the Danish internal borders , which Ms Koppa referred to , you will , of course , be aware that the President of the Commission wrote to the Danish Prime Minister immediately , pointing out that the first analysis by the Commission raised major doubts about whether the proposed measures would be in line with Denmark 's obligations under European and international law .
President Barroso emphasised that Member States may not carry out systematic intra-EU border controls of goods or people and urged Denmark to refrain from taking unilateral steps .
We are now analysing the information provided by Denmark and will then decide on further action .
Ms Koppa also asked whether the Commission will propose a revision of the principle of exclusive responsibility of the state of first illegal entry .
I would like to underline that this is a principle according to which a person found irregularly on the territory of a Member State is returned to the state of first entry into the EU .
It is a specific rule under the Dublin Regulation , which establishes that the Member States have to assess which Member State is responsible for examining an asylum application lodged on their territory .
It is therefore not an instrument designed to respond to the challenges related to irregular migration .
In the Commission proposal for a recast of the Dublin Regulation , this principle remains untouched .
The Member States that play the biggest role in the applicant 's entry into the EU should be responsible for examining his or her application for asylum .
The European Parliament expressed overwhelming support for this in its vote on the proposal in May 2009 .
This support was confirmed by the vote in the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs in November last year .
Commissioner , I am , of course , very glad to hear you stress again the importance that you attach to the maintenance of the Schengen area .
I know you are very sincere on that , but my worry is that , despite that , people seem to have got the wrong end of the stick and the impression has got abroad - for instance , last week an article in the Financial Times said that ' Schengen as well as the eurozone was disintegrating ' - that somehow the Commission is fairly relaxed about the reintroduction of internal border controls .
I fear that the emphasis the Commission puts , as it were , on its own institutional rights is not being tracked through to its determination in practice , its zeal in practice , to take infringement proceedings if necessary .
I have not heard of Rome and Paris receiving a letter of the kind that the President sent to Copenhagen .
( EL ) Thank you , Commissioner , for your clear reply on the question of Schengen and for referring to a previous question on the measure to redistribute immigrants in the Member States , based on demographic , economic and geographical criteria .
Be that as it may , I should like to point out on the question of the Dublin II Regulation that , for certain countries today like my country , Greece , which lie on the external borders of the Union and actually receive approximately 90 % of immigrants who land in Europe , the Dublin II Regulation is unacceptable ; it is not something that local populations can accept ; it is not something that the countries can accept .


Consequently , from our point of view , a recast in light - at the very least - of the new developments , is a standing request .
( EL ) Commissioner , you referred earlier to the emphasis placed on the concept of solidarity and on fair burden-sharing .
You very rightly reminded us that negotiations on the resettlement of refugees from third countries are imminent .
You also announced last year that we were waiting for the new programme on internal resettlement .
Could you please tell us if the Commission will be making an announcement soon ?
Secondly , as regards Dublin II , I should like to point out the following , to add to what Mrs Koppa said .
France has suspended returns to Greece , as has Germany .
The European Court of Human Rights has convicted us on specific grounds , both for Dublin II and for its operability .
What else must happen in order for us to understand that Dublin II needs to be recast immediately , as requested by Parliament ?
Member of the Commission . - I am sorry if there is a false impression about the Commission 's views on Schengen .
I do not think I have spoken about anything other than Schengen for the last month !
I have emphasised how important Schengen is , what a gift it is to the European Union and that we must strengthen it and not weaken it .
We look very seriously upon all reports of the suspension of Schengen .
We are engaged in dialogue with Italy , France and Denmark in order to clarify exactly what has been done , what is being proposed , and whether it is in compliance with Schengen rules .
We are also looking at how we can strengthen the evaluation of Schengen in order to make sure , beforehand , that the current peer review system , which is not very good , is exchanged for something that is done at a European level , with an increased role for the European Parliament .
We need to have more tools at our disposal to assist Member States .
We need to be better at issuing guidelines .
We also need to clarify under what exceptional circumstances suspension can be carried out in order to avoid unilateral action that jeopardises the whole system .
So you can rest assured that we will do our utmost to strengthen Schengen and that we need more European engagement there , not less .
Dublin is , of course , related to this , but it is a parallel process .
This is part of the negotiations on the asylum package that are currently taking place between Parliament and the Council .
The Commission has proposed keeping the responsibility of the first country of asylum in the Dublin Regulation , but also reintroducing an emergency mechanism in order to suspend that mechanism under special circumstances .
This is very controversial in the Member States ; very few support such an emergency mechanism .
It is one of the most difficult areas of the negotiations on the asylum package .
So that is not the solution to the Greek problem .
In parallel with putting the asylum system in place for the whole of Europe , which would also lead to greater burden-sharing - because if all Member States have a system that works , all Member States could receive asylum seekers - the solution for Greece is to continue with the reform plans that are being implemented under the action plan in Greece .
The Commission and the Member States are supporting Greece with a huge amount of money , expertise , interpreters and administrators .
We are assisting Greece in the important work it is doing to build up a system that is in line with European law .
A lot has been done , but there is a lot still to do . This has to be done in parallel with the negotiations on the asylum system .
Subject : Future of the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund ( EGF )
A number of votes and declarations have proven that there is consensus within the EU on various aspects of this fund .
First of all , it differs from the European Social Fund in both its methodology and its objectives . The two instruments cannot therefore be confused , either formally or in practice .
Secondly , despite a slow start , changes to the implementing regulation in 2009 enabled the EGF to be used more effectively .
Indeed , a clear increase in applications to mobilise this tool that brings the Union closer to its workers has been noted .
There is therefore no doubt that it needs to be made sustainable .
Lastly , this specific aspect of the EGF calls for it to be regarded as a permanent fund in its own right , with sufficient payment appropriations to ensure that no transfers have to be made in order to mobilise it .
What does the Commission think about establishing a genuine fund that is on a par with the others , to meet all the needs of the EGF without restricting the role of the European Parliament which has been so involved in this issue ?
Member of the Commission . - I am grateful for the interest you have shown in the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund .
This year will be crucial for the Fund 's future , because the Commission intends to make a proposal on the rules governing the fund and the way it will function in the next programming period .
Over the past few months , the Commission has carried out consultations on this matter with the Fund 's most important stakeholders .
In particular , we have closely examined Parliament 's own excellent report on the EGF , which was drawn up by Mr Portas a few months ago .
On the basis of experience gained with the Fund in its present form and suggestions made during consultations , we have great hopes that our proposal will significantly improve the fund after 2013 and will , in particular , solve two problems with the current mechanism for financing .
The first issue is the time it takes for a contribution to be granted once a Member State has submitted an application .
A large part of that time is taken up by assessing the application .
The Commission is looking at ways of clarifying or simplifying the information that the Member States will have to provide to demonstrate that applications are eligible .
A lot of time is also taken up with the need to request and obtain approval for each application from both arms of the budgetary authority .
This also holds up payment of contributions from the Fund , to the detriment of the workers , because some Member States are reluctant to advance payments for training , job-search assistance and other measures .
In addition , the number of applications submitted to the Fund , and thus the overall amount applied for , has increased significantly over the last two years .
This has made it increasingly difficult to identify sufficient margins from which to draw contributions .
That is a problem .
Commission approval of applications to the Fund in 2011 had to be postponed for the first time because sufficient payment appropriations could not be found quickly .
I am sure you will agree that this is not helpful to workers who have been made redundant and need assistance quickly .
We need to find solutions for these problems and bring the mechanism for financing the Fund more closely into line with these objectives .
At present , there are several options on the table .
For instance , the Fund could be part of the European Social Fund .
It could have its own budget .
The Commission has taken no decision yet on the best way of addressing these issues , but it intends to table a proposal in autumn on the Globalisation Adjustment Fund of the future , bearing European workers ' best interests in mind .
I look forward to hearing your views .
Mr President , Commissioner , on Mr Daerden 's behalf , I would like to thank you for your reply .
Naturally , we will support any initiatives that help speed up procedures when these are aimed at helping workers who have been made redundant due to globalisation or to the economic crisis .
We simply wished to draw your attention to two particular problems .
The first is that the purpose of supporting workers should remain the number one priority .
This means that as the procedures are revised , we will oppose the idea of the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund ( EGF ) becoming just another instrument , for example , an instrument of the cohesion policy , because that would mean that all the EU 's money apart from funds put aside for foreign policy or research and development would belong to the cohesion policy .
We have specific aims to pursue and we need these resources .
The EGF is among them .
We are also asking you to coordinate management of the EGF , in collaboration with your fellow commissioners , with other policies that have an impact in this area , for example , in the field of competition or industrial policy .
( EL ) Commissioner , at the beginning the year , when asked if Greece had filed a request for the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund to be activated , you replied that it had not .
This reply caused a stir in Greece , due to the economic and social situation in the country .
My question to you is very straightforward : six months later , has my country filed a request for the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund to be activated , in order to support workers affected by the financial crisis ?
If it has , if you have that information , please tell me if it has been approved .
If it has not , can you explain why no such request has been filed by Greece ?
I did have a question for the Commissioner further on , which we will not get to tonight , and which did indeed ask for his view on the merging of the ESF and the EGF , on which you have spoken but did not give us an opinion .
So , if you are in a position to do that , I would appreciate hearing it , and also , if there were to be a merger , would you see an increase in budgetary appropriations for the Social Fund ?
Finally , my other question relates to the timing , and you spoke about the difficulty with the Commission and the budgetary authority .
What about also encouraging Member States , as soon as they have applied for the EGF , to start putting in place themselves the measures that they have applied for under the EGF , because that at least would ensure that workers would not be waiting for the application of the Fund ?
Member of the Commission . - I am glad to hear in the discussion confirmation of the Commission 's objectives in this exercise to bring the EGF into the next financial perspective as a stronger and more effective instrument to support workers who have been made redundant .
This case is also supported by the fact that , in the near future , fiscal consolidation will remain on the agenda in most of the Member States , and they will find it extremely helpful if there is a strong , quick and effective EU-level instrument to support workers who suddenly find themselves out of a job .
As I pointed out , some questions remain open , such as the relationship between the EGF and the ESF .
As you know , the ESF is implemented through shared management , and I believe that the management system of the current ESF is not compatible with the objectives of the EGF .
No matter what eventual format we find , I think this question of management will be very important in influencing the final arrangements .
I am not speaking about names , but about the need for a separate fund and the need to pay attention to speed in particular .
Of course , even now , and probably also in the future , various Member States will find it possible to fund programmes either from the EGF or the ESF and have some kind of room for manoeuvre , but it is very important just to keep the EGF available for all Member States in case there is a need to respond to sudden employment crises .
The second question pointed to the problem of defining eligibility in the current regulation .
This is also an issue we are looking at in order to have a greater level of clarity , but at the moment , we are simply working on extending the temporary regulation until the end of this financial perspective .
I am speaking here about the rules which have been introduced in response to the crisis and to make the EGF more effective in tackling the impact of the crisis on workers .
Mr President , can you indicate how many more questions you might be prepared to take in this section ?


Mr Aylward , I did say before you came in that we had 20 minutes per Commissioner , which would mean that we could possibly get to Question 15 by Mrs Blinkevičiūtė , but I am afraid I do not think we are going to make it to yours .
Perhaps you could put a supplementary to another question ?
Subject : Collective labour agreements
Having had recourse to the bailout mechanism , Greece , Spain and Portugal have come under heavy pressure from the Commission and the IMF to make major changes to industrial relations and collective bargaining procedures under the terms of the respective ' Memorandums ' , thereby overturning national guarantees for workers .
For example , in the case of Greece , the Memorandum stipulates the following : ' The government shall ensure that company-level agreements take precedence over sectoral agreements , which , in turn , take precedence over occupational agreements .
The government shall remove the provision that allows the Ministry of Labour to extend all sectoral agreements to those not represented in negotiations ' .
Furthermore , under Article 156 TFEU , matters relating to collective bargaining are governed by the principle of subsidiarity .
In view of this : Is the Commission aware that this approach not only is creating a vicious circle of pay cuts and erosion of workers ' rights but also runs counter to the Treaties , which the Commission is required to respect ?
Member of the Commission . - The Commission acknowledges that the Greek crisis has a high social cost for sections of the population in Greece , but that cost is mainly the result of financial imbalances , diminishing competitiveness and financial difficulties : the very difficulties the Memorandum seeks to resolve and not exacerbate .
Some claim that , because these are in the Memorandum , it does not observe the principle of subsidiarity provided for in the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union .
I do not believe that is true .
The measures in the Memorandum were drawn up in close cooperation with the Greek Government and endorsed by the Greek Parliament .
That shows that they respect the principle of subsidiarity .
The Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union backs up my opinion .
Article 28 of the Charter stipulates that , in line with EU and national laws and practices , workers or their organisations have the right to negotiate and conclude collective agreements at the appropriate levels , and , in cases of conflicts of interest , to take collective action to defend their interests , including strike action .
However , Article 51 of the Charter states that its provisions are addressed to the institutions , bodies , offices and agencies of the EU , with due regard for the principle of subsidiarity , and to the Member States only when they are implementing EU law .
There is no specific EU legislation regulating which collective agreements take precedence when they are concluded at different levels , nor is there any specific EU legislation regulating the possibility of extending collective agreements concluded at branch level by way of state intervention .
These issues therefore fall exclusively within the remit of national law , with due regard for the relevant international obligations of Greece , including the relevant conventions of the International Labour Organisation .
I trust that I have answered the questions satisfactorily .
I also trust that I have convinced you that the fiscal , financial and structural measures in the Memorandum are vital if Greece is to come out of the crisis .
I hope I have allayed the fears some of you may have about the failure to observe the principle of subsidiarity .
( EL ) Commissioner , I am sorry , but once again , you have not given a clear reply .
You gave me more or less the same reply to my written questions .
If the Commission really does respect the fact that the collective agreement regime is a question of national legislation , then are you or are you not infringing the role vested in you under the Treaties when you call for the collective agreement regime basically to be abolished ?
Your interpretation is not adopted by the European trade unions which have filed a complaint against you for infringement of the Treaties .
My question is this : who is calling for collective agreements to be abolished ?
Is it you ?
Is it the International Monetary Fund ?
Is it Greece 's , Portugal 's and Ireland 's lenders ?
A clear reply , if you please .
Member of the Commission . - ( microphone switched off until middle of first sentence ) ... much of the institutional arrangements including the wage setting arrangements in various Member States .
These emergency situations have been handled through policies that were jointly developed by the EU , the IMF , the ECB and the governments of the Member States concerned .
Indeed , there are still some open questions , and also some raised by the so-called Euro-Plus Pact .
We recently held a number of discussions about the connection between social dialogue and economic governance with the social partners , including the ETUC .
This is an ongoing discussion .
I am not saying that all the questions have been answered and that is exactly why I took the initiative of organising a conference on wages and wage setting in the EU .
This conference will take place with the involvement of the social partners and other stakeholders in September .
We will continue this discussion and hopefully find the right answers .
Subject : Review of Regulation ( EEC ) No 1612 / 68 on freedom of movement for workers within the Community
The reference framework for the free movement of workers is laid down in Council Regulation ( EEC ) No 1612 / 68 on freedom of movement for workers within the Community and has been revised several times .
Parliament is currently drafting a report on promoting professional mobility in the EU .
The Commission representative who attended the meeting of the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs stated on 19 April 2011 that the Commission was preparing to revise and improve the regulation .
When , in the Commission 's view , is that process likely to begin ?
Member of the Commission . - The free movement of workers is a fundamental principle of the EU .
Together with the free movement of goods , services , and capital , it is a pillar of the Single Market and has contributed to European integration over the last 50 years .
It also has a significant social dimension , insofar as it fosters the social , economic and cultural integration of EU migrant workers and members of their families into the host Member State .
The body of EU law on free movement of workers gives EU citizens the right to move freely within the Union for work purposes and protects the social rights of workers and their family members .
As you know , 1 May 2011 was an important date for the EU .
It marked the end of restrictions on the right to work of citizens from the eight Member States which joined in 2004 , who can now work freely in any Member State .
The Commission hopes that the Member States which still apply transitional measures to workers from Romania and Bulgaria will liberalise their labour markets when the second phase expires on 31 December 2011 .
The end of transitional arrangements means that more EU citizens can take advantage of one of the EU 's fundamental freedoms and work freely in another Member State .
That opens great opportunities for the individual , who can move where there are jobs , and also for the economy .
I know that mobility and freedom of movement for workers are also important to this House .
The Commission is pleased with the own-initiative report on promoting worker mobility within the European Union and is following the debate in the parliamentary committees with great interest .
But we are also aware that , despite the large body of EU legislation in the area of freedom of movement for workers , most EU citizens still feel there are too many obstacles to working in another Member State .
The situation has been highlighted on several occasions recently .
The Monti Report of 9 May 2010 - ' A New Strategy for the Single Market ' - points out that , while freedom of movement for workers is a success overall from a legal viewpoint , it is the least-used of our four Single Market freedoms .
Tackling these problems calls for a broad approach , combined with effective implementation of the principle of free movement .
The enforceability of the right of free movement conferred by EU law is particularly relevant in cases of discrimination on the basis of nationality , as the individuals concerned need to have suitable mechanisms to ensure such rights are properly protected .
The Commission services are currently evaluating EU legislation on the free movement of workers , and in particular Regulation ( EEC ) No 1612 / 68 , and are exploring the options for improving the enforcement of EU law on freedom of movement , including , where necessary , by presenting an initiative in 2012 .
Parliament 's report on worker mobility therefore comes at the right time , and will certainly contribute to the debate on enforcement of EU law on free movement of workers and the choice of any further action on this issue .
( LT ) Mr President , Commissioner , thank you very much for your answer .
We are really looking forward to the revised regulation that will be presented by the Commission next year , but I would like to hear whether you feel that the Commission should evaluate the negative consequences of the free movement of workers , as well as the positive consequences .
For instance , there has been an exodus from some European Union countries of qualified , well-trained workers , in which Member States had made a significant investment .
They have moved to other European Union countries .
Do you not feel that we should establish a certain fund so that we could compensate the losses experienced by those Member States that have lost trained , qualified workers .
Member of the Commission . - This is a very topical question .
We have recently had a number of discussions in the context of 1 May .
I took up this issue with the employment ministers of the Visegrád countries , and of the Baltic states .
We have been looking at where free movement might lead to a certain amount of tension , especially when it affects certain professions where free movement is not leading to a circular phenomenon , but more of a one-way street .
If such tendencies are observed , it is primarily up to the Member State governments to draw up the right strategies regarding training , remuneration and career opportunities to improve development for those in the medical profession , for example , which has been a particular focus of these discussions .
We will continue to monitor this problem and continue to discuss it with the governments of the relevant Member States , as I have already been doing .
Subject : Reallocation of financial resources in the regional and cohesion funds
Is the Commission prepared to reallocate at least 10 % of the EUR 51 billion currently available each year in the regional and cohesion funds to fast-start funding for new electricity networks for renewable energy ?
Mr Martin , thank you very much for the question .
It is important to point out that , for the current funding period , 2007-2013 , the resources under the heading of the structural funds have already been allocated and agreed with the regions and the Member States within the framework of the more than 400 operating programmes .
Part of the overall process at the beginning of a funding period is to determine the programmes for the current period and to decide what funding is available for the individual programmes .
In accordance with the concept of shared duties or shared management , it is the Member States and / or the regions that are responsible for the implementation of the programmes on the ground .
They are also competent and responsible for the selection and implementation of the projects and , ultimately , for monitoring - at least on the initial level .
Even at the beginning of this period , the subject of energy efficiency and promoting renewable forms of energy was an important point .
This is one of the priorities of regional policy , which is also implemented in the form of tailor-made proposals in several of the roughly 400 programmes that I referred to earlier .
On the basis of this agreement with the regions and with the Member States , a budget totalling EUR 9.2 billion is envisaged for a sustainable energy policy in the current period , with the key focuses being renewable energy and improving energy efficiency .
With a 2009 decision of Parliament and the Council , we also established the possibility that up to 4 % of the resources from the European Regional Development Fund could be used for measures to improve the energy efficiency of residential buildings .
Since then , around half of the Member States have made use of this , with France being particularly exemplary in using and implementing this possibility .
( DE ) Commissioner , please do not be angry , but let us get serious .
I would like to read my question to you .
It is as follows : is the Commission prepared to reallocate at least 10 % of the EUR 51 billion currently available each year to fast-start funding for new electricity networks for renewable energy ?
You have now had quite a lot to tell us , all of it correct .
It is just that none of it is what is at issue .
What is at issue is sending out a signal and saying , yes , we have understood .
Yes , we are drawing the conclusions from Fukushima .
Yes , we really are serious about 2020 .
To push forward energy change , we need to bring the electricity from northern Germany to Austria .
My father was head of Voralberger Kraftwerke , the power generating company for the Austrian Province of Voralberg .
I am sure you have experience in this area .
You need power lines to do this .
Once again , my question is , are you personally prepared to really get this fast-start funding specifically , which everyone is saying that we urgently need , off the ground and not merely implement what your predecessors decided ?
Mr Martin , I did read your question very carefully .
That is why I also gave you a very specific answer based on the rules that we have in the field of regional policy .
The essence of these rules consists of there being agreements in the Member States , and these cannot be unilaterally altered by either the Commission or the regions .
Personally , I would want the resources already in place to be used for this , and I would be pleased if that were the case .
I find myself going from conference to conference , from Member State to Member State , like a living Tibetan prayer wheel , pleading the case for these resources - which are already in place - to be used .
As the expansion of renewable energies does indeed represent one of the focal points of the Europe 2020 strategy , I assume that , in the forthcoming period , there will definitively be a higher budget for this area , including from the regional policy heading .
Moreover , there will certainly be investments in this connection , in collaboration with Mr Oettinger , in the field of infrastructure when it comes to trans-European networks in the field of energy provision .
If , today , regions are seeking to re-dedicate resources in addition to the resources already available , we are certainly very open , in this area , to the idea of opening up this opportunity or , in any case , to holding serious talks in this regard .
Once again , however , we in the Commission cannot unilaterally alter these agreements .
Subject : Fulfilment of the objectives of structural funds payments
At the end of June 2011 , the Commission will present its proposal for the next 7-year budgetary framework ( 2014-2020 ) .
In the case of EU regional policy , there have been substantial problems with absorption capacity under the individual programmes .
Several programmes have also failed to achieve their objectives .
How does the Commission intend to include the absorption capacity of each Member State as a criterion for the allocation of structural fund appropriations in the coming budgetary period ?
Does the Commission agree that payments should be reviewed if a region has been receiving structural funding for years without this resulting in it meeting the targets set ?
Will the Commission consider a ' sunset mechanism ' that sets a closing date on the allocation of structural fund appropriations to individual recipient regions ?
Does the Commission agree that such a mechanism would help create a more results-oriented cohesion policy ?
The Court of Auditors Annual Report for 2009 found the highest error rate to be in payments under the EU 's cohesion policy .
This was the same finding as in previous years .
How does the Commission intend to remedy this situation ?
Mrs Jensen , thank you very much for your question .
When it comes to absorption capacity and its consideration in the allocation of funds in the forthcoming period , I make reference right now to the existing rule regarding the upper limit on the allocation of funds - in a word , capping .
There is a rule that says that , given a certain sliding scale per Member State , only a specific sum measured by the overall GDP of a Member State is available for structural policy .
The annual allocation must not exceed this upper limit .
For the forthcoming period , we will certainly consider whether the level of the current upper limit is justified and whether any adjustments are necessary in order to better design or secure the absorption capacity .
When it comes to the programmes meeting their targets , I must remind you of the fifth cohesion report and the budget review , in which it was made clear that the performance of the programmes must be given more attention .
For the forthcoming period , a set of tests and incentive systems are envisaged in this regard , which the Commission has put forward in the legislative report package for cohesion policy after 2014 .
When it comes to the error rate , I have made reference many times , including in this House , to the methodological problems involved in auditing multiannual programmes .
Around half of the EU budget certainly is composed of resources that are allocated for multiannual activities .
The auditing by the Court of Auditors in respect of budget implementation always only considers the year in progress , and for that reason , methodological challenges result as , in relation to regional policy , the third audit level applies , while the annual audit by the Court of Auditors already takes place under the first audit level and therefore , a higher error rate will always result here than at the end of a programme cycle , as we can prove already .
In any event , my predecessor , Mrs Hübner , also put in place an action plan together with Parliament in this regard , the efficacy of which is already evident and which has shown its effect .
One of these measures , however , was also giving Directorates-General the ability to suspend payments for up to six months in justified cases .
By way of example , this tool was used over fifty times last year .
All these suspensions of payment were able to be lifted again before their deadlines expired , as the issues about which an objection had been raised had been resolved .
When it comes to the error rate , however , I would also ask you to always take into consideration that regional policy has , if you like , a kind of snowplough function in this connection , that , in relation to certain statutorily developed elements , we check how they are implemented in day-to-day practice , how effective they are and what problems result .
The issue of public procurement is repeatedly the subject of discussions with the Member States , regions and final beneficiaries .
Around 70 % of the error rate occurs in this area .
If we succeed in simplifying this system - and we have launched an initiative to this end together with Commissioner Barnier - we will also reduce the practical error rate in this area , too .
We are attempting to do our homework in this area and to make progress in this regard .
( DA ) Mr President , I would like to thank Commissioner Hahn for his excellent answer , which shows that he is taking these problems seriously .
These problems have clearly not been made any better by the economic crisis , which is making it difficult for many countries to find cofinancing .
Is the Commission giving particular consideration to what this could mean for the next programme period ?
Will aid from the structural funds really lead to the development of these regions ?
Are we seeing results ?
Is the Commission also considering what can be done to improve the follow-up of the actual objectives - the overall objectives - relating to development , so that these do not only provide projects , but also result in development ?
Mrs Jensen , it is our stated goal in the next programme period to thematically tie in structural policy - insofar as it is affected , in any case - with the Europe 2020 strategy .
In this area , there are thus key objectives and priorities that are to be applied in the course of a tailored adaptation in the regions .
It will then be the job of the regions to select a few priorities for themselves as if from a menu , in particular , when it comes to competitive regions .
The regions will then set and agree very realistic but also ambitious and quantifiable targets together with us in the Commission in a partnership and investment agreement so that , at the end of the period , we will be clearly able to see whether or not the objectives agreed between us have been achieved or perhaps even exceeded .
If it turned out that they had not been achieved , we would then have the possibility of together examining the causes of non-compliance and whether it was due to domestic or external factors .
Building on that , we could then draw conclusions for future programme planning and the financial allocation in the subsequent period .
This represents a very material , very qualitative development of regional policy over the forthcoming financial period .
Questions which have not been answered for lack of time will receive written answers ( see Annex ) .
That concludes Question Time .
Agenda of the next sitting : see Minutes
Closure of the sitting
Opening of the sitting
Implementing measures ( Rule 88 ) : see Minutes
A new Multiannual Financial Framework ( MFF ) for a competitive , sustainable and inclusive Europe ( debate )
The first item is the report by Mr Garriga Polledo , on behalf of the Special committee on the policy challenges and budgetary resources for a sustainable European Union after 2013 , on Investing in the future : a new Multiannual Financial Framework ( MFF ) for a competitive , sustainable and inclusive Europe .
Mr President , Commissioner Lewandowski , ladies and gentlemen , we have had 23 years of financial perspectives , four distinct periods that have helped EU expenditure and income to evolve in a well-ordered way .
The existence of the financial perspectives is what has allowed the Union 's programmes to be carried out .
This is why this debate and the vote following it are so important to the Union 's finances .
Parliament is taking the political initiative in Europe 's budget for the first time .
The Commission and the Council will have to react to this proposal and put forward their alternatives .
Parliament has drafted a proposal that is defined by consensus and collaboration .
It has involved one year of work , 1 100 amendments and 120 commitments , with 11 parliamentary committees and 10 national parliaments having contributed to it .
I would like to congratulate all the officials and assistants who have worked over the past year to make this report possible .
There has also been institutional cooperation from the College of Commissioners , headed by José Manuel Durão Barroso , with the Commissioner for Financial Programming and Budget , Janusz Lewandowski , having provided particular support .
We hope that the proposal they put forward on 29 June will be in line with the recommendations made in our report .
We can no longer carry on making more Europe with a smaller budget .
We want an end to the bad habit of accepting solemn political commitments that cannot possibly be funded .
We have had enough experience on this issue with the Lisbon strategy , and we do not want the 2020 strategy to be another failure that only serves to increase disappointment and euroscepticism .
That is why we are making the Europe 2020 strategy the backbone of the forthcoming financial perspective .
We firmly believe in the efficacy of EU expenditure .
One euro administered by the EU budget is more efficient than one euro spent individually by 27 national budgets .
We have proved the idea of added value and we believe it can be applied to practically all EU programmes .
We call on the European Commission to make this a reality .
There can be no European policy without sufficient funding for the agricultural policy and the cohesion policy .
That is why we are asking the Council to maintain the level of expenditure for these two policies beyond 2013 .
Research , development , innovation , investments in energy efficiency , renewable energy , trans-European communication and energy interconnection networks , climate change and education are just some of the priorities that this EU budget must cover .
Cutting the EU budget is not a viable option for those of us who believe in a competitive Europe .
We consider that an increase of at least 5 % is needed over the total expenditure in the current financial perspective .
This increase is the minimum requirement for meeting the needs of the major traditional policies as well as our new priorities .
This 5 % is an exercise in political realism , and should be the basis for future interinstitutional negotiation , along with the sensible proposal put forward in this report , agreed between the groups in this Chamber , on a new system of own resources .
This period of crisis and rescue plans may be the worst possible time for starting negotiations on the financial perspective , but for all those of us who believe in the EU budget as an instrument needed to transform 27 Member States into a true Union , the challenge is before us , and our sights must be set high enough to tackle it .
The good and bad aspects of the report will come out in today 's debate , both praise and criticism .
I know it is impossible for this Chamber to give its unanimous support on such a sensitive issue , but I would like to thank the political groups for their generosity in seeking consensus , and the skills they have contributed over this period .
Thanks to them , the final report is infinitely better than anything that I could have produced without their support .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the euro and public debt crisis demand solutions at European and not national level .
This is the message that Mr Barroso , speaking on behalf of the European Commission , has been sending the Member States for months .
However , a European solution means European funding .
My group seeks to adapt this funding to the new realities of Europe , both in its objectives and its terms of reference .
My question to the Council is as follows : is Europe of the 2020s the same as Europe of the 1960s ?
Are the state of public finances of our Member States , our growth prospects and the position of Europe in the world comparable ?
I think not .
It is clear that Europe today is no longer in any way comparable to the Europe of the founding fathers .
It has changed , and it would be irresponsible not to reflect these changes in the ways in which Europe is funded , in other words , in the way Europe is designed .
( The speaker broke off , hoping to continue his speech later )
( NL ) Mr President , given his extremely negative reactions to the position of the Dutch Government , I would like to ask my esteemed fellow Member whether he still recognises at all the democratic right of EU Member States to voice their own opinions on behalf of their citizens .
( DE ) Mr Hartong , of course I recognise this right .
I only hope that you also recognise that the position of the Dutch Government cannot simply be handed down ex cathedra , but that it should be debated in a multinational democracy .
I have absolute respect for Mr Rutte , who is in favour of a 2.7 % increase in the EU budget .
I have taken note of this and am pleased that you have listened attentively because the positions of all governments are debated openly in this Parliament .
To this extent , I failed to understand the meaning of your question , but what I believe I can glean from it is that you also support democracy .
I suppose that this represents some sort of progress .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Mr President , I have here the letter from the representative of Her Majesty 's Government on the SURE report .
The letter says that Her Majesty 's Government is disappointed by the draft SURE report .
Colleagues , I think that means that we have a very good draft SURE report here today !
I have to tell you that beyond the three or four words saying that Her Majesty 's Government is disappointed by the report , the other parts of the letter are a real provocation : a provocation to Europe and the European Union , because their main point is that no increase in the Multiannual Financial Framework ( MFF ) is possible , and that we have to stick to the old MFF , the same figures , the same resources , naturally the same rebates , and certainly the same rebate for the UK .
We must change nothing at all .
Her Majesty 's Government is nevertheless a government that wants to take decisions , that wants to reform not only the UK but also the European Union .
So I do not see why we have to stick to the old MFF and simply continue with the policies of the past .
I think that the time is now ripe to say to the public that it is not by cutting this EU budget of 1 % [ EU GDP ] that we will solve the fiscal consolidation of the different Member States of the European Union .
This 1 % is only one-fortieth of the total expenditure within the European Union .
There are other ways to make savings .
Another suggestion that we can make to Her Majesty 's Government is that , if it wants to make savings in the British public sector , it can do so by increasing the role of the European Union .
Let me give you three examples .
First of all , foreign policy .
In the US , there are 28 000 diplomats .
In Europe there are 93 000 : there are four times more diplomats in Europe because we are not working together under a single foreign policy .
There is a saving to be made there .
If the British Government invested more in the European Union , they could make savings on their foreign policy , in William Hague 's department .
Another example is monetary policy .
Around 44 000 people are responsible for monetary policy in the European Union .
In the US , there are 18 000 in the Federal Reserve Board .
That is three times fewer civil servants .
If the British Government wants to make savings , it can join the euro , it can give the European Union more powers and responsibilities , and it can make savings with regard to all those people working on monetary policy in Britain .
If it wants to make savings in Great Britain , it can do so in the research sector simply by adopting the European patent immediately .
That would make enormous savings in its research budget .
That is the answer that we have to give to Her Majesty 's Government .
( Applause )
Mr President , my group would like to see European financing that reflects Europe 's new realities , trends and aims .
Do the state of the public finances of our Member States , our growth prospects and Europe 's place in the world match the vision of the founding fathers of Europe ?
Definitely not : they have evolved and changed .
It would be irresponsible if we failed to adjust how Europe is financed to reflect these changes .
The Multiannual Financial Framework is a highly political issue that the special committee , working with the Committee on Budgets , has been discussing for over a year .
I would like to congratulate the committee on its work .
I hope that the European spirit found in the committee will shape the implementation of the framework and take Europe forward for the benefit of our citizens .
The Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) calls on all Member States to participate fully in this debate .
When I say fully , I mean not simply announcing that the ultimate aim is to freeze European expenditure to 2020 , nor dismissing out of hand the notion of European own resources .
We want own resources in order to reduce pressure on national budgets .
This is why we are proposing the concept of own resources to the Heads of State or Government : to ease straitened national budgets .
Let me remind you that the European budget has always been balanced , unlike national budgets , which , for the most part , have serious deficits .
Let me also remind you that over 90 % of that budget is spent on projects that benefit Member States .
Lastly , let me remind the Member States that any money which is not spent will be returned to them at the end of the year .
Yet we are accused of being poor managers : I think that we need to ramp up our communication efforts .
So please , let us stop treating the European budget as a strain on domestic finances .
Let us be honest : one euro spent at European level brings far greater returns than a euro spent by national governments .
Between 20 and 30 cents of one euro of national spending are immediately diverted to repay interest on the national debt .
Europeans need to be told the truth .
The truth is that without European funding for education and lifelong learning , the brain drain to China and the United States will gain momentum .
The truth is that without European funding for research and innovation , our countries would be less competitive globally , while growth and employment would languish .
The truth is that without European cohesion funding , the gap between rich and poor regions would widen .
The truth is that without European funding , food security policy , energy policy and climate change policy would be unable to match our expectations and aims .
Ladies and gentlemen , the truth is that without European funding for foreign and defence policies , the European Union would have remained in the wings instead of at the centre of the world stage .
Of course , money is not the only consideration : how the European Union chooses to invest and to implement political priorities to 2020 and beyond will determine Europe 's capacity for influencing the world .
The European Parliament - and for once , the groups that have already spoken are in agreement with me - is therefore calling on the Council to give serious thought to its position on the financial framework .
If the Council is seriously committed to seeing growth and employment pick up , then it needs to use the European budget and Community own resources as a powerful lever .
If , like Parliament and the Commission , the Council really wants to give Europe a real chance in the context of globalisation , then it needs to understand that spending wisely is far more useful than limiting spending and that joint funding for joint projects is a more intelligent approach than spreading resources thinly between short-lived projects .
Ladies and gentlemen , this morning , the members of the PPE Group are calling for an ambitious view of Europe .
Our fellow citizens share our ambition and hopes .
As young people express their anxieties on the streets of Athens and Madrid , as 500 million Europeans are wondering what their future holds , it is time to ask the right questions and to come up with responses to the issues that we face .

on behalf of the ECR Group . - Mr President , if I may take this opportunity , speaking on behalf of Her Majesty 's Government , I want to respond to Mr Verhofstadt who , as ever , has missed the point and who , as ever , is facing in the wrong direction .
If he had read the report , he would have seen that Her Majesty 's Government said that this is a time of crisis in Europe .
He would have noticed that economies are stagnating , jobs are being lost and industries struggling to compete in a fast-changing world .
What Europe needed is a budget that is relevant , that is adding value and that engages with the people , but what Mr Verhofstadt and his colleagues are offering is more of the same .
There is a saying : ' If you do not change direction , you finish up at the point you were heading for when you started out ' .
This budget needs to change direction .
We and Her Majesty 's Government agree that spending should be increased in those areas that add value .
We agree : investment in research and development , in trans-European networks for transport , energy and telecommunications should be increased .
We agree : education , small businesses and encouraging the Single Market is wise , sound investment and should be encouraged .
That will help create jobs and growth .
But we do not agree that it is acceptable for this House to take that as a reason to demand a bigger budget .
To Mr Verhofstadt , I have to say this .
All over Europe , governments are imposing austerity budgets , and this House would be exceedingly unwise if it does not take on board that message , if it chooses to ignore the letter from the five Heads of Government , because what those five Heads of Government were saying is : more Europe is not the answer ; smarter Europe is .
We need a budget which is more focused .
In the special committee on the policy challenges and budgetary resources for a sustainable European Union after 2013 , we rightly talked about priorities , but then we never acted on it .
There was no evidence of a willingness to take tough choices , the kind of choices which are being taken by governments all over Europe at this time .
So we accept that there should be increased expenditure on the new priorities but we also think it was time we looked again at the traditional priorities , so here again , it was another missed opportunity for the European budget .
( The speaker agreed to take a blue-card question under Rule 149 ( 8 ) )
Mr President , I would like to ask my colleague if he does not accept that transferring from the national to the European budget some key items of expenditure is going to produce cost efficiencies and economies of scale and save national treasuries money .
That is the central message of Parliament 's approach to reforming the financial perspective .
It is logical and it requires a logical and rational response from London .

Mr President , I understand Mr Duff 's point and , as ever , the theory is right but the practice is not .
Show me the evidence of where transferring that support makes for greater efficiencies through spending by the European Union .
Show me the evidence of where it has actually saved citizens money rather than costing them more .
I say again , this budget is evidence of a call from Mr Duff and his colleagues for more Europe , not smarter Europe .
The United Kingdom Government is asking for better spending , not more spending .
Mr President , it is always interesting to see that , as soon as we start talking about a forward-looking budget , the debate is only ever about ' how much exactly ? ' .
This debate should actually be about three issues , three priorities which for us , the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance , are crucial .
Firstly , we need a vision for Europe and we need to decide what added value the European budget brings to that vision for Europe ?
Secondly , yes , Mr Ashworth , the budget should be renewed and made greener , it should be a forward-looking budget .
However , a forward-looking budget also means shifts in priorities and still more European money .
The third priority concerns the EU 's own resources .
Make the system fairer and more transparent , and then we can talk about own resources .
Let me run through these three priorities , the added value , to begin with .
Here , too , the tone of the debate is as if the money which goes to Brussels is disappearing into a black hole .
What nonsense , complete and utter nonsense !
If you start looking at what can be done at the European level , there are many reasons for spending money at the European level and specifically not at the national level .
Take , for example , our diplomatic services , our embassies abroad .
Do we want to have 27 of those in all kinds of countries in Africa , or do we want to have a single EU one ?
The latter means that more money will have to go to the EU for that EU embassy , but it also means that 27 times less money is spent in the 27 Member States .
That is dealing with money efficiently .
Look also at infrastructure .
If we , as countries , build infrastructure , how do we then ensure that this also works across borders , in the field of ​ ​ energy networks ?
There , too , you need European money .
Or take innovation and research .
Ensure that they are consolidated so that you see it through together , so that you have economies of scale .
Now , that is clever investing .
That is a vision of the added value of Europe and that is why we need a European budget .
Secondly , the budget must be forward-looking .
The current budget is too much ' business as usual ' .
We have the 2020 objectives for a smart economy , a sustainable economy .
We must therefore invest in that .
The challenge for the EU is dealing with scarcity , the scarcity of natural resources , but also of labour .
The EU must invest in this so that we can deal with it .
The European Agricultural Fund for Rural Development must be renewed and made greener , so that agriculture can become an example of proper and efficient dealing with natural resources .
The Structural Funds , too , must respond to new challenges , such as energy .
Ensure that the Structural Funds contribute to the objectives we have set for 2020 .
That is the innovation we should be talking about .
What are the new challenges ?
Sustainable energy - that means infrastructure and we need money for that ; foreign policy - the Arab Spring : what has been the European response ?
For that , too , we need European money .
Poverty reduction within and outside the EU , climate change , innovation , all good reasons for us to act at the EU level .
The third priority concerns the EU 's own resources .
The current system is bankrupt .
The rebates which the British have , and which the Dutch and the Danes want , that is a bankrupt system .
Make it fairer , make it more transparent , or secure own resources for the EU .
Consider a financial transaction tax .
Then you have a fair system where the money goes to the EU and where we can achieve our own objectives .
This is a clever policy .
Things do have to change but they must change at the European level , surely ?
Finally , I would like to put the following question to those Member States which are saying that less and less money should go to the EU , but which , at the same time , are giving all kinds of new priorities to the EU : if you want less money to go to the EU , what are the priorities that we as the EU should work on ?
Because if you want the EU to receive less money , you also have to make choices .
So far , we have heard that there are more and more priorities , with less money .
This simply does not add up .
Now , that is the question the British and Dutch governments should be thinking about .

Mr President , Mr Garriga Polledo , you will understand that the Left has particularly high expectations in relation to the social alignment of the EU and is therefore a little disappointed that your report does not give greater priority to social aspects for the coming years .
I am sure that the preservation and development of the European model of the social state and the European solidarity principle will be of enormous importance in times of crisis and economic cut-backs .
Both of these are significant European cultural achievements and I believe that giving these up could signal the end of the European social integration process .
Of course you have enumerated many important challenges , some of which go beyond the Europe 2020 strategy .
However , I do not believe that the proposed tentative increase of 5 % will be enough to meet these challenges .
As Parliament , we should state clearly that we intend providing particular support for a social Europe .
Other elements , such as ERD , FRONTEX and ITER may need to wait a little longer .
I believe it is wrong to invite the Council to set negative priorities , in other words , cuts .
At the same time , we must accept that this report will trigger serious parliamentary debate on the reform of the own-resources system .
In particular , the introduction of a financial transaction tax is an issue that we must finally take in hand .
This is not just a useful financial instrument , but also offers greater transparency in relation to how the EU is financed .
Naturally , this involves an important part of financial market regulation .
I also believe that we need to do away with the British rebate and ensure that unused EU resources are returned to the EU budget .
on behalf of the EFD Group . - Mr President , this House will , yet again , be accused of being out of touch with reality if it votes for a budget increase for the period 2014-2020 .
The reason given for this increase is the funding of the 2020 strategy , the one it is said will take us out of the crisis .
Let us recall what happened with the Lisbon strategy ; it was an epic failure .
Taxpayers ' money was wasted and we should not repeat this mistake .
The European Court of Auditors reports a significant percentage of irregularities affecting different policy areas , averaging 2.8 % of the budget year after year , and we continue to flow funds to these regions .
Projects have seen costs grow by up to three times their original estimates ; others suffer delays while being superseded by better technology .
Such is the case with Galileo , which has gone from a EUR 7.7 billion budget to a EUR 22.6 billion budget .

More than 40 % of the budget continues to be invested in the common agricultural policy , while only 4.7 % of the workforce in Europe is engaged in this .
The common fisheries policy - deemed a failure by Commissioner Damanaki - requires taxpayers to send EUR 1 billion to Brussels every year .
The European External Action Service costs an extra 500 million each year and has not yet demonstrated its raison d 'être .
All these examples should certainly justify not a budget increase but a budget reduction .
I would like to think that the UK Government will take a stand , will say enough is enough , and call for a reduction .
However it seems its coalition MEPs here favour a freeze .
Taxpayers in the UK will not be thanking them .
( NL ) Mr President , on the eve of World War I , the British Minister , Sir Edward Grey , spoke these words : ' The lamps are going out all over Europe .
We shall not see them lit again in our time ' . We have before us the Polledo report on the political priorities of the European Parliament for the post-2013 period .
This concerns both the legislation and the budget .
This is therefore the vision of the EU on the future of European citizens .
What terrible intellectual , cultural and political poverty pervades this report !
What a tendency towards dictatorship by the European political elite .
This Parliament claims that the EU is adding more value at international level than the sum of individual Member States .
You are therefore demanding a minimum 5 % increase in the EU budget .
How ridiculous !
What a denial of national sovereignty and what contempt for the citizens and governments of our countries .
Let me make it clear : a right-thinking Member State such as the Netherlands will never be able to agree with this report .
MEPs with a fresh , freedom-loving vision should throw this report straight in the bin .
Why ?
Because , otherwise , the lamps will go out in Europe and we will be paving the way for a dark future for our children .
My group want the lamps to stay on in Europe and , therefore , we will vote wholeheartedly against the report .
Colleagues , as you see , we are witnessing a fundamental discussion on the future of Europe and we are waiting for the standpoint of the Commission .
There is a blue card .
Mr Hartong , are you ready to answer ?
( NL ) Mr President , I would like to ask my fellow Member Hartong the following question .
At present , several EU Member States are members of the G8 , the organisation of the eight largest economies in the world .
In the next 10 to 15 years though , not a single European country will be represented there any more .
How can you then insist that individual European countries continue to play a significant role on the world stage ?
Do you not think that the only way Europe can really continue to play a role there is to act together ?
( NL ) Mr President , I thank my fellow Member for the question .
Europe is so wonderful and so powerful because of its Member States , and so by working together , in close consultation , the Member States are able to speak with a strong voice on the global political stage .
That will continue to be the case .
Precisely because national governments are working well together , their voices will raise a wonderful chorus .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , I welcome on behalf of the Commission the report submitted by the SURE Committee .
This is a real contribution to the preparations for the next financial perspective , but it is also truly European .
It is a genuine European perspective on the future of the European project .
This is desperately needed now when we face numerous common challenges demanding common answers in the era named by Mr Schulz as that of a spirit of ' Entsolidarisierung ' ( ' dismantling of solidarity ' ) .
My comment relates not only to the report itself , but also to the proceedings in the SURE Committee - in which I participated , so I know what I am talking about - to the skilful management by Jutta Haug and the role of Salvador Garriga Polledo .
That is the broad consensus and majority vote which will probably and hopefully be confirmed today in the plenary .
Yes , we share the vision which is contained in the report .
Yes , we also say that the European budget is not about the duplication of national budgets , but about delivering common goals beyond the capacity of nation states where European funds can realise economies of scale or create synergies .
In short , the European budget should be used where it makes a difference , as it has the nature of an investment and has no deficit .
We also share a vision of the so-called ' traditional ' policies - namely , the common agricultural policy and cohesion policy .
Traditional does not mean outdated , but as a mechanism for delivering the goals of the 2020 strategy .
When properly shaped in the budget , they could create room for much better and visibly better financing of what was under-financed - i.e. innovation , the management of migration flows , the external responsibilities of the European Union that are now so visible in the Mediterranean area , energy efficiency and , above all , how to connect Europe via the trans-European networks and the other cross-border connectors in energy systems .
The European budget should assume new functions as a toolbox for disciplining the Member States ' public finances , but it cannot be blamed for mismanagement of public finances at national level .
It should act as collateral now for the balance of payments facility , but also in the future for the greater use of innovative financial instruments leveraging European budgets .
The report is asking for a reform of the financing side and we are to respond by indicating new resources .
As Mr Daul rightly said , that is how to make the life of a Finance Minister easier - by indicating new own resources for the budget and reducing the direct contribution .
Therefore , the package to be presented at the end of June is about figures , the Multiannual Framework Regulation , a new proposal for an interinstitutional agreement , but also about own resources .
Specific sectoral proposals should come later , between September and the end of the year .
Let me end by repeating once more my conviction that the SURE Committee report is a good input into the discussion about the future of the European Union , and a strong , important point of reference for the Commission .
Cooperation between the Commission and Parliament is essential , not only for a good start in shaping the proposal , but also for a happy end to the negotiations which are extremely difficult in the present context .
Thank you , Commissioner .
That was a very important discussion between the Commission and Parliament .
The two institutions would like to back each other , to have a similar approach to the Multiannual Financial Framework .
We will see the European Commission project at the end of this month , when it will be also be presented in Parliament .
( In response to a voice from the floor : )
I am sorry but we do not put blue-card questions to our guests , they are put only to Members of the European Parliament .
Mr President , for the Committee on Development , this is not just a clear report , but a vital one as well , because it establishes that the European Union will be shouldering its responsibility for the poorest countries during the next seven years and that it will therefore make appropriations to this end in the budget .
It establishes that Member States must honour their own commitments .
However , Member States still have a long way to go to commit 0.7 % of their gross national income ( GNI ) to development cooperation .
If the European Union works together on development cooperation , it will result in savings , elimination of overlaps and ensure better and more efficient spending .
The report stipulates that action on climate change cannot be funded from the development budget .
It calls for greater priority to be given to the strengthening of human rights , democracy and the rule of law .
It calls for new methods of funding besides just subsidies , for example , combinations of loans and subsidies .
It emphasises that humanitarian action should continue to have its own independent financial instrument because emergency aid must be neutral and free of the political choices of the European External Action Service ( EEAS ) .
With these choices , the European Union remains the most important partner for developing countries in the world and that is vital .
Mr President , the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety can also express its satisfaction with the report in the form in which it has been tabled before us .
It takes account of the scarcity of raw materials , the threat to biodiversity , the move towards sustainable energy and , in particular - and I find this key - the importance of sustainability for our economy .
There is one but , however : we live in a time when all Member States are turning over every euro at least three times before spending it .
Yet , we are doing something really peculiar .
We are spending billions in subsidies , such as environmentally harmful subsidies , on things which we subsequently have to spend many more billions to put right .
On behalf of my group , I have therefore retabled the amendment which was adopted by the Environment Committee , namely , to run down subsidies which have a harmful effect on the environment in the period up to 2020 .
Especially in these times of scarcity , we cannot afford to have that kind of subsidy .
Mr President , cohesion policy accounts for one of the largest individual budgets in the European Union .
We need to develop a new policy that is adapted to the new challenges .
We want investment in a modern infrastructure , in research , innovation and the development of new technologies .
We want sustainable , integrated urban development and we want a well-educated workforce .
The regions need specific subsidies to help them to become competitive and to develop economically .
However , at the same time , it must be said that all regions must have access to cohesion policy , both Eastern European Member States and strong national economies like Germany .
Eastern Germany requires support .
However , some western German regions require European aid , as do parts of the United Kingdom .
This requires a budget that should be no smaller than the current one and that cannot be split into different sectors .
We must make every effort to improve efficiency and transparency and we must link this with an abandonment of unnecessary bureaucracy .
Cohesion is linked with solidarity .
However , cohesion is also sensible from an economic point of view and necessary .
A lack of cohesion is bad news , even for strong national economies .
For this reason , we should provide appropriate financial backing for cohesion policy .
I would like to thank the rapporteur for including the opinion of the Committee on Regional Development in his report and I would ask for support for the amendment for once again improving the intermediate categories .
We have reached a compromise in the Committee on Regional Development and I would recommend that this House should incorporate the compromise found by the specialist politicians in the Garriga Report .
I would ask for your broad support .

Mr President , first of all , I would like to pay tribute to Mr Garriga Polledo , including on behalf of the majority of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development ( AGRI ) , for his excellent work over recent months .
The debate on future financial perspectives was very heated and the report put together by Mr Garriga Polledo offers an effective summary that encompasses the positions taken by the different national delegations and the various political groups .
In my capacity as rapporteur for the opinion of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , I express my full support for the decision to at least leave the agriculture budget unchanged and I - like many of my colleagues in the AGRI committee - am strongly opposed to the amendment tabled by the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe ( ALDE ) which would accept possible future cuts in agriculture resources in order to fund other activities .
I feel compelled to remind my fellow Members that the common agricultural policy is enshrined by the Treaties and is one of the few real European policies ; it can play an important role in a strategic sector that provides public goods and generates true European added value .
Mr President , whenever we talk about the European Union budget and European funds , especially about the future Multiannual Financial Framework , we automatically talk about European added value .
I do not think that there is an area or segment in the European Union budget where European added value is bigger , with so little money .
However , to ensure that everything we think in this Chamber and all the European projects have a connection to Europe 's population and each European citizen , and that all these projects have a future , the youth of today must believe in the European Union project , they must feel increasingly European and we must significantly increase our investments in culture , education and in youth projects and programmes .
This is why I say that for the European Union to have a future , we need more money for education , for culture and for young people .
Not to mention sport , which is a priority on the Europe 2020 agenda .
Mr President , as rapporteur for the Committee on Women 's Rights and Gender Equality , I would like to point out that when the crucial decisions are taken with regard to the economy and financial and monetary affairs , fiscal matters and trade policy , all decisions that affect the budget and our opportunities , the amount of influence that women have on these decisions is currently very small .
In order to produce a modern budget for the future , the Committee on Women 's Rights and Gender Equality has highlighted some important issues for future work on the budget .
The skills and experience of women must be utilised .
We would point out the need for the integration of equality - for equality to be taken into account in the budget .
I hear my fellow Members talk about the future budget and increased resources and so on .
It is not just a question of increased resources , but also of having the political courage to reprioritise aspects in the budget and utilise the skills that women have .
If we do that , we will not always need to call for more and more budgetary resources , but will be able to use the budget to produce modern policies for the future .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , this report is a proper , reasonable offer by Parliament to the Commission and Council for the further development of the budgetary basis of the European Union in difficult times .
I would like to thank the rapporteur , Mr Garriga Polledo , and the committee chair , Mrs Haug , for their work .
You have both done an excellent job .
Despite all the political differences between the various groups , our work was characterised by a struggle to find joint European solutions .
Other institutions could have a little more of this spirit .
We want to have genuine own resources , as described in the Treaty .
Irrespective of other income , the budget is to be financed solely from own resources .
In other words , we are being faithful to the Treaty when we demand this .
By the way , let us bring an end to all of these extraordinary targeted rebates .
This debate should be conducted jointly with our colleagues in the national parliaments without prejudice and with less foaming at the mouth than is evident in some capital cities and commentaries .
At the same time , we want to know that the unity of the budget is protected and that budgetary policy is not to be taken away from the community budget .
When we discuss expenditure , we must refer to the obligations that result from the Treaty of Lisbon .
We must provide sufficient finance for the EU 2020 strategy to which we have all committed ourselves .
Growth is the basis for economic and social activity .
We must discuss European added value and the necessary synergies between the national budgets and the EU budget in greater detail than before because , irrespective of the potential savings to be achieved in the EU budget , a lot of the additional resources required can be discussed in the context of a genuine debate on synergy and potential savings between the EU budget and the national budgets .
We must tell the Council clearly that if it refuses to take the path indicated by us today , it needs to indicate which political priorities are to be struck off the agenda and no longer financed .
This is required if we are to be honest with our citizens .
I hope that the Commission will respond positively to these suggestions from Parliament in its legislative proposals and I expect that the future presidencies will find a way to communicate openly and transparently with Parliament , so that we can complete the assent procedures in the appropriate timeframe .
( The speaker agreed to take a blue-card question under Rule 149 ( 8 ) )
Mr President , as far as I know , Mr Böge is a member of the CDU in Germany .
I wonder whether his plea for own resources of the EU reflects his own personal position or the position of his party in Germany ?
( DE ) Mr President , I am happy to deal with this question .
The fact is that I am not just a member of the Christian Democratic Union , but have also been Vice-Chair of the CDU in Schleswig-Holstein for 13 years .
Before this committee expressed its view , the CDU / CSU Members of the European Parliament agreed a position .
The statement on own resources agreed by the CDU / CSU Members of the European Parliament , which , to a certain extent , contradicts the party 's national position , is completely at one with the findings of the Policy Changes Committee .
I stand by this , also in my capacity as a CDU politician in Germany .
Mr President , the EU is currently facing the biggest challenges that it has faced in a very long time .
We must try to put an end to the economic crisis and , at the same time , avoid new crises .
We need to deal with increased globalisation and competition .
Major cross-border investments in research , for example , will be needed .
We need to get to grips with the challenges posed by the environment and the climate and with the sustainable supply of energy .
We need to reverse the devastating trend towards permanently high unemployment and social exclusion that Europe is experiencing , and , in particular , we must try to help with regard to the crisis affecting our southern neighbours .
Unfortunately , in a situation where we most need solidarity and well-functioning European cooperation , the threats to the European idea are also growing .
Right now , these are directed at the EU budget , among other things .
In the Special committee on the policy challenges and budgetary resources for a sustainable European Union after 2013 , we understand that it can seem strange that , at a time when many Member States are making cuts in their own budgets , we are demanding more money for the EU budget post 2013 .
However , at the same time , it would be completely unreasonable to ignore these challenges , to give in to euroscepticism and give up the political ambitions that the Member States have given us in the Treaty of Lisbon , for example .
We must also remember that large cuts will not benefit the most vulnerable Member States , Greece , Ireland and Portugal , but , on the contrary , will reduce the EU 's ability to support them .
The UK Government is only speaking on behalf of the net contributors and no one else .
Therefore , in the report by the Policy Challenges Committee , we have tried to find a reasonable balance between restraint , the ambitions that are needed and a future-oriented reform of policy areas such as agricultural policy .
We arrived at a proposal of a 5 % increase in appropriations for the next period compared with 2013 .
I would like to express my sincere thanks to Mr Garriga Polledo , who succeeded in securing a broad majority in support of his report .
The point is that this extra 5 % is to be used precisely for investments within the key areas that are focused on the future , in particular , research , growth and employment .
It is clear that there is a need for action in these areas , and without resources , we will not be able to meet these challenges .
To do this , however , we also need to be able to change our view of the EU budget .
Remember that this EU budget is still lower in relation to the Member States ' economies than it was when Sweden joined in the 1990s , for example , despite enlargement from 15 to 27 Member States .
The increase in the EU budget has also been significantly slower than the increase in the Member States ' national budgets , the UK budget for example , which is something else that is not mentioned when Her Majesty 's Government speaks .
I , personally , am absolutely convinced that austerity measures are not the only way out of this crisis .
We must find a way back to growth and jobs by finding resources for investments , and for that we need these joint actions .
Mr President , I would like to offer my sincere thanks to the rapporteur , who has done an excellent job in collating the views of this House .
I am sure that we are all in complete agreement as to the challenges that we face .
The question is simply how we will get the funds to stretch , and now we are not only talking about funds in the EU , but also funds in the Member States , and that is a balancing act .
In committee , we decided to recommend increasing the future budget by 5 % .
Five percent sounds like a lot , at least it does if we go home to our own capital cities and explain that we need another 5 % .
On the other hand , 5 % is very little when we consider the challenges that the EU is facing , and when we know only too well that the EU has actually been given a number of new tasks that it really ought to take care of properly , and we cannot do that without funds .
However , in order , at the same time , to be credible when asking for more money , we must also have the courage to look at existing structures and existing costs .
Our credibility will then increase significantly if we manage to show that we can also reallocate / reprioritise and save money before we ask for more .
Now , I am talking about unjustified advantages within agricultural policy as well as the fact that our anti-corruption policy is , to a large degree , not as successful as we always claim it is , and the fact that , to a certain extent , the EU 's administration is rather unwieldy - the very fact that we are here in Strasbourg is an example of this .
These are the sorts of things that our group wanted to raise as examples that could be discussed , for this is what will bring us credibility when we later ask for more money .
However , we have not always been entirely successful in doing this in this report , which also explains why some of my fellow Members will be pressing the ' no ' button , or perhaps the ' abstain ' button , in tomorrow 's vote , even though a large majority of our group supports the report .
Many people are , after all , disappointed that we are not able to discuss a new way of allocating existing funds as well .
Another issue that we absolutely must address is how we are to finance the EU budget , and in this regard , our group has been very clear .
We want a serious debate about what is referred to as own resources , and this is also important in order for us to eliminate the unhealthy elements in the current financing structure : more rebates , unclear and non-transparent arrangements and so on .
It cannot continue like this in the future , and in this regard , I hope that we can initiate a constructive dialogue with the Council concerning the future .
This is an absolutely crucial issue if the EU budget is to have a positive future .
Mr President , the Polish delegation in the European Conservatives and Reformists will vote in favour of adopting the report on the Multiannual Financial Framework .
However , this does not mean that we have not noticed the document 's weak points .
It is a sheer waste of time to expand upon proposals for own resources and European taxes .
Europeans already pay too much in government levies .
We need to place greater emphasis on monitoring of EU expenditure and on a critical assessment of current policies in this field .
Turning a blind eye to the money wasted will not solve the problem , and it is also unfair to European taxpayers .
The predominance of the Europe 2020 agenda may mean that EU policies are reformed at the expense of much more important obligations - those enshrined in the Treaties , which refer to the promotion of economic cohesion between Member States .
Yet European added value , which is linked to European cohesion policy , must not be ignored .
Its effects can be seen more clearly in Poland than anywhere else .
We are not the only ones to benefit from accelerated growth thanks to cohesion policy .
Accelerated growth in Central Europe also makes a significant contribution to growth throughout Europe and improves investment conditions , yielding profits not only in Warsaw and Prague , but also in Amsterdam , London and Berlin .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to begin with the statement by Mr Ashworth , which played off a smarter European budget against a higher budget .
I do not consider this to be a true alternative .
Indeed , we must pursue a smarter budgetary policy by identifying precisely where money can be saved , where management can be improved and where the administration is particularly constraining .
However , the task of this special committee was to find out how much money we need in order to be able to deal appropriately with the new political challenges faced .
Thus , what we need is openness to reform and political courage .
We need to organise ourselves in such a way that we can respond to the major challenges posed by 2020 .
I do not believe that this can be achieved from your position , Mr Ashworth ; instead , I would back Mr Böge , who I believe is correct and faithful to the Treaty when he says that we need to have the courage to return to a system that involves what are genuinely our own resources .
This will make the European Union stronger and our financing system more transparent .
This will make it clearer to our citizens where the money is to come from .
From the perspective of the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance I would like to add that we are mainly thinking of the financial transaction tax because it will regulate financial transactions and give us the opportunity to establish smarter policies .
Thus , this is one way ahead that will not strangle the Member States , instead opening up new alternatives for us all .
That is why I believe Mr Verhofstadt is right when he says that we must , of course , be prepared to take up joint initiatives such as the establishment of the European External Action Service , while at the same time making savings at national level .
Naturally , we cannot just drop one element and add another .
European responsibility means paring back national expenditure in order to pool resources at European level .
Why is that ?
It is because together we are stronger and because we can obtain European value added that is good for our citizens , particularly in the areas of research policy and education policy .
The major tasks ahead of us are ecological transformation and the establishment of intelligent energy networks .
We need money for this and for broadband networks in rural areas .
These are the tasks for the future and this requires a smarter and bigger budget .
( The speaker agreed to take a blue-card question under Rule 149 ( 8 ) )
( NL ) Mr President , Mrs Trüpel is again sounding her familiar credo : ' We must have more Europe , more Europe will do us good and more Europe means more money ' .
We already know the percentage by which she and Mr Verhofstadt would like to see the MMF increase .
It is too bad then that we are seeing our citizens moving in completely the opposite direction .
The confidence in Europe is diminishing .
Our citizens see this House as a money-devouring machine asking for more and more money .
Is it not time that you rethought your credo and came up with a different tune for a change , one which is in line with what Mr Ashworth is advocating ?
( DE ) Mr van Dalen , I believe that you are making a serious political error .
If we in Europe fall back into a pattern of following political national self-interest , then we risk destroying 50 years of work on the European project .
What we do here is not a waste of money .
We must take decisive action against any corruption and financial scandals as they arise .
Naturally , we are on your side on this issue .
However , when it comes to generating European added value , as we have done in many areas , we need to work together to develop this because , when they go it alone , the national states are weaker in the face of international competition .
You will not achieve good results with 27 national states acting unilaterally , but only by pooling forces .
This was recognised by the founding states after the Second World War .
We should work on developing this , not destroying it .
Mr President , having been listening to this debate , the speech I am about to make goes against the grain .
My first question is this : can a single currency be sustained without a strong European budget ?
The answer , in my opinion , is no it cannot .
The sovereign debt crisis proves exactly that .
It proves that if we had a strong budget , there would not have been a speculative attack on the sovereign debts of Greece or Portugal .
This is exactly what we must respond to , and I believe that this is the main problem to which Mr Garriga 's report fails to respond .
This report lacks ambition .
The possibility of a marginal 5 % increase in European budgets only seems a lot to Her Majesty , the Queen of England .
In fact , the real problem is that it is not possible to establish priorities for growth and job creation with a European budget that is essentially frozen .
It is not possible to respond to the new obligations resulting from the Treaties with a budget that is essentially frozen .
It is not possible to think that cohesion policy is succeeding , because it is not succeeding when Europe is regressing towards social divergence internally .
My final observation is that we will vote for the financial transaction tax but we believe it will only see the light of day if Europe has the courage to implement it independently of others .
on behalf of the EFD Group . - Mr President , much has been said and I would like to add a different note to this meeting .
Years ago , I was having dinner with the late President Gerald Ford in the United States and he was describing to me how the G7 came about .
He said he wanted to have a meeting with Callaghan - I think it was - the British Prime Minister , on some issues and Callaghan said why not combine this with a good game of golf ?
So Ford said , well , the Canadian Prime Minister , Trudeau , is a good player , we should invite him , and then Trudeau - welcoming the invitation - said he had some issues to solve with the French , so why not invite the French Prime Minister .
But then when they all discussed it over the phone , they said the Germans are going to be very suspicious , so we need to invite them to this meeting .
And when the Germans accepted , they then said that Italy was chairing the European Union for these six months , so they had to be there .
Ford then said to me : you know , Niki , this was the first time I realised you have a Union that is so split , divided and unbalanced .
One day , you should have a European budget that is strong enough to compete out there in the global world ; the guys are going to be very tough out there .
Be careful .
Mr President , I am very pleased as an MEP that I am living at this moment .
( DE ) Mr President , the Committee on Budgets has been working intensively on the next Multiannual Financial Framework ( MFF ) for some time now and the report from my fellow Member is an important contribution to this .
Never before have the people of Europe had such high expectations of the EU , while , at the same time , criticising it harshly .
Three points seem to be important : firstly , above all , the link to the citizens of Europe .
It is completely understandable that our citizens should lose their personal orientation against the background of the impact of the structural crisis and the ever-increasing demands of globalisation , inevitably leading them to question the European project as a whole .
This is a subject that must be considered carefully when drawing up the next MFF in order to ensure that Europe is better understood , accepted , practised and supported .
Secondly : this acceptance among citizens and at a political level in the Member States will be all the greater if the EU budget can generate tangible added benefits for Europe .
It will therefore be regarded as being of value to European unity .
Thirdly : in addition , we welcome the fact that the Europe 2020 strategy is to be the reference point for the forthcoming MFF , which also entails consideration of the timeframe .
( PL ) Mr President , anyone not in the know might come to the conclusion that the European Parliament is behaving irresponsibly by proposing a budgetary increase .
I would like to state quite clearly that the work of the Special committee on the policy challenges and budgetary resources for a sustainable European Union after 2013 has , above all , been very matter-of-fact and business-like , and extremely realistic .
It has been dominated by discussions on how much political decisions will cost .
We must remember that the Member States , including those which have published letters , agreed to the objectives of the Europe 2020 strategy .
Our committee has attempted to give some indication of how much joint political decisions will cost .
We take political decisions extremely seriously .
If the Member States decide to take certain measures , and we , as representatives of the citizens , are of the same opinion , we must have realistic funds .
In this context , the report which will be put to the vote is well thought out and based on compromise .
It is a realistic report and , most importantly , it is a report which forms a very good basis for the opening of talks .
I think that today , in this Chamber , we can say that the European Parliament is ready to open negotiations .
As an MEP from Poland , I would also like to express my strong belief that the Polish Presidency of the European Council will be one which engages in a serious and extremely realistic debate .
Since Poland and the Polish Government are pro-European , I believe that this debate , while certainly difficult , will also be extremely beneficial in terms of future measures .
What matters most is that negotiations are opened , and Parliament is ready for this .
( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , a year ago , the plenary agreed and mandated a special committee to draft the position of the European Parliament in relation to the next financial perspective .
Now , following exactly eleven months of work , the Policy Changes Committee is presenting the fruits of its labours .
This was a task that required discipline and concentration and that could only be achieved by adopting an approach characterised by openness , solidarity and mutual trust .
For that , let me express my sincerest gratitude to those Members involved in the creative process .
The report we have produced , drawn up under the leadership of Mr Garriga Polledo , is a genuinely good result .
It is something of which we can be proud .
However , as we all know , good results require not just hard-working Members , but also excellent staff .
We certainly had this , not just in the shape of our personal assistants and our group staff , but also , above all , in an excellent secretariat .
This super team , led by Monika Strasser , was not just competent and professional , but was also more than usually interested in its work .
It was patient and creative , extremely well organised , and , at the same time , spontaneous and flexible .
Best of all , it was always cheerful and open .
They obviously enjoyed all the hard work .
I would like to thank this nine-strong team from the bottom of my heart .
Thank you very much indeed .
( Applause )
From the outset , Mr Garriga Polledo and I wanted to deliver a report that could be supported by three quarters of Parliament .
We actually received a majority of more than four fifths in the vote in committee .
We were very pleased with this .
Our call for a seven-year financial perspective which is expressed in a structure that reflects the objectives of the Europe 2020 strategy , while , at the same time , respecting all the policies for the European Union and avoiding increasing the European budget to unrealistic levels , must be seen to be reasonable .
It is realistic and achievable .
Our report contains 174 paragraphs , all of them arguments for more Europe .
We genuinely need more Europe .
Please read the report .
It offers the best basis for convincing our citizens in local debate and for entering into serious negotiations with the Council , which is unfortunately notable by its absence today .
Thank you for your excellent work .
( DA ) Mr President , I , too , believe that this is a very well-balanced report with a clear , but also very flexible mandate for the Committee on Budgets , which is to negotiate an agreement with the Council , and I would reiterate Mrs Haug 's call for it to be read - and for it also to be read by those Heads of State or Government and finance ministers who were quick to express their negativity with regard to the result .
This has been a sound and sensible process , as has already been said , and I would like to thank Mr Garriga Polledo and Mrs Haug for their excellent work .
I would also like to thank the Commission for its very active role .
This work has actually enabled us to go through all parts of the EU budget and the various policy areas that we would like to see reflected in the budget .
This is therefore a solid achievement .
Is the result sufficiently ambitious ?
I believe it is .
We are strengthening the Europe 2020 strategy , which is intended to equip the EU to face the challenges posed by competition from China and other rapidly emerging economies and bring about our switch to more renewable energy .
I would have liked to have seen stronger wording with regard to the common agricultural policy , and I would also have liked us to have investigated the possibility of making savings in the Structural Funds .
After all , this is money that the Member States receive back and would very much like to have .
I therefore also think that it is necessary for us to have this possibility of a 5 % rise , so that there is the opportunity for new policy areas and for meeting new demands , as well as for investing in transport , energy and research - areas that the EU must invest in in future .
We have a grip on the EU budget .
The report that we are debating and adopting today concerns a ceiling for the EU budget .
We are not talking about the specific funds that are paid out , but rather a ceiling , and below this ceiling there must be scope for us to be able to deal with new challenges .
We do not know what will happen between now and 2020 , and I therefore support this report .
( CS ) Mr President , over the last few months , we have been busy preparing the Multiannual Financial Framework for 2014 to 2020 .
We are acting in this just like the puppy and the kitten in the fairy tale by the famous Czech writer , Karel Čapek .
They decide to make a cake , and in order to make it really tasty , they throw everything that they like into the pot .
The result is a cake that gives them belly ache .
I am afraid the same will happen with our budget framework .
We are also throwing lots of ingredients and fine-sounding commitments and recommendations into the pot , but we are not at all sure that they will go well together .
We are well aware of how badly the Lisbon strategy turned out .
We now have the 2020 strategy and we are trying to make a budgetary framework for it .
There is a problem both with the set objectives and with the instruments recommended by the report .
In my opinion , the fight against climate change represents the worst of the set objectives , and in the case of instruments , I see a major problem in the so-called own resources and the option of issuing bonds .
In reality , own resources mean a new European tax , which I do not want .
Eurobonds are a way for the EU to get into debt along with the Member States , which I do not want .
For these reasons , I cannot back the report .
Welcome
I have just received information that the Under-Secretary-General of the United Nations , Mr Muhammad Shaaban , is in the official gallery .
I should like to welcome the representative of the United Nations .
A new Multiannual Financial Framework ( MFF ) for a competitive , sustainable and inclusive Europe ( continuation of debate )
We now continue with the debate on the report by Salvador Garriga Polledo on a new Multiannual Financial Framework ( MFF ) for a competitive , sustainable and inclusive Europe .

( FR ) Mr President , the report by Mr Garriga Polledo , and I thank him and congratulate him on his work , is an ambitious summary that looks to the future .
Indeed , his report calls for greater resources so that the Union can better implement its objectives as set out in the Treaty of Lisbon .
It forcefully raises the question of own resources and therefore , indeed , the issue of whether our institution enjoys freedom in its fundamental political act , that of voting on its budget .
It proposes extending and expanding common policies , in particular , cohesion policy which has made a major contribution in the past to making the European Union a model of cooperation and understanding between peoples , and may continue to do so in the future .
With the future Multiannual Financial Framework , if we listen to the European Parliament , cohesion policy will be able to move into a new phase thanks to the creation of intermediate regions .
Thus , we propose a new package for this fund which strengthens equal opportunities between all our European territories , regardless of their past in economic terms , regardless of their handicaps when compared with more developed regions and regardless of how vulnerable they may be to the economic crisis that we are experiencing at present or any crisis that we may have to face in the future .
Cohesion among the different territories of the European Union is a key , strategic objective on which the very future of Europe depends .
The proposals that have been made are a step in the right direction , and if they are acted upon , lay sound foundations for the future .
Mr President , the vote on the report by Mr Garriga will be a simple choice : choosing a Europe that is moving forward , a vote by people who , leaving aside their political affiliations , believe in the future of Europe .
( PT ) Mr President , at this time of serious economic crisis in the euro area , resulting from neoliberal policies , and from a lack of solidarity and economic and social cohesion , it is unacceptable that a break with and change in the policies of the European Union and its financial resources is not being advocated .
When experiencing an economic and social crisis , one of the most significant challenges we face is finding a new Multiannual Financial Framework in which the Union budget for economic and social cohesion is significantly increased , whilst obligatory national contributions are reduced to , at most , 10 % of the project on the table , particularly for the countries with the greatest financial difficulties ; a framework in which there is a commitment to investment , to public services , to support for production , to the creation of jobs with rights , and to the eradication of poverty , social inequalities and all types of discrimination , particularly on the basis of gender .
There is also a need to promote peace , cooperation and development aid , and to significantly cut spending on the military and overseas representation .
For all these reasons , we consider this report a long way from what is needed for a better , fairer future for Europe and its citizens .
Ladies and gentlemen , as I take the chair for this sitting , all of you will understand if I express to you my sorrow and consternation at the death of Jorge Semprún , which took place a few hours ago , at the age of 87 .
In Jorge Semprún , we celebrate someone who was imprisoned in Buchenwald concentration and extermination camp , someone who fought Nazi forces in France and the Franco dictatorship in my country , Spain .
We also celebrate the outstanding , politically-committed writer , who collaborated , in particular , on our European Book Prize programme , and the reassured pro-European politician .
I mourn his death as both a colleague and a friend of his and I am going to ask President Buzek to send his family and the Spanish Government a message of heartfelt condolence and support , which I am sure that all of us here share .
( Applause )
( IT ) Mr President , there is no doubt that we are facing one of the most critical moments in the economic history of the European Union .
For this very reason , the committee that we have managed to establish during the course of this year certainly has a fundamental role .
We have no preconceived ideas against increasing the budget , although we think we do need to investigate where cuts can be made .
It is clear that we need to cut the European budget because , unfortunately , sometimes European funds are not used properly .
Indeed , perhaps it is precisely because of the way that these funds are used that many European citizens are no longer so convinced that the European Union is worthwhile .
To cite an example , we would call your attention to the various funds channelled towards the enlargement policy - sometimes we do not know where they end up .
What is there to say about the incalculable amounts spent on integration and which have achieved so little ?
There are also some virtuous regions that do not access the funds , which are then granted to other regions that either fail to use them , or use them poorly or for not entirely legitimate ends .
We would ask for maximum focus on this whole issue and for steps to be taken so that Europe can recover its credibility , including through rigorous measures .
( NL ) Mr President , obviously , I will have to confine myself to a couple of essential comments .
First of all , despite its bulk , I cannot find anywhere in this report a single serious attempt to make proposals for structural savings , for example , the abolition of what , in my view , are totally superfluous European institutions , such as the Economic and Social Committee , the Committee of the Regions and a good few European agencies of all kinds .
Nor , indeed , has any attempt whatsoever been made to ask the question of whether Europe would not be wiser to confine itself to a number of carefully defined core tasks .
On the contrary .
Secondly , I absolutely shudder at the repeated suggestions that the EU should impose its own taxes or that it should issue European government bonds , which will sooner or later have to be paid back by somebody .
The suggestion in this report that measures of this kind would not increase the total tax burden on the citizens is a lie , of course , and a deception of the worst sort .
Besides , this would further undermine the last vestige of supervision and control that the Member States are exercising on the European institutions ' spending diarrhoea .
Those are the basic reasons why I cannot possibly support this report .
( RO ) Mr President , the current challenges which the European Union is faced with require a firm , sustained EU-level response .
The response to these challenges is the 2020 strategy , an instrument created to bring recovery and strength to Europe .
The report presented today places the 2020 strategy at the heart of the next MFF being drafted , together with the new situation created by the areas of competence and policies stipulated by the Treaty of Lisbon .
At a time when many Member States are faced with difficult fiscal adjustments , the EU budget , 95 % of which is used for investment , must provide a very high level of European added value .
The report calls for the continuation of two extremely important European policies - the common agricultural and cohesion policies - at least at their current level .
The allocation of resources under these policies must be based on new criteria which will ensure the proper use of resources to achieve maximum efficiency and compliance with convergence and cohesion criteria .
The transport and energy policies must be enhanced .
Allocation of funding to research and development , at both European and national level , must ensure the progress of all European policies .
The seven-year period , the new structure proposed and greater flexibility provide additional security in implementing and adapting to changing priorities .
For the sake of stability , the EU budget 's system of resources needs to be rethought so as to replace current national contributions with European resources .
The European Council recently adopted ambitious targets for the EU 's development .
This same Council must accept that the 5 % budget increase being proposed by the report is the minimum condition for achieving these targets .
The forthcoming MFF must be implemented with an economic governance system in place which can ensure the financial stability required to implement European policies .
I wish to congratulate the rapporteur , Salvador Garriga .
( ES ) Mr President , I would like to start my speech by praising the work of the rapporteur and all the members of the Special committee on the policy challenges and budgetary resources for a sustainable European Union after 2013 ( SURE Committee ) .
Above all , I must praise their determination over the past year of work to achieve a majority agreement and majority support in Parliament for a report such as the one we are presenting today .
This report is the road map that the European Union must follow if we want to meet the political , economic and social objectives we have set ourselves , and also if we want to overcome the challenges we are going to face in the coming years .
This is the script we must follow in order to emerge from the crisis , and to ensure that our growth is intelligent , sustainable and integrated , as set forth in the Europe 2020 strategy .
If we agree that the value of the European Union is much more than the sum of the 27 Member States that comprise it , if we are in favour of high quality , responsible agriculture , if we want to achieve the Millennium Development Goals , if we want to help our Mediterranean neighbours in their transition towards democracy , if we want to keep investing in research and innovation , if we want to carry on fighting climate change and investing in education , training and Erasmus grants , if we still believe in the cohesion policy as a tool for sustainable development and solidarity between our countries , and if we still support , for example , trans-European energy and transport networks - in short , if we still want more Europe - then we must call for a bigger budget for the European Union .
That is why we warn in this report that without sufficient resources , we will not be able to achieve the objectives we have set ourselves .
We know that some members of the Council do not agree with increasing the budget - we have seen as much here .
They were not in favour in economic boom times either .
Now they say it is because of the crisis , but they wanted cuts when the current financial perspective was negotiated too .
That is why we are asking the Council , if it does not agree with this budget increase , to tell us which objectives it does not want to be met .
In this report , we do not only set out the policies we want to achieve .
We also show how to finance them and we put forward a discussion on own resources .
This discussion , designed to bring to an end the false debate of the net contributors , seeks funding without hand outs , funding without exceptions , funding that is fair .
We have put forward various options for doing this , but I have a preference for one of them , and Commissioner Lewandowski knows very well which one it is : it is the tax on financial transactions or , as it is known in many of our countries , the Robin Hood tax .
This tax would make it possible to raise between EUR 200 billion and EUR 300 billion .
It is a tax that penalises speculators and would force all those who have profited by gambling with our money to pay up .
It is a tax that would increase transparency and reduce financial speculation and , above all , a tax that would not affect citizens , because it would force those directly responsible for the crisis to pay for their excesses .
We are really only asking you for one thing : to set your sights higher .
We ask you to set your sights higher to ensure that the European project continues on track and does not become stalled , because that would cost us our future .
( DE ) Mr President , I was born into the European Union in 1975 and it has shaped my political life ever since .
That is why it pains me all the more to have to pour cold water on this matter .
When there is talk of increases , then discussions must lead to a consideration of the correct use of resources .
Although the report is ambitious in seeking to find the greatest possible majority support from the House , I believe it lacks ambition in the objectives and aims it seeks to achieve in its current form .
The agricultural and structural budgets are left untouched .
However , more money is being sought for research and development .
The only response that occurs to the House and to the report is more money , although there is no clear indication where this money is to come from .
We hear talk of the Union 's ' own resources ' , but there has been no definition of what these resources actually are .
If people were serious about wanting structural reforms , they could have taken up the suggestion made by David Cameron , for example , of going to the Council and saying : funding is to be frozen , but we demand that unused resources should be able to be carried over to the next financial year , so that we can continue to spend them on viable projects and to save money .
The future viability of the EU should not be measured in terms of decimal places .
To this extent , I am more than a little disappointed by the present report .

Mr President , this morning , Mr Daul came running to speak here in the plenary on the need for a bigger EU budget , but he was running so fast that he was running out of breath and had to stop speaking .
This reflects very well the debate on the multiannual budget .

The EU budget is fixed at about 1 % of EU GDP ; the Commission and Parliament say , ' that is not enough , we want more money ' .
Yet the EU is unable to spend the money available ; billions of euro in regional cohesion funds remain unspent .
Some money has to be returned to Member States .
So why do you need more money if you cannot spend the money you have ?


But then , here in this Parliament we have a couple of ' Pavlovs ' : Mr Schulz , Mr Daul , Mr Verhofstadt , all absent now - they have run away instead of speaking here to focus the budget on quality rather than quantity , for example , by limiting regional and cohesion funds to the poorer Member States , saving 30 % of those funds , and investing that money in innovation and future oriented policies .
But I am sure that the EU Pavlovs will yet again run into the brick wall of the EU Council later this year .
( FR ) Mr President , as has already been said , it is clear that for a variety of reasons , some similar , some different , but in all cases exacerbated by the crisis , national budgets are struggling .
In each of our countries , no matter what majority is in government , the budgetary situation needs to be addressed .
We have two options .
One is to all act alone , trying to reconcile spending and income , in some cases , according to what I have heard , worshiping austerity as an ends in its own right , making swingeing cuts to public spending and social benefits , thereby exacerbating the situation for citizens .
I would plead in favour of the second option , namely pooling our budgetary efforts , making budgetary solidarity work , playing the own resources card , not least through a tax on financial transactions .
That is the purpose of the budgetary complementarity that we want to achieve through this convention-style conference , a proposal that we made to the Council during the conciliation procedure and that we have reiterated in this report .
We need to work together - the European Union , national parliaments and governments - to find a way of pooling our spending and budgetary approaches .
We cannot have our cake and eat it : we cannot make cuts and , at the same time , invest in infrastructure .
It is not possible to contribute less but receive more .
I think that this convention-style model of dialogue between governments , the European Union , national parliaments and the European Parliament is the right way to rebuild confidence in Europe , both now and in the longer term .
( NL ) Mr President , this is a very bad report and one which deserves to be thrown in the bin straight away .
Right now , when people everywhere are facing incredibly painful austerity measures , it is too insane for words that we in the European Union should be proposing to spend even more money .
To think that we are behaving in that way when things could be so different : no more throwing money around , no funding for cycle paths and crêperies in a country like the Netherlands .
We should concentrate our Structural Funds on the poorest countries and only on innovative projects of pan-European significance in the rest of the Member States .
According to the report , everything should remain as it is : more money has been requested for the European Agricultural Fund for Rural Development , no reforms of the Structural Funds have been proposed , nowhere are there any concrete proposals for more efficiency .
This Parliament ought to be ashamed of itself , in particular , the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe and the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) .
While , in the Netherlands , nota bene , the Rutte cabinet is leaving the sick and the disabled out in the cold , the same groups in this House have a burning hole in their pockets .
Austerity champions at home , big spenders in Brussels .
This is an outrage !
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to emphasise several aspects of this important report , beginning with the European Union 's revenue system .
By now , it is clear that the current mechanism has too many inconsistencies , the most famous of which is the United Kingdom 's correction mechanism .
Various other corrections and compensations have since been added , making the EU revenue mechanism entirely inequitable and anything but transparent .
At this point , it would be better to move towards a direct revenue system based exclusively on the gross domestic product of the Member States , or towards a shared and unified form of revenue such as value added tax , for example .
Obviously , European citizens must not suffer any extra burdens , nor should Europe replace the tax policies of the Member States , which must remain autonomous and absolutely sovereign in this area .
The report sets out various priorities , some of which are important and others less so , but in any case , they are all very expensive .
We can raise resources by using instruments such as project bonds and Eurobonds , which must , however , be managed with the utmost rigour so as not to risk the creation of further debt , which would be dangerous .
We , as Members of the European Parliament , can make an immediate contribution to improving Europe 's finances .
We must , at long last , choose a single location for the work of Parliament , which would bring savings of tens of millions of euro each year .
This is not demagogy but simple ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
Mr President , the mocking of Her Majesty 's Government by Mr Verhofstadt when he shared with us his logic as to why Britain should hand over more money and more power to the EU was further evidence of the palpable disdain in which the UK , its national government and its citizens are held by some in this House .
What Mr Verhofstadt failed to mention is that other savings are available to the UK .
Businesses forced to spend GBP 30 million to comply with EU regulations could save this by taking back control from Europe .
UK fishermen would love to have the GBP 3.3 billion in their pockets : the value of the catch lost when the EU let other countries fish in their territorial waters .
Commissioner , you state that the European budget is not a duplication of a national budget .
However , it cannot be divorced from the realities of its citizens .
Currently , the UK contribution is GBP 6.4 billion , rising to over GBP 10 billion if the rebate goes .
It can only be met by raising taxes , cutting services , schools ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , there are five questions we need to ask ourselves :
The first is : what budget is required for the 2020 growth and employment strategy ?
Secondly : what budget is required by a currency union ?
Thirdly : what potential is open to us to make savings ?
Fourthly : what budget is required by the United States of Europe ?
Fifthly : what role is Europe 2020 to play ?
Do we want to play a role at all ?
We , the European Parliament , take our responsibilities seriously .
We deal in plain speaking .
In Austria , we have a saying : if you do not pay up , the band does not play .
We want to achieve our goals , meet our obligations , accept the challenges and keep our promises .
More functions , greater competitiveness , more sustainable growth , more jobs , more research and further integration cannot be achieved with less money , without a financial review , without an evaluation of existing disbursement of funds and without our own resources .
More Europe will also create a potential for savings in the Member States .
More Europe will also create more efficiency and is our response to globalisation , to the future and to sovereign debt .
What is it that we want ?
We do not want to freeze the budget .
Anyone seeking to freeze the budget will damage Europe and weaken our ability to fulfil our duties to our citizens .
We want to introduce a transaction levy as a resource of our own , accepting the challenges and adhering to the Treaty rather than burying our heads in the sand .
That is our strategy .
Let us really set the ball rolling and vote in favour of this report .
( SV ) Mr President , I have to say that in all my years in this Parliament , the work of the Special committee on the policy challenges and budgetary resources for a sustainable European Union after 2013 is the most pleasant and the most visionary , in short , the most enjoyable - it really is very fine work .
It includes everything that is necessary and positive for Europe 's future .
However , I am personally extremely concerned about what we did not do , and that is set priorities .
We have taken on board all of the new challenges , but we have also retained all of the old ones .
It will perhaps not be possible to deal with both .
We should have set priorities .
We should have been much more rigorous in setting priorities , but what is most worrying of all in this context is the fact that we have left the setting of priorities to the Council .
That does not bode well for the future , ladies and gentlemen .
Mr President , the public , the hardworking taxpayers across Europe who actually earn the money which so many in this place are so keen to spend , want Europe to do less and they want Europe to do it better .
They want a lean European budget which takes into account the fact that , whether we like it or not , we are living in an age of austerity .
They want Europe to focus on the very limited number of areas where Europe can actually add value , and leave the rest of the activities to our Member States .
Unfortunately , this report proposes none of these things .
Let us be clear : the suggestion of a 5 % increase is completely unacceptable and the idea of so-called own resources is equally unacceptable - it is just a power-grab by the EU .
The budget should be modernised , funds should be reallocated to programmes which actually deliver future benefits and not cover up past failures .
Financing of euro bail-outs should be left to those countries that actually wanted to join the euro in the first place .
Those of us who warned that it was a mistake should not be forced to contribute to it .
The committee had a chance to pursue many of these constructive and future-proof suggestions ; they rejected it .
They have done none of those things and the report should be rejected by this House .
( HU ) Mr President , the report we have in front of us is perhaps the most important one of this period .
The European Parliament is the first among the institutions to draft its thoughts about the next seven years , but without prejudice to the Commission 's right to submit proposals .
However , this is the only possibility to avoid a scandal about our right to consent that would oblige us to reject the proposal of the Council .
Thus , all of our partners know what the European Parliament wants and they can incorporate that into their ideas as far as possible .
To my dear fellow Members , may I recommend two documents that are worth reading before you turn your thoughts to rude criticism : the Treaty of Lisbon and the report itself .
Supporting own resources is no more , no less than what is enshrined in the Treaty of Lisbon .
I consider the message that the European budget needs a slight increase to be very important .
Slight in a sense that this 5 % will also be modified by inflation , which means that we are not talking about an abnormal increase .
It is not about increasing the expenditure on agriculture or cohesion , but about the fact that these cannot be decreased .
Miklós Zrínyi , a writer of dual Croatian-Hungarian origin who lived in the 1600s said - in connection with the Turks at that time - ' Do not hurt the Hungarians ! '
Quoting his words I say : Do not hurt the agricultural policy ; do not hurt the cohesion policy ; because those who hurt these policies not only hurt the Hungarians , the Romanians , the Slovaks , but all citizens of the European nations .
The lesser the voters ' support behind a politician , the more he refers to citizens .
I believe that we , who enjoy the support of a greater political force , likewise represent citizens ' interests , and this is the reason why we say : do not hurt the agricultural policy and cohesion !
Mr President , I would like to thank the rapporteur and the Chair for the work they have done on this report .
The debate today on the report highlights that there will be a fight in the Council on a number of issues , including the overall increase , the UK rebate and own resources .
To be fair , apart from the issue of the UK rebate where UK Members will be in a minority of one , I think the Parliament has tried to reach some compromises .
When you have long , complicated and important reports like this , compromise is almost inevitable , but I do welcome some of the compromises .
I welcome the compromise on the duration and the structure of the next financial perspective .
I also welcome the compromise on cohesion policy .
I believe that cohesion policy is vital if we are to achieve jobs and growth in the EU post-2013 .
Therefore , for cohesion policy , we need adequate funding at least at the level we have now , if not more into the future .
The next financial perspective must be about jobs and growth if it is to be relevant to citizens .
Therefore , as well as a strong cohesion policy , we also need policies for funding research and development in our universities and SMEs .
FP8 therefore needs adequate funding for the future .
We also need to invest in our infrastructure in the European Union - infrastructure like transport , energy and improving broadband in many rural areas - and our rural areas themselves should not be forgotten .
To deliver all these policies on jobs and growth , we need delivery mechanisms .
We also need partners .
( The President cut off the speaker )
( FI ) Mr President , Commissioner , firstly , I wish to congratulate the rapporteur for an excellent report and for his excellent work on the special committee on the policy challenges and budgetary resources for a sustainable European Union after 2013 .
One of the main objectives of future financial frameworks is to establish instruments to take the EU 2020 strategy to the grassroots level .
There is a realisation in this report that , without a cohesion and agricultural policy that is robust and strong in terms of its budget , this objective will not succeed .
Cohesion policy , for example , is not the only tangible instrument that will enable us to develop innovations and create jobs and growth .
We need reform , but we can also implement it within these policy sectors .
Consequently , I appeal to you , Commissioner , to ensure that , in the forthcoming financial period , both regional policy and agricultural policy maintain their existing budget levels , in accordance with Parliament 's opinion .
I am , moreover , glad that the report also gives consideration to regions where conditions are especially tough , such as the sparsely populated areas of the north .
They will also need their own additional budgets in the forthcoming financial period
( NL ) Mr President , the key word for Europe is ' confidence ' .
The European institutions in general , and the European Parliament in particular , need to restore confidence among the citizens .
How can that be achieved ?
Firstly , not with more Europe or more money for Europe , but with a better Europe , a Europe with an added value , and Europe should not interfere with matters , such as sport or tourism , which Member States can deal with perfectly well on their own .
Secondly , commit the cohesion fund to the genuinely poor regions in Europe .
We still have fifty percent going to rich Member States , such as Germany and France .
This is unacceptable .
If we sort this out , we will be able to rein in the unnecessary throwing around of money and still come out with a net profit .
Thirdly , investment in future-proof agriculture and industry .
The Polledo report has been a failure .
Everything and more has been chucked into one big melting pot and our citizens are expected to digest this gunge .
Bon appetit , but be careful you do not choke on it .
( PT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would congratulate the rapporteur on the excellent work he has done , which has resulted in a report that enables a good start to be made on building a Multiannual Financial Framework ( MFF ) , and that constitutes a challenge for the Commission and the Council .
This is an ambitious report , whilst simultaneously being a realistic report .
I hope that all the institutions have drawn the correct conclusions from the financial , economic and social crisis that is slow to loosen its grip on us .
One conclusion is clear to me : only a united Europe that shows solidarity and strengthened , harmonised and convergent economic governance will be up to the task of successfully confronting the political challenges we have before us .
We need more and better Europe .
We need to give priority to the Community method rather than the intergovernmental method .
We need to increase the budget .
The Europe 2020 strategy has been agreed , its priorities are clear and its objectives are measurable .
It will be the guide for the next financial perspectives .
However , this strategy will only be successful if there is a budget corresponding to its activities ; to its objectives .
As such , the MFF needs to have the financial backing to match the ambition and commitment of the Europe 2020 strategy .
Cohesion policy is also the result of the solidarity principle .
It is important that this cohesion be economic , social and territorial , and that it act as a pull on the poorer regions .
I therefore believe it essential that funding for cohesion policy at least remain at the same levels , along with funding for the common agricultural policy ( CAP ) .
It is also important to make progress towards an MFF , more than 80 % of whose funds do not come from national budgets .
( HU ) Mr President , the crisis compels us to review both national and European Union budgets from the aspect of efficiency and to see how they serve our goals , and how much added value , European added value , they bring to this effect .
I would like to talk about a field that has not been mentioned so far today , namely , cooperation in the field of justice and home affairs , which was elevated from the competence of Member States to EU policy level by the Treaty of Lisbon .
Our desire to achieve great improvement in this field must be reflected in the subsequent budget period .
We definitely have to provide funds for the Stockholm programme , which is a rather ambitious programme .
Europe is in need of well-educated immigrants who reach Europe in compliance with the regulations , and of a common migration policy with adequate resources .
The events in North Africa have drawn attention once again to the importance of a common European immigration policy , and have shown the need for integration supported by resources and for European solidarity .
The last few months have also highlighted the fact that protection of our common values , non-discrimination and human rights also need protection and resources , that we need to simplify the use of resources for the management of extraordinary situations , and that we need our own resources to create a better , stronger and more extensive Europe in the coming period .
Mr President , congratulations to the rapporteur for all the work he has done .
It is tremendous in terms of the achievement of trying to get a consensus .
There are three areas for amendment which I would plead in favour of .
Firstly , in the longer term , we need a five-year financial perspective .
If it is the case that 2020 is a seven-year dimension , we should have an absolute condition that the next one will be for a five-year period .
Secondly , there is insufficient work done on looking at how we get a statement of assurance for expenditure .
Those who are arguing for more money at a European level would have a stronger case if we knew that we had an absolute cast-iron understanding of where the money actually goes .
Last but not least , in reply to Mr Verhofstadt , it is unwise to single out any one Member State when there are a number of Member States which are net contributors to the budget .
I would urge very strongly that we should have a limit on the net contribution of Member States as a percentage of GDP because , looking forward , it is unrealistic to think you can get Member States ' approval when their net contributions are doubling at a time of significant austerity .
( DE ) Mr President , the 5 % increase in the budget is explained by spending on the External Action Service , border protection , the war on terrorism , an increase in development aid , support for research and transnational infrastructure .
Overall , this request from Parliament is absolutely justified .
However , Parliament is also passing up an opportunity with the Garriga Polledo report .
We would have more credibility if we were to show where Europe can be more efficient and where money can be saved .
This certainly includes the large number of agencies that enjoy an extremely expensive autonomous existence , and agriculture , where some Member States have still not succeeded in introducing a more market-appropriate flat-rate acreage payment scheme .
As the rapporteur for the future of structural policy , I would also say that European cohesion policy should also be included here .
Happily , many regions have succeeded in exceeding the threshold for the maximum funding of 75 % .
However , if there is less poverty in the various regions of Europe , then European solidarity may also recede .
The money saved could be better invested in European added value , for example , in a smart link between Structural Funds and transnational networks in the border regions .
This is currently under discussion by the Committee on Regional Development , as is a proposal for an intermediate category of 75 to 90 % GDP , as suggested in the Garriga Polledo report .
Perhaps Mrs Krehl was dreaming if she believed that we had already agreed on a compromise in the Committee on Regional Development .
I do not believe that the temporary Special committee on the policy challenges and budgetary resources for a sustainable European Union after 2013 is the right body to make recommendations for such an intermediate category .
We are making things too easy for ourselves if we simply also define the more prosperous regions as requiring particular support .
The way I see it , this is an invitation to waste money .
We are leaving the tried and tested phasing-out / phasing-in system but are no longer offering any incentive .
We are guaranteeing a permanent subsidy for all regions almost up to a level of average economic strength .
There can be no future for a system like this in European regional policy .
We therefore need to drop paragraph 73 from the report .
Otherwise , the report is acceptable .
( The speaker agreed to take a blue-card question under Rule 149 ( 8 ) )

( DE ) Mr President , Mr Pieper , I am surprised to hear you say that Mrs Krehl must be dreaming .
A large majority voted in favour of the intermediate goal when the vote was held in the Committee on Regional Development .
I believe that we will get the backing of the majority here , too , because there is majority support for the solidarity of the regions .
That is why we need this intermediate goal .
I should be interested to know why you refer to this majority as a dream .
Mr Pieper , can you explain why it is a dream ?
( DE ) Mr President , Mrs Schroedter , this is your perception of the issue .
We in the Committee on Regional Development have a different proposal from the one contained in the Garriga Polledo report .
That is my first point .
My second point is that significant fundamental resistance to the intermediate category still exists within the political groupings .
You are well aware of this .
That is why I find your question surprising .
I think that you are dreaming when you simply claim that we have come up with compromises and that these are unambiguous .
Anyway , it is a matter for the Committee on Regional Development to prepare the matter for debate in plenary .
I am very surprised by your extremely optimistic view that our work is complete .
( FR ) Mr President , the debate on the European Union 's financial perspective raises questions about the European project , its scope and its ambition .
This report is laudable because it seeks to mobilise the Union 's budgetary resources in order to comply with the Europe 2020 strategy .
This puts it at odds with the narrow vision of most Member States .
Whereas Member States see Europe in terms of their financial contribution , which they want to see reduced , and the financial returns , which they want to see increased , this report argues in favour of strong and integrated Community policies , be they long-established policies or new competences under the Treaty of Lisbon .
Consequently , this own-initiative report by Parliament should form the basis for future discussions , even if , in my view , it does err on the side of consensus and caution .
It is true that a 5 % increase in the European budget would be better than the Member States ' budgetary plans for 2012 .
However , the crux of the matter - and probably the stumbling block - will be agreeing a figure that tallies with the policies described in the report .
We are aware of the downsides of austerity policies : how they affect employment and have left growing numbers of citizens despairing .
We have a responsibility to finance countercyclical policies , not least through a strong cohesion policy , Mr Pieper , which promotes public investment and employment in all European regions .
I would like to stress the importance of creating an intermediate regions category to ensure that the allocation of Structural Funds accurately reflects economic and social realities in the regions .
Let me conclude by saying that we need to impose a tax on financial speculation , which would increase our citizens ' support for a well-financed Europe .
Mr President , first of all , I would like to congratulate the rapporteur for highlighting the number of challenges in front of us .
I also welcome the very clear message in the report calling for a significant increase in research and science because that is one of the priorities we need to have .
I would like to say - and I say this to the Commission - that politics and leadership are about priorities .
Without priorities , there is no leadership .
There are always those tasks and challenges that are more important than others .
That is the case with the budget of the European Union as well as in Member States .
We need to further increase research and science , but we also need to increase the amount of science and research in regional funding .
We need to take into consideration the development of the agricultural markets and decrease the spending there .
But let us remember that we need to set priorities at all levels , at the European level as well as in Member States .
I must say that I dislike EU-bashing or Brussels-bashing , but I also dislike Member States-bashing , because it diminishes the importance of the spending we have in the Member States : health care , social security , pensions , education .
This is not a conflict between the EU and the Member States .
This is an ongoing struggle for leadership and priorities .
If we do not dare to set those priorities , we do not show leadership .
I must say that if we cannot understand the tough situation Member States are in today , we do not understand the reality for citizens .
We need to set priorities and not solve problems just by increasing budgets .
So I would ask the Commissioner to show leadership , to be courageous , and to remember that research and science , infrastructure ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , we are about to vote on a highly important strategic document that provides a solid framework of reference for financial perspectives after 2013 .
It begins with the request for coherence between objectives and instruments , and between the new role that the European institutions must perform - in the light of the Treaty of Lisbon and the recession - and the resources that , together , we decide to invest .
Such coherence also implies a serious response to the demand for innovation from the public , from the recipients of EU policies , and from Europe 's social groups and industries .
We did the same for cohesion , which is a crucial issue for deciding what we want the European Union to be in the coming years .
Experience shows that cohesion is now a vital nexus of the European project , and an important asset for everyone to safeguard , protect and renew .
On this front , the effort made on the idea of introducing an intermediate category of regions is particularly important , above all , because in a number of cases , the years of recession that we are emerging from have intensified internal divisions , further increasing the importance of effective and adequate support for less developed regions in Europe , combating wastage and bringing development policy sharply into focus .
However , I maintain that the challenge of intermediate categories and the safeguard clause is one that we must take on in order to begin a new phase in Europe 's cohesion policy and also to realise , within the cohesion policy , the more balanced and sustainable development that we want to assure for Europe over the coming years .
( FR ) Mr President , the 500 million citizens of the European Union currently make up over 8 % of the world 's population .
By 2050 , that figure will be 5 % or 6 % .
In 2100 , we will make up 3 % of that population .
This throng of Europeans continues to maintain , largely through national budgets , 2 000 embassies , 27 armies , 50 joint forces and more .
I believe China is currently employing extra deputy ministers just to receive all the mighty European ministers who arrive to petition Beijing for favours and bilateral agreements .
All of this is starting to look ridiculous on the world stage .
Dividing up 8 % of the world 's population between 30 sovereign budgetary policies is madness .
Essentially , that sovereignty remains absolute .
Europe manages 2.5 % or one-fortieth of total budgetary expenditure in Europe .
The Member States ' contributions make up one-fortieth of their national spending .
Yet apparently , even that is too much .
Let us now consider the question of own resources or maybe another time .
Let us stop carping about the 2.5 % of public spending with which we are supposed to maintain the whole apparatus required to implement the 2020 strategy and to fulfil all the responsibilities accorded to us under the Treaty of Lisbon .
We did not devise the strategy and competences : it was the Member States who did that .
In view of these realities , Mr Garriga Polledo 's report is modest .
Yet there are those who want to restrict us yet further and who would deem the report ambitious .
That is why this House should adopt the report .
( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , this report is vital to the future of the European project , which should involve solidarity and ambitious aims , particularly in view of the budgetary crises that Member States are currently struggling with .
Taking an ultra-liberal approach , the majority of Heads of State or Government in the Council are choosing to keep slashing budgets wildly and are willing to sacrifice investment in key forward-looking policies such as those funded by the European budget .
A budget freeze will dent growth , no matter what other Members might say .
An increase of at least 5 % , as recommended in this consensus report , is the minimum if we are to tackle the challenges and stand together .
European solidarity includes the need to finance the 2020 strategy , not least its social objectives , which include combating poverty .
The report has also persuaded me that European solidarity should be strengthened by the creation of intermediate regions in order to ensure that the cohesion policy provides fair coverage for the whole of Europe .
Finally , another example is the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund , which offers real solidarity for European workers .
The report recognises the valuable role played by this Fund .
The increase in the Multiannual Financial Framework is necessary .
It should not be seen as a burden on Member States because the European budget provides added value and will , in future , include a tax on financial transactions .
( EL ) Mr President , the Treaty of Lisbon created new fields of competence and strengthened Union policies , as reflected in the new Multiannual Financial Framework for the period 2013 to 2020 .
I congratulate the rapporteur , Mr Garriga , on his integrated report , which sets out the political priorities of a different Europe from the Europe we know .
Given the major internal challenges faced by the Union and its citizens and bearing in mind its enhanced international character , we realise that the main objective of its policy must be to reduce the existing social , economic and territorial inequalities .
A planned and successful cohesion policy constitutes per se European added value and will surely prove to be to the benefit of all the Member States of the Union .
The new programme and the new seven-year framework are based on actions in the EU 2020 strategy and are designed to help Europe to recover from the crisis , by promoting smart , sustainable and inclusive growth .
The political priorities and objectives set are to promote employment , to strengthen innovation , research and growth , to address climate change , to improve education levels , to achieve social integration and to combat poverty , alongside policies on immigration and to safeguard resources to develop inaccessible and border areas .
The Union budget is the main mechanism for activating solidarity between the Member States and is a strong tool for a reform that could mobilise additional private and public resources to support investments that will act as a catalyst in terms of the exponential effect of spending by the Union .
The European budget must be increased and must be based on real own resources if we want a strong Europe for its citizens and towards the rest of the world .
The Union budget is a tool for global and integrated development at a time when the Member States alone cannot ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
( FR ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , it is often said that money forms the sinews of war .
We must remember that money also forms the backbone of a peace project like the European Union .
If Europe really intends to implement the policies enshrined in the Treaties , including the new policies found in the Treaty of Lisbon , it needs the financial wherewithal to realise those aims .
Consequently , I am in favour of establishing own resources and a tax on financial transactions .
The necessary increase in the European budget must go hand in hand with significant savings from optimising our spending .
For example , let us create a real Common Foreign and Security Policy to give Europe more influence on the world stage , but also in order to make the best use of public money .
The report by Mr Garriga Polledo is crucial , almost a complete recast : it recommends a very strong political and financial framework for the European Union .
What is more , two key Union policies are given their rightful place .
On the common agricultural policy ( CAP ) , which is crucial for food security and self-sufficiency , the report advocates renewing the CAP budget .
On the cohesion policy , which is the financial instrument used to create regional solidarity and encourage regional economic development , the report proposes enhancing its objectives by creating a category for intermediate regions so that regions at the same developmental level can benefit ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
Mr President , I would like to say a few words on the need to move towards own resources reform .
I believe that the dominating role of GNI-based revenue makes a decision on the EU budget over-politicised and less efficiency-oriented .
It facilitates demands to freeze or to reduce EU spending .
It leads to the logic expressed in the context of the 2011 budget negotiations that if we cut our national budgets due to the crisis , we should apply the same approach to the EU budget .
It is , however , not at all obvious that with an additional own resource that would reduce the dependence on GNI , we can expect a revolution in EU capacities to finance growth and structural change .
There is always a risk that the same coalition that adopts the budgetary decision in the Council can also adopt the same decision in the European Parliament .
If we care for Europe , we should move away from responding to the expectations of Finance Ministers and move towards citizens ' expectations .
The success of a national politician returning home from Brussels negotiations should not be based on the message that the government will pay less to the EU budget but , for example , on the message that the EU will help to make small companies fund innovation projects .
It is clear that the way EU costs are financed should be fully transparent .
This could be easier to achieve with only one tax , but it is also feasible to build the revenue on a group of taxes that meet criteria on transparency , equity , visibility , efficiency and sufficient harmonisation .
( PT ) Mr President , Commissioner , I will begin by congratulating the rapporteur on his excellent work .
I welcome the fact that the priorities put forward in this report are in line with the Europe 2020 strategy and make growth central to European policy .
We need more and better Europe .
As such , we should promote the areas that contribute most to competitiveness , like research , innovation and energy .
We therefore need to significantly increase financing of science and innovation , so as to promote scientific excellence throughout Europe .
It is also important to strengthen the European system for financing science so as to realise the objective of investing 3 % of gross domestic product ( GDP ) .
The new budget should also promote increased energy efficiency and support the construction of future infrastructure , energy infrastructure in particular , thereby creating the necessary conditions for European industry to be competitive .
There is a need to increase the role of industry , in particular , that of small and medium-sized enterprises ( SMEs ) , so contributing to reinforcing Europe 's position of leadership in a globalised world .

( IT ) Mr President , I should like to congratulate the rapporteur , Mr Garriga Polledo , for his excellent work throughout the year , which has received broad political backing .
I welcome the message that this report has managed to get across : the solution to the crisis is the assertion of the Union 's status as a global player .
The future financial framework mirrors the goals set out in the Europe 2020 strategy and is grounded firmly within the Treaty of Lisbon .
However , suitable funding is required for the Union 's priorities to be credible .
The development of energy and transport infrastructure , investment in research and development , learning and youth policy must find fresh impetus in the Union 's future budgets , while the fundamental pillars of the cohesion policy and the agricultural policy should continue to receive the current amount of funding .
Europe and its big projects clash with budgetary constraints at national level , meaning that greater involvement of the private sector through project bonds or public / private partnerships is the key to raising competitiveness and growth .
Together with the rest of the Italian delegation , I am concerned about the proposals to add these so-called ' intermediate categories ' to the regional policy , as this risks harming the weakest regions of the Union .
I will conclude by asserting that financing the Union entirely through a system based on own resources is the only way to ensure the future and the development of the European Union .
( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the reform of the Staff Regulations is to be presented together with the MFF package .
This question of how the EU is actually administered is dealt with very succinctly in paragraphs 125 and 126 of the Garriga Polledo report .
Commissioner , I would ask you to be ambitious when presenting the Staff Regulations .
After all , the question of what we do , which has been discussed in detail here , is at least as important as the question of how we do it .
The question is what role will the European Commission play in future when implementing all the points in the 2020 programme we have presented today .
I would like to see the Commission choose a stronger role for itself , rather than delegating all the tasks to others .
That is why it is important , in the context of the Staff Regulations reform , that vacancies should be created for these new tasks , so that the Commission itself can also get involved .
We have an enormous number of free days .
The Commission 's officials have up to 13 weeks paid leave .
Commissioner , I would suggest that you take some of these free days and reallocate them to the implementation of the budget , so that we can actually achieve the political goals we want to achieve .
I would ask that we should also be provided with an EU 2020 strategy for the administration of the EU .
This would require action not only from you , but also from the entire college and the President of the Commission .

( PL ) Mr President , I would like to congratulate Mr Garriga Polledo on having drafted such an excellent report on the Multiannual Financial Framework .
The report gained very strong support within the Special committee on the policy challenges and budgetary resources for a sustainable European Union after 2013 .
I hope that the report will serve as a key foundation for negotiations on the new multiannual European Union budget , which will commence shortly .
I am very pleased that MEPs have decided to support the amendment I tabled regarding the strengthening of policies on youth .
At a time when young Europeans are some of the main victims of the economic crisis , we should support all initiatives aimed at improving the situation of young people and , in particular , those aimed at improving access to education and their professional situation .
Programmes such as ' Youth in Action ' and ' Lifelong Learning ' , which have a very low cost per beneficiary and are extremely effective , should therefore be maintained as a separate element of future multiannual financial frameworks , and these programmes also deserve significantly more funding .
At the same time , I would like to commend the proposal to maintain a high level of funding for cohesion policy .
Cohesion policy not only plays a key role in achieving the objectives of the Europe 2020 strategy ; its primary task is to strengthen European integration and solidarity by reducing the social , economic and territorial differences that still unfortunately exist within the European Union .
( RO ) Mr President , the rapporteur started his presentation with a very important sentence , saying that we need to combine traditional European Union policies with our new priorities .
Neither one nor the other can operate without each other .
In this context , I would like to welcome the vision of the common agricultural policy outlined in the report .
I will remind you , if I may , of some of the important ideas , the main one being maintaining the level of the CAP budget during the forthcoming financial programming period .
The traditional role of European agriculture , along with the new ambitions we are aspiring to , fully justifies maintaining the level of this budget .
Secondly , the need to maintain a CAP system based on two pillars , while promoting rural areas as part of the second pillar , is closely linked to the Europe 2020 strategy objectives .
One final point is the need for a reformed CAP in the future , aimed at using the budget more effectively , based on a fair distribution of payments as one of the options for achieving this .
( LT ) Mr President , first of all , I would like to thank all the rapporteurs for the tremendous work they have done .
Today , we have a clear parliament position on what we and our citizens expect from the forthcoming financial programming period .
We all understand that we will have to fundamentally change the direction of current policy and this is reflected clearly in the Europe 2020 strategy .
We have to develop a safe single European energy market , ensure that the whole of Europe is connected through transport networks and eradicate the disparities that still exist among the various European Union regions .
We must completely review the common agricultural policy , which must guarantee a fair and uniform system of direct payments , and many other important areas , without which we will be unable to create a competitive and strong Europe .
Of course , this will require major investment , particularly in research .
Therefore , it is necessary to look for new financial instruments , such as the introduction of a tax on financial transactions , etc .
I believe that ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
( NL ) Mr President , one of the key issues that has emerged out of this debate is : ' What exactly is European added value ? '
I hope that the Commission , when it comes up with its proposals at the end of this month , will give a clear explanation as to why certain budget headings have a clear added value .
It seems to me that it is precisely that which we need to know , because then we will be able to justify what we are voting for .
Secondly , the debate will also be strongly influenced by the debates on own resources .
One of the issues which has poisoned the debate is the decision on the British rebate taken in 1984 .
How has it been able to continue for so long ?
I think that either the British Government should not be entitled to any rebate at all or that other countries which find themselves in a similar situation to that which Great Britain was in in 1984 should be treated the same .
I hope that the Commission proposals will , in fact , move in this direction .
( ES ) Mr President , this obsession with focusing only on the quantity of the cuts to be made and not on how or what to cut , and even less on how to increase revenue , is already a cause for concern .
Firstly , more Europe means a better Europe insofar as it means less economic power for the Member States .
Secondly , we must , of course , also review expenses .
However we must be careful about where we do so : one proposal would be to reduce military spending ; another would be to reduce the two European Parliament sites to a single one .
We believe that these are the most important suggestions .
Thirdly , what most concerned me was seeing Mr Lewandowski smiling , in what I believe to be a worrying way , when the subject of the tax on financial transactions was mentioned .
It worried me , and I would ask him how it could be so bad , so detrimental , to ask those who have become rich by speculating to pay for the crisis instead of asking those who are least to blame for it to do so , and not do as you did yesterday , calling for Spain to reduce social spending through a reduction in expenditure on ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
( LV ) Mr President , I should like to remind fellow Members of one thing - when approving the budget , we must remember that among residents of Europe , scepticism is growing regarding what we do here .
In this regard , it seems to me that the budget is not sufficiently coordinated with the ambitious goals included in the EU 2020 programme .
I also have a question : you , Commissioner , promised Latvian farmers that direct payments would be evened out with this budget .
However , if it is approved as it stands now , it will be difficult for you to keep your promise .
I want all that we talk about and that we discuss to correspond also with the interests of our constituents .
Mr President , I thought the EU could not get any worse and then I came across this report .
It starts with a hefty helping of self-delusion : ' never have Europeans been more demanding of the EU ' .
Well , increasing numbers of British people are demanding that we come out of it .
Perhaps that is what they mean .
It dismisses utterly the idea of freezing the budget after 2013 and insists that even an increase of 5 % would allow only a limited contribution to the EU 's objectives .
Well , we must be thankful for small mercies .
Tucked away in the middle of paragraph 166 is a call for an end to rebates .
This is the device by which the United Kingdom pays only an unacceptable net contribution instead of an outrageous net contribution .
Insisting that the UK should pay over its hard-earned money is bad enough , but paragraph 169 suggests that the EU should have the power to levy its own taxes without our consent and without our control .
That is simply unacceptable .
( PL ) Mr President , we have achieved an important consensus .
The report that has been presented is a necessary continuation of what has gone before , while also proposing the expected changes .
Stability is a characteristic feature of EU policies , hence , the proposal to maintain the current budget for cohesion policy and the common agricultural policy .
Levelling the playing field in terms of development contributes significantly to strengthening the common market , which yields positive outcomes for all EU Member States .
The common agricultural policy benefits every consumer in the EU .
It is worth bearing in mind that farmers have very low incomes , in spite of the support they receive from the European budget .
The new tasks with which agriculture has been faced in respect of the environment , the climate , animal welfare and unrealistic WTO negotiations mean additional costs for farmers .
Who will pay ?
The changes that we expect include an increase in funding for sustainable and smart development , and an emphasis on innovation , scientific research and education .
( The President cut off the speaker )
( EL ) Mr President , Commissioner , Parliament is sending a clear message today , both to the European Commission and to the prime ministers of the European Union , for a budget up to 2020 which is commensurate with its responsibilities and public expectations .
As far as cohesion policy is concerned , the message is clear .
' Yes ' to a cohesion policy with sufficient financing to make a decisive contribution to development , to new jobs and to innovation .
' Yes ' to an independent cohesion policy .
' Yes ' to coordination at all policy making levels , from strategic planning through to implementation .
' Yes ' to the creation of an intermediate category of support for the regions .
' Yes ' to special measures for island and mountainous areas in Europe .
However , there are also two clear and important ' no 's ' .
' No ' to any splitting of this policy in different sectors and , finally , ' no ' to the imposition of sanctions in connection with the Stability and Growth Pact .
That concludes the ' catch the eye ' procedure and I apologise to the 11 or 12 Members who were on the list and have been unable to speak , but clearly there is no time for their speeches .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , I have already used up my speaking time so I shall make just two short remarks .
First , in the present international context of austerity , the European budget , which is without deficit , cannot be blamed for the mismanagement of national finances .
It can , however , help create jobs and growth because it is about investment .
In this , it differs from national budgets , which are mainly about social transfers .
Second , as regards promises to the farmers in Europe , gradual convergence is realistic .
A flat rate is not feasible at the moment , and I believe it will remain that way in the coming years .
Finally , on behalf of the Commission , I expect the forthcoming vote to reflect the broad consensus in this Chamber , making the voice of the European Parliament strong and influential .
We will end the debate with a speech from Mr Garriga Polledo as rapporteur , whom I wholeheartedly congratulate on his excellent work on this subject .
Mr President , I firstly want to thank the national delegations , who I understand have resisted pressure in their Member States and will vote for this report .
I feel that this is not a debate on budget volume , but rather on the supremacy of the Community method , and I think that those who have focused this debate on efforts to reduce the Union budget have made a mistake .
They want new priorities and a reduced budget ; I say to them that going down this route will mean that they end up with a reduced budget and fewer priorities .
I certainly do not understand how they can sit in this hemicycle and defend an intergovernmental approach .
Leave that step to the Council ; you should defend a European Union , with its policies , priorities , responsibilities , and an adequate budget .
We do not want an increase of 5 % in European public spending ; instead , we are seeking to alleviate national budgetary burdens and gather certain transnational investments into the EU budget , where they can be more efficiently utilised .
That is the European added value that all groups in this Chamber accepted in the Policy Challenges ( SURE ) Committee this year .
I think this is certainly a far-reaching proposal ; it is an ambitious proposal and requires important decisions to be made in the Member States , and we would ask them to rise to the challenge it entails .
I want to acknowledge the constructiveness of the proposals and the debate , which I feel has been sufficiently vibrant and has fully expressed the mosaic of viewpoints which unite the European Parliament .
I think that we come out of this debate , in any case , in a much richer position as a House and with a much improved political profile .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place today at 12 : 00 .
( The sitting was suspended for a few moments )
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
Due to the current crisis and the drastic public spending restrictions , Member States are finding it increasingly difficult to record economic growth .
I must stress the need for the EU to respond to demographic challenges .
The decline in the proportion of the working population , combined with the rise in the proportion of people in retirement will put a strain on social protection systems .
I support the idea that all the funding provided by the EU should help improve the general state of the European environment .
Consequently , the positive and negative impact on the climate and environment and the use of EU funds should be analysed at every level .
Investments at EU level can achieve considerably greater savings at national level , especially in the areas where the EU unquestionably provides greater added value than national budgets .
The continuing debate on the forthcoming programming period shows us that it will be necessary to focus to a greater extent this time on a more comprehensive approach to this primary economic instrument for EU policies .
The global financial crisis and the intense global competitive pressures from the economic tigers of China and India show us that the Multiannual Financial Framework ( MFF ) will have to be set up in such a way that it corresponds to the main objectives of the 2020 agenda .
The rapporteur 's idea of merging all policies relating to the 2020 agenda into the single area of the MFF looks extremely bold .
The rapporteur is quite right to propose a legally binding review of the limits in individual areas half way through the programming period .
Also of interest is the idea of bringing the timing of the MMF into line with the political cycles of EU bodies , thereby increasing democratic control and accountability .
The rapporteur 's idea that we must consider reforming EU revenues is undoubtedly correct in principle .
It is also entirely appropriate to move across gradually to a system of own resources for the EU , thereby replacing the current system of Member State contributions , as this leads to comparisons of the balance between the EU and Member States , causing the general public to draw the wrong conclusions over the meaning of EU membership , which is an entirely mistaken conclusion given the current interconnectedness of economies and policies .
Mr Garriga Polledo 's report sets out to define the European Parliament 's political priorities for the Multiannual Financial Framework for the period after 2013 , both in terms of legislation and the budget .
Two elements in particular caught my eye : firstly , that cohesion for growth and employment is a political priority .
I fully support the creation of an intermediate region category .
This would apply to all regions where GDP per capita falls between 75 % and 90 % of EU GDP .
This would serve to create a better balance between regions .
The proposal puts into practice the principle of territorial cohesion as set out in Article 174 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union .
On the subject of the financial perspectives , I am in favour of taxing financial transactions so as to build up own resources for the European Union .
in writing . - I want to draw attention to the proposal in this report for a financial transaction tax ( FTT ) .
A financial transaction tax could deal with two problems at once - how to finance ever-growing demands to put new EU policies in place , and how to make the financial sector contribute to the resolution of the economic crisis that it helped to cause .
The tax revenues could moderate payments EU Member States currently make to the EU budget .
At the same time , they will allow the smooth development of policies to safeguard the economic future of Europe .
We would have the resources for investment in research and development , fighting climate change and in building solidarity between the regions of the EU .
Europe should lead the world by levying this tax within its borders and campaigning for it to be introduced in the rest of the world .
I urge the European Commission to act promptly on foot of this report and meet the demands of this democratically elected Parliament to bring forward appropriate measures .
Let us look at the current Multiannual Financial Framework ( MFF ) .
The EU 's expansion to 12 new countries , generally with lower levels of development than the average for the 15 previous Member States , has brought undeniable challenges and demands in terms of realising the principle of economic and social cohesion .
However , what we have seen is a relative cut in the Structural Funds from 0.42 % to 0.37 % of EU gross national income ( GNI ) .
In other words : they have been cut in relative terms at the time they were most needed .
The results are plain to see : instead of the promised convergence , what we have is a visible divergence , exacerbated by the effects of the economic and social crisis , and by the functioning and development of instruments like the Single Market , to the benefit of some and to the clear detriment of others .
This is the MFF now serving as a benchmark for the debate on the financial perspectives 2013-2020 , with the proposal being , essentially , to maintain it .
The 5 % increase will not raise the EU budget substantially above 1 % of Union GNI .
Once again , this is threatening the heralded principle of cohesion .
This is made even worse by the fact that available resources are now channelled into other purposes - included , nonetheless , in the Treaties : militarism and overseas intervention , amongst others - that make this principle even more secondary in nature .
Although there were grounds for freezing EU expenditure during the economic crisis , we cannot use the same arguments that we did two years ago when considering the Multiannual Financial Framework today .
Instead , we must ask ourselves questions regarding the principles governing the EU 's functioning in the next seven-year period : is it to be an EU based on solidarity , which fulfils its obligations and establishes an innovative economy and a common foreign policy in line with the Treaty of Lisbon ?
Or is it instead to be an EU which did admittedly include ambitious objectives in the Treaty , but which everyone knows was only playing make-believe ?
I am a staunch advocate of the former , and I support the rapporteur 's opinion as regards the need to increase funding in the next Multiannual Financial Framework by 5 % compared to 2013 levels .
This change would bring us closer to achieving the ambitious goals enshrined in the Treaty , and a 5 % increase in expenditure would actually mean a very small increase , since inflation currently stands at 3.2 % .
Furthermore , this insignificant increase in the EU budget will benefit the poorest regions , which gain most from EU assistance granted in order to ensure that differences in development are overcome .
I hope that the next Presidency , which will be held by Poland , will make it a priority to reconcile the positions of the ' net payers ' , such as Germany , France and the United Kingdom , with Parliament 's position , as set out in the ambitious Garriga Polledo report .
In the past , MEPs had only limited influence in talks on the Multiannual Financial Framework ( MFF ) of the Union .
The fundamental change ushered in by the Treaty of Lisbon applies precisely to this long-term programming of the budget , which must be compiled afresh by the Council after approval by the European Parliament .
This was the reason for establishing the special committee on the policy challenges and budgetary resources for a sustainable European Union after 2013 ( SURE ) , which defines in its report the political priorities of the European Parliament ahead of the start of talks on the next MFF following 2013 .
It is clear from the report of Salvador Garriga Polledo that adequate funding will have to be secured for EU policies if the Union still wants to focus on achieving the ambitious objectives of the Europe 2020 strategy .
Without sufficient new resources after 2013 , the Union will be unable to fulfil either the current political priorities or the new tasks and objectives from the Europe 2020 strategy .
In view of the inadequacy of the EU 's traditional own resources , a specialist discussion was started in the SURE committee on new own resources for the EU budget .
We have a great opportunity in the next financial framework to show European citizens that the Union is capable of thinking and acting in their long-term interest , and achieving effective results in securing internal cohesion and solid growth .
I therefore entirely agree with the rapporteur 's priority statement that the sums earmarked for the common agricultural policy and the cohesion policy in the next period must not be lower than in the current framework .
The draft proposal , which was supported by eight committees , starts out from challenges to which the new Multiannual Financial Framework has to respond as well .
The current crisis is the last warning for Europe to react to the transformation in world order .
Like all transformations , the emerging order will produce winners and losers .
Europe shall not be among the losers .
Jean Monnet warned in his time : ' Europe has never existed .
One must genuinely create Europe ' .
The founding father of European integration did not regard this task as a single act , but as continuous work .
Accordingly , we must assess expected conditions and specific circumstances and determine what we have to do to make sure that Europe exists and does not end up as a loser .
The Commission submitted the Europe 2020 strategy last year , whose aim is recovery from the crisis and the preparation of the European economy for the next decade .
The three key areas that promote economic growth are the following : knowledge , innovation , education ; or ' intelligent growth ' that puts digital society in the centre , sustainable development that promotes more efficient energy use and enhances competitiveness , and inclusive growth that increases participation in the labour market .
The new Multiannual Financial Framework of the European Union must be established at Community level and national development programmes should be adjusted to each other in a way that they result in an optimal implementation of the Europe 2020 strategy by creating the necessary synergies .
People expect concrete results from the EU more than ever during economically difficult times .
We need better , simpler legislation which serves the interests of Europeans .
Regulation needs to be pruned .
There is no reason to draft European legislation unless there is a real need for it .
The EU 's forthcoming budget should respond more effectively to the day-to-day problems faced by the public .
The budget should support growth and new jobs , but , above all , it should create European added value .
At the end of this month , the Commission is to publish its proposals for the EU 's budget after 2014 .
With the economic crisis , the Member States of the EU have had to make tough decisions with respect to their own budgets .
In times of crisis , the EU 's budget should not be increased either .
On the contrary , it should be cut .
I hope that , ultimately , we will rid ourselves of much of the foolishness that is associated with the EU .
Parliament 's monthly trek between Brussels and Strasbourg costs European taxpayers a good EUR 200 million a year .
This money can be put to better use .
The various discounts that are granted to the United Kingdom , Sweden , Austria , the Netherlands and Germany should be abolished altogether .
This year , the United Kingdom alone will receive a rebate of some EUR 3 billion because of a discount on contributions negotiated in 1984 .
It is time the EU and its budget were reformed .
The money that European taxpayers provide has to be used more effectively and bring European added value to the Member States .
An increase in administration , red tape and unnecessary EU legislation does not represent that .
The new Multiannual Financial Framework is extremely significant because the European Union 's future will , to a great extent , depend on it .
The debate on the financial perspective is not an easy one because many Member States are feeling the effects of the economic crisis .
Their reluctance to increase the EU budget is quite understandable .
Nevertheless , the financial sceptics should be aware of the extent of the benefits the common market confers upon the individual Member States ' economies .
European integration has a positive and stimulating influence on the economy .
In addition , the European Parliament would like the new financial framework to be structured in such a way as to increase competitiveness and promote social integration .
The EU budget funds measures which are absolutely vital for the citizens of all the Member States .
This is not an abstract statement .
Cohesion policy and the common agricultural policy have an impact on the daily lives of millions of citizens .
There can be no doubt that some of the tasks performed by the EU would not be carried out by any other body .
Increasing the level of social , economic and infrastructure cohesion or ensuring equality of opportunity in the agricultural sector are objectives which deserve our support .
It is worth spending European money on them .
The European Union cannot carry out more measures in more Member States with a smaller budget .
This is not feasible , and this is why we need a larger and ambitious budget .
As the rapporteur writes , European Union assistance is essential if the Member States are to be in a position to meet future challenges .
The Europe 2020 strategy indicates the appropriate areas where this assistance should be focused , by outlining the priorities and vision of a strong , stable and modern Europe ; a Europe which will have learnt its lesson from its recent economic problems and a Europe which will ensure jobs , energy security and healthy food for its citizens .
Budgetary plans should take account of the most important objectives of sustainable development , at the same time as being flexible and focused on concrete measures .
I barely need mention the fact that money must be spent transparently and for good reason .
Public acceptance and understanding are nowadays an integral part of EU policy and form the basis for the EU 's functioning .
in writing . - To achieve the 2020 goals , a European approach is needed .
At the same time , one has to realise that more Europe cannot be achieved with less money .
Freezing the resources by Member States will not be a sustainable option .
Once Member States have accepted long-term strategic all-European political commitments , it is not possible to deny them financing .
This will only undermine the EU 's credibility in the eyes of millions of citizens .
In practical terms , much better coordination of the programmes is required , concentrating on their complementarities .
Financing the new priorities - R & D , innovation , and energy and transportation networks - will be unrealistic while retaining the present level of resources .
The real internal EU challenge is to make the older EU15 and younger EU12 meet at the end of the next financial framework .
Continuing with old programmes and designing new programmes has to be given in-depth scrutiny .
Commitment to the EU 's principles of equality and solidarity should end the existence of different standards and also prejudices in decision making .
The EU can succeed when all its Members are treated by the same standards .
A true financial perspective has to look even further forward than seven years .
However , I support flexible mechanisms for necessary adaptations .
The European Union 's poorest regions are developing rapidly at present , and one of the reasons for this is European funding .
Although many new roads have been built or repaired and Internet connections have been installed , there are still a great many needs to be met , since there is a very large gap between these regions and the most highly developed regions .
When we joined the European Union , there were fears that Poland and the new Member States would not make proper use of the opportunities afforded to them by membership , and that European funds would be spent without due consideration .
Fears were also voiced regarding corruption , since opportunity - or a great deal of money - makes the thief .
Meanwhile , analyses have shown that European money has been spent wisely in Poland , and has not been linked with dishonest practices .
Therefore , in view of the gap we are trying to bridge and , at the same time , the EU 's future goals , we must not reduce either the EU budget or the funds for implementing cohesion policy .
Even if the European Parliament votes through an increase to the European budget , which I hope will be the case , it is now important to convince the individual Member States that it is worth supporting Parliament 's political position .
I would like to extend my sincere congratulations to Mr Garriga Polledo for having prepared a comprehensive report , and for the impressive amount of work he has put into drafting compromise amendments .
I agree with the rapporteur that cohesion policy , which has proven its effectiveness , should be given a place in the new Multiannual Financial Framework which is commensurate with its importance .
However , we should strive for better coordination and complementarity of the individual funds , and for simplified procedures .
Changes to systems for monitoring and managing funds , aimed at increasing the effectiveness of their interventions , should be based on a thorough analysis of their current functioning .
I also support the view that unused funds should remain in the budget earmarked for cohesion , and not returned to the Member States , and I believe that we need a thorough analysis of the possible consequences of including the European Development Fund in the EU budget , in particular , in light of the EU 's obligations to third countries .
Europe is experiencing a crisis .
The tax shortfalls of self-governing regions exceed 20 % of the budget , compared to the period before the crisis , which is unsustainable .
The revenue shortfalls for municipalities look very similar .
They cannot fund their core competences , they are laying off employees and they are getting into debt .
In such a situation , we should not be surprised that they fail to understand why the European Parliament is asking for more resources .
However , if states coordinated their policies and funding in the area of priorities , they would achieve better results and would save more funds than the amount by which we want to increase the common EU budget .
There is therefore no better alternative than the one we are discussing today .
We must discuss it and debate it more , not only in the European Parliament , but especially with ministers in the Council , with members of national parliaments , and also in the regions , so that they understand that a joint solution will bring not only the best result for our citizens , but will also lead to savings in national budgets .
Since the fiasco with the euro rescue package , the net contributors find themselves not just paying the EU budget through the huge redistribution mechanism , but actually paying two and three times over .
In future years , real hard cash will be poured into these rescue mechanisms instead of guarantees .
This will have to be financed by the net contributors , in other words , the hard-working German , French , Italian , Dutch and Austrian citizens , from their national budgets ; the first painful cuts are already being felt in these countries .
The people in the economically strong EU countries are angry - at least every bit as angry as the demonstrators in Athens - because they have to tighten their belts for the sake of the PIIG states .
Demanding budget increases in this difficult situation is out-of-touch and scandalous .
We do not need a bloated EU budget that is perhaps up to ten times higher than necessary ; we do not need a budget funded by the EU taxpayer that has lost any sense of the need to economise ; we do not need a further bloating of Brussels bureaucracy that robs the shirts from the backs of the net contributors .
Instead , we should consistently pursue every opportunity to make savings .
Farming subsidies , the largest and most contentious budgetary factor , should be renationalised .
This would take the pressure off the EU budget and the Member States will be better able to respond to the specific character of their agricultural sector .
If the enormous amount of money paid in taxes were to reach small and medium-sized farmers instead of big landowners , agricultural factories , large businesses , monarchs and golf clubs , then maybe it would be possible to halt the decline in farming .
The adoption of the report by Mr Garriga Polledo marks an import step for this House : it constitutes a clear , pragmatic and realistic statement of the European Parliament 's budgetary ambitions post-2013 .
Firstly , on cohesion policy , which is key to regional development . I believe that we need to maintain the cohesion policy budget and create an equitable aid model for all regions with intermediary income so as to make future EU investments in the regions transparent and fair .
The 5 % budget increase is reasonable .
It is not , as the Eurosceptics claim , an example of European profligacy , but rather a courageous admission that if we do not give ourselves the means to build Europe together , we will remain isolated and powerless .
Consequently , so as to be able to finance the actions linked to the EU 's new competences under the Treaty of Lisbon , I am supporting the request for the question of own resources to be examined and for new forms of Community income , in order to ease the pressure on national budgets and to do away with the belief in a ' fair return ' which is economically inaccurate and politically unsound .
The European Parliament is presenting the European Commission and Council with its vision of the European Union 's priorities for the 2014-2020 period for the first time .
It is now the European Commission 's turn to take into account in its legislative proposal the European Parliament 's opinion .
I should stress in particular that the development of a competitive agricultural sector and economic and social cohesion should be maintained as priorities for the period ahead .
MEPs have also given their due attention to Europe 's research efforts .
The European Parliament 's entire vision is firmly grounded in the Europe 2020 strategy .
When determining the framework of the next budget , the first question to ask is whether we want more or less Europe .
In my opinion , Parliament has already taken a stand in this question .
We have already stated that we need more Europe by accepting the ambitious goals of the Europe 2020 strategy .
Now we have to declare loud and clear that these objectives can only be achieved if we assign sufficient resources to them .
In a period when many Member States are suffering from the ' Mediterranean dilemma ' , whereby the country needs fiscal expansion in order to stimulate growth , but it cannot be done because never-ending austerity measures would be inevitable due to the country 's indebtedness , we cannot respond by decreasing or approving the current EU budget that is fundamentally aimed at development .
We cannot , because it would mean depriving regions lagging behind of their only chance to put their economies on a path to growth .
The creation of ' intermediate regions ' as proposed in the report means that relatively rich areas of poorer Member States will still receive support , and will be able to prepare gradually for the point in time when they lose this additional funding entirely .
The possibility of creating such a group of regions is undoubtedly a very welcome development for the main beneficiaries of cohesion policy , which have to make long-term plans .
Parliament 's adoption of this proposal today would send out a very important message in the debate on the future shape of cohesion policy .
The Galliga Polledo report devotes much attention to the Europe 2020 programme .
I believe that earmarking significant amounts of money for the objectives of this programme may result in a drop in funding for programmes which are important for European cohesion and development , such as the cohesion fund .
The outcomes show that this fund has been the most effective tool to date for accomplishing the goals enshrined in the Treaty on European Union and the Treaty of Lisbon .
It is therefore important for its funding to be increased .
Many European countries have been severely affected by the economic crisis and for them , the cohesion fund is now a driving force making it possible to fight unemployment proactively and to mobilise regions .
On the other hand , it is important for the EU to provide financial support for energy projects and innovation .
These two areas of investment are the key to the rapid growth of the European Union .
At present , two thirds of energy resources are imported from countries outside the EU , mainly Russia .
This entails significant capital outflow beyond our borders , and we should therefore earmark more funds for supporting infrastructure investments which allow for a diversification of supply and a subsequent drop in prices , including the Nabucco pipeline , which is the most important project in terms of diversification .
The report also fails to set out any clear guidelines regarding support for shale gas exploration in the near future .
The EU must not forget that making wise investments today in sources of energy will mean capital savings tomorrow .
( DE ) Mr President , I just wanted to say that the microphone at my desk , number 759 , is not working .
I already asked for it to be repaired yesterday .
I would ask for the services of a technician please .
Thank you .
Colleagues , as you know , because of the fire practice , the voting and explanations of vote were suspended yesterday , so we will be taking those today as part of the vote .
They have been mixed in , in the order you have on your voting lists .
1 .
Application of Schengen acquis in Bulgaria and Romania (
2 .
66th Session of the United Nations General Assembly (
3 .
Seventh EU programme for research , technological development and demonstration (
4 .
EU-Canada trade relations (
Mr President , Amendment 9 speaks about protection of EU policies concerning overseas countries and territories , yet specifically speaks about Saint Pierre and Miquelon .
My oral amendment , and my Group , aims to speak for and protect fairly and equally all overseas territories and countries , and not to speak specifically about Saint Pierre and Miquelon .
So it reads :
' Calls on the Commission , with a view to ensuring the consistency of EU policies , in particular , those concerning overseas countries and territories ( OCTs ) , to make sure that the interests of OCTs in relation to their strategic products are protected in the future agreement between the EU and Canada ' .
5 .
Credit rating agencies (
6 .
External dimension of social policy , promoting labour and social standards and European corporate social responsibility (
7 .
Cooperation in vocational education and training to support the Europe 2020 strategy (
Mr President , yes , it is a very simple oral amendment replacing the word ' harmonisation ' with ' cooperation ' since this is more appropriate and more precise as we are talking about vocational training .
( The President asked the speaker to read out the whole text of the amendment )
So it will read : ' Takes the view that better cooperation among Member States ' different education systems - bridging those differences and ensuring mutual recognition of certificates and diplomas among the Member States - should be emphasised in order to heighten cross-border collaboration and aid mobility ' .
8 .
Financing instrument for development cooperation (
9 .
Guaranteeing independent impact assessments (
10 .
Progress towards a European contract law for consumers and businesses (
11 .
GDP and beyond - Measuring progress in a changing world (
12 .
European satellite navigation programmes (
13 .
A new Multiannual Financial Framework ( MFF ) for a competitive , sustainable and inclusive Europe (
Voting time
The next item is the vote .
( For the results and other details on the vote : see Minutes )
Explanations of vote
Oral explanations of vote
( IT ) Mr President , I should like to express my overall satisfaction about the adoption of Mr El Khadraoui 's report .
I believe it represents a step forward for consumer and environmental protection , including in terms of the positions of individual Member States , which sometimes complain of delays .
Essentially , I think that by adopting this measure , Europe has demonstrated that it is further ahead than many Member States , which will clearly have to remedy this situation in short order .
I come from a country whose government was rather tardy in expressing its interest in this directive .
I therefore hope that Parliament 's decision will be productive and function as a stimulus so that the attitudes and the level of attention for this issue will be substantially improved in the not too distant future .
( IT ) Mr President , the ' polluter pays ' principle is , without doubt , essential for resolving environmental problems aggravated by European industrial development .
However , it is not always right to attack a single category ; we also need to defend the principle that it cannot be solely road hauliers to pay , but also those in Europe who do not put enough energy into supporting an alternative transport system .
Europe still has too few programmes to restructure the transport sector for more ecological solutions with a low environmental impact , and there is also a dearth of resources to improve its efficiency and environmental performance .
Once again , therefore , we need to remember that we cannot cut traffic volumes because , by contrast , the amount of journeys and haulage needs to be increased .
Therefore , road hauliers cannot be the only ones to pay for the ecological problems caused by others .
( FI ) Mr President , the rapporteur , the Committee on Transport and Tourism , and , obviously , Parliament as a whole , have to be congratulated on this excellent piece of legislation .
This was the result of compromises being made and which received willing support .
I think that it is extremely important that heavy goods traffic is included when we speak about climate change and sustainable development .
In this way , we can show the public that we are really concerned about how emissions from heavy goods traffic , especially during the rush hour and on congested roads , are causing problems .
One thing I agreed to here , for the sake of compromise , was that the money that is being charged here for heavy goods traffic can be spent on rail transport or shipping .
That may be possible in some cases , but I hope that when these decisions are being implemented nationally , it will be realised that it is heavy goods traffic that is paying for it .
These funds could be used for improving , repairing and building roads and would , in this way , be of benefit to heavy goods traffic .
Mr President , in relation to the carrying of heavy goods vehicles , this is quite serious as far as Ireland is concerned .
We are on the periphery of Europe , with two sea bridges to mainland Europe where all of these extra charges for road use and pollution are going to apply .
I understand from the exporters ' association in Ireland that this would add EUR 150 per trip , or EUR 300 per round trip , for haulage from Ireland , which depends heavily on this type of haulage and also very heavily on exports .
This will ensure that we will be less competitive .
I believe that the Commission and the Council must look at this and must take into consideration the peripheral regions .
It is not a major issue for the mainland European Member States but is certainly a major issue for Ireland and for other peripheral countries .
( PL ) Mr President , I wish to make it quite clear that the recommendations Parliament has adopted today will not be so straightforward under the conditions existing in Poland .
These recommendations result in an increase in transport costs , and hauliers with older vehicles will obviously be in a worse situation .
It is , however , to be welcomed that additional funding will be available to invest in sustainable transport and , above all , that there will be an opportunity to construct high-speed rail links and water transport links .
However , I would like to echo previous speakers who have said that these recommendations have negative as well as positive aspects .
They will also give rise to a whole series of complications for a great many hauliers in my country .
( DE ) Mr President , I have two comments to make on the so-called Eurovignette .
On the one hand , I would have liked to have seen a clear formulation to the effect that the financial resources collected there really are to be used for road building .
My second point is that I assume that the provision stating that the countries can exclude small commercial vehicles weighing between 3.5 and 12 tonnes from the Infrastructure Costs Directive will be respected by the Member States .
After all , a lot of medium-sized enterprises use vehicles in the 3.5 to 12 tonne range .
Most of these businesses will be unable to sustain higher costs .
Such businesses are often the pillar for potential employment and enterprise in our rural areas .
Mr President , the Eurovignette proposal is well intentioned .
There are many commendable aspects to it .
To reduce carbon emissions from vehicles is very commendable ; to reduce heavy goods vehicle congestion is very commendable ; and the spending of 15 % of the tolls on infrastructure is very commendable .
I would have liked to support this particular measure but I had to vote against because , as has been said already by my colleague , Pat the Cope Gallagher , Ireland 's economy is heavily dependent on exports .
The Eurovignette measures , if adopted in our country , would have devastating consequences .
Any additional charges on Irish hauliers would have a major negative impact on our exports .
I think I am supported by the Spanish , the Portuguese and also the Italians .
We are peripheral nations .
We are totally dependent on our international markets .
The high cost of diesel has pushed hauliers to the brink .
Regrettably , I had to vote against the measure .
( IT ) Mr President , today 's vote represents a marked step forward in bringing in the ' polluter pays ' principle , including in the road haulage sector , which makes a significant contribution to atmospheric and noise pollution .
Despite the criticisms of industry organisations , I think that the Council 's position is the best compromise available right now , even though I hope that improvements can be made in the future .
I voted in favour .
I must point out , however , that we need to identify better ways to use the revenues , making it mandatory for the Member States to invest these resources to improve the trans-European transport network ( TEN-T ) and infrastructure for reducing pollution .
This is the only way that , in future , we will be able to say that today 's decision has had positive results .
( IT ) Mr President , thanks to the Treaty of Amsterdam , environmental and sustainability policy has gained greater significance and attention has focused on integrating economic and environmental policy , as well as introducing environmental considerations to other policy areas .
The key sectors include climate change , sustainable transport , nature and biodiversity , health and the environment , the use of natural resources and waste management , as well as the international dimension of sustainable development .
The Council , in its conclusions of June 2006 , called on the Union and its Member States to extend national accounts to the fundamental aspects of sustainable development .
National accounts must therefore include an integrated economic and environmental accounts statement with fully coherent data .
I voted in favour of this proposal for a regulation because it creates new uses for national accounts data , environmental statistics and other statistical domains .
( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I voted in favour of the Leinen report because I am convinced that by recording this data in the various countries , we will learn far more about the situation in these countries .
However , I have chosen to speak again because a number of contributors to the debate have said that we should only deal with these accounts and ignore GDP completely .
I would like to advise you against this .
That is an extremely dangerous development .
Gross Domestic Product is an indicator of economic development and prosperity .
If we want to stop measuring this or only want to use social and environmental criteria in our measurements , then we are heading for a disaster .
Thus , all of this can only supplement GDP figures .
GDP must be at the centre of our analyses , as agreed in the Rosbach report .
I believe that this should also apply here .
I should like to emphasise that yet again .
Mr President , sorry , could you tell me which subject we are on now ?
I did not hear it .
( The President : ' On Coelho ' )
The Romania / Bulgaria acquis ?
Thank you .
( DA ) Mr President , we have today voted on and adopted in Parliament a decision recognising that Romania and Bulgaria are ready for admission into the Schengen cooperation .
I do not doubt that the purely technical aspects are in place and that an enormous amount of work has been done to be ready for admission .
However , I think that there are a number of reasons why we should take seriously the concern felt by European citizens on account of the rising level of corruption in many Member States and the increasing level of cross-border crime .
We ought therefore to have utilised this situation to strengthen our police cooperation and our fight against corruption before we set about extending the Schengen area .
It is not a question of directing criticism at these two countries , but of taking advantage of the opportunity before extending Schengen to demand some relevant answers for the concerned citizens who are witnessing this rising crime in Europe .
( IT ) Mr President , Romania and Bulgaria adopted the Schengen acquis when they joined the European Union in 2007 , yet both countries still carry out border checks as a result of the partial application of the measures contained in the acquis .
As careful assessments and visits carried out by groups of experts have shown , even though the two countries have shown substantial commitment and made obvious progress in implementing the acquis , some shortcomings still remain , for example , in the fields of equipment , performance of border checks and training .
We are of a mind to confirm our support for their full adhesion to the agreement , although we think it is essential for the two countries in question to inform us in writing , within six months , that additional measures to close these gaps have been implemented .
Indeed , the fact that the Bulgaria-Turkey-Greece area is one of the most sensitive regions for the Union 's border policy in terms of illegal migration is something we cannot ignore or fail to consider .
( BG ) Mr President , the most important part of this very well drafted report from Mr Coelho was at the end .
This is where there was a very clear mention about the danger from the emigration wave which may inundate Europe from Turkey and , through Turkey , from the countries in the Middle East and North Africa .
Up to a quarter of a century ago , Europe was protected from such emigration waves for two reasons : the Iron Curtain and the totalitarian regimes in North Africa .
Both totalitarian systems kept their citizens under submission and were more likely not to allow them to leave their country than the opposite , but these obstacles do not exist now .
This is why I voted for this report .
I welcome the fact that Mr Coelho has mentioned the significance of the emigration pressure from Turkey on Bulgaria and Greece .
However , I wish to say that it will not be enough for these statements just to remain words on a piece of paper .
Resources and programmes are needed , which will be used to protect the Union from this emigration wave .
( FI ) Mr President , it is obviously very important that in the European Union , the same principles can be applied to all the Member States of the Union .
In this respect , the Schengen Agreement is one step forward towards this kind of closer cooperation , that is to say , freer movement , but we must obviously remember that free movement also has to involve a certain sense of responsibility .
Now we must hope that , when Romania and Bulgaria join the Schengen area , the problems that have occurred on their borders are actually addressed , and that adequate resources are channelled there to ensure that this sort of illegal migration and the other occurrences can be prevented .
Of course , basically the situation is that there cannot be a two-tier system in the European Union : the same rules have to apply to everyone .
In this way , we can also ensure that the same opportunities are pursued in these countries as elsewhere .
Resources are needed , because we know the problems and dangers that are occurring there .
Mr President , as you are well aware , British Conservatives normally take the view that we abstain on questions to do with the euro or with Schengen because we are outside both , and therefore arguably it is none of our business .
However , in this case , I believe it is our business ; we know that Bulgaria and Romania have serious problems with crime and corruption and I do not believe that their border controls are as good as those which would obtain in other Schengen countries .
They will therefore become a route and a conduit for illegal immigrants into the European Union who , within the Schengen area , would then be free to come to Calais and would definitely have the effect of increasing illegal immigration into the United Kingdom .
For that reason , I voted against the report .
( IT ) Mr President , the report on the mid-term review of the Seventh Framework Programme is especially significant .
There are four reasons - which I consider to be paramount - why I voted in favour of the report : 1 ) the simplification and streamlining of procedures in order to make it easier to access funding ; 2 ) the participation of small and medium-sized enterprises , which are essential for growth and employment ; 3 ) innovation for a competitive manufacturing sector capable of meeting the challenges of the market ; and 4 ) the risk finance facility , which so far has produced very good results .
Lastly , I should like to point out that the triangle of knowledge , education and research - on which the future of the cohesion policy rests - can only be consolidated in Europe through a steadfast commitment to research .
( DA ) Mr President , there is broad consensus in Parliament on the need to reform our research programme .
Nevertheless , I have to express my regret that the Commission has been so vague and unambitious in its mid-term review .
It could , in fact , be made very much better and much more could be done immediately .
The Commission could reduce the application deadlines , secure funds for demonstration facilities and use international accounting standards instead of inventing its own .
All of this creates pointless bureaucracy that frightens industry away .
It prevents Europe from progressing from ideas to invoices .
In future , therefore , we must reduce the chaotic jumble of programmes and the amount of bureaucracy , and we must focus on the major challenges : climate change , energy and food - in short , we must use our research to create jobs .
Parliament has today shown that it has the will to do this .
Now it is up to the Commission to show the way .
( IT ) Mr President , research and innovation play a central role in the European Union 's development and competitiveness and they are crucial in terms of reaching the objectives set out in the Europe 2020 strategy .
The Seventh Framework Programme is the main instrument for funding research in Europe , as shown by the report voted on today .
However , there are still many problems being caused by excessive amounts of red tape for small and medium-sized enterprises ( SMEs ) .
In its resolution of 11 November 2010 , Parliament asked the Commission to introduce procedural , administrative and financial simplification measures into the current management of the Seventh Framework Programme , yet these measures have still not been addressed .
I call upon the Commission to acknowledge Parliament 's observations and to identify solutions to make it easier for SMEs to access the seventh and eighth research programmes .
( FI ) Mr President , I was also happy to vote in favour of this report , and I thank my colleague , Mr Audy , for doing such a good job .
I have two matters to raise .
Funding is extremely important , and it could be a little more ambitious , since it is being stated here that this level is credible and necessary .
We have to increase funding to achieve vital growth in Europe .
Some time ago , I myself was listening to a Finnish research group which was receiving funding through this programme .
They do cell research , in which they are quite close to a breakthrough which would even allow them to develop cures for cancer .
They have had no information , however , as to whether the funding will continue .
They are quite at a loss .
In my opinion , this funding should be continued and it should be sufficient .
The other issue , on which we are clearly receiving feedback , is that a lot of working time is spent on red tape .
This needs to be cut , so that things can be prioritised properly .
( LT ) Mr President , I am pleased that today , we are discussing the mid-term review of the Seventh Framework Programme .
Many of the points mentioned in the document are very true , particularly as regards young researchers and more active participation by industry in projects under the Framework Programme .
The document expresses concern over the rather low participation rate among certain Member States .
I would like to draw attention to the fact that there are objective reasons for this .
The financing schemes in force today are , in a sense , more favourable towards the old European Union Member States .
This is also reflected in the figures .
The amount of financing that a project participant from one of the new Member States receives is half what it would be for a participant from the old Member States .
As a result of this situation , a gap is forming in the Community and new Member States are being excluded , which I firmly believe is wrong .
I therefore feel that it is necessary to review the financing schemes and to strive to ensure during FP8 that there are no more disparities or discrimination , so that we can successfully address the challenges mentioned in the Europe 2020 strategy .
( HU ) Mr President , the current Seventh Framework Programme ensures that the European Union can raise its research policy to an adequate level .
With its budget in excess of EUR 54 billion for the period 2007-2013 , we can consider it as one of the most significant programmes supporting research in the world .
We need to prepare a mid-term review based on concrete data in order to ensure that the Seventh Framework Programme continues to meet European requirements .
I believe that the simplification process is the most important thing we can underline in a mid-term review .
Experience also shows that the complexity and difficulty of administrative procedures was one of the biggest problems for our researchers .
The other important thing is the facilitation of the participation of SMEs in the programme .
Unfortunately , in this respect , we need to make further efforts , although some improvement has been achieved in programmes concerning cooperation .
We were very pleased to welcome the introduction of the Risk-Sharing Finance Facility .
This should be continued and increased until the end of the Seventh Framework Programme , and in the course of subsequent programmes .
For these reasons , I voted in favour of the report .
( PL ) Mr President , I voted against the Audy report .
I am unable to lend my approval to a document which blocks the INDECT project .
I do not agree with the statement that the project , which is being carried out at the well-known AGH University of Science and Technology in Kraków , violates the Charter of Fundamental Rights .
Its research goal is , after all , to accomplish the goals set out in resolutions on the fight against paedophilia , sales of weapons via the Internet and the fight against drug trafficking and human trafficking , which are issues we have raised many times in this Chamber .
It is an innovative project , which does an excellent job of filling the gaps in the EU Member States ' security systems , particularly as regards the Internet .
The people it affects are those who break the law , and they are the ones who have most to fear from its goals .
What is more , the project provides a good basis for the construction of an integrated security network , ensuring defence against cyber attacks .
Russia , the United States and China have put in place similar solutions , and we have been eagerly awaiting them for several years at EU level .
I do not therefore understand why funding for the entire project is being withheld , all the more so since this is the only project which the Audy report singles out in this way .
( SK ) Mr President , I voted for the report , but concern remains over the public funding of embryonic cell research .
According to the Advocate General of the European Court of Justice , embryonic cells are considered to be human embryos , and therefore beings from which life arises .
These cells , since they represent the first stage of the human life they will become , must be legally defined as embryos , the patenting of which must be ruled out .
On the basis of this statement , the European Commission should immediately take into account the decisions and conclusions of the European Court of Justice and adapt its policies on the funding of science and research to them .
( DA ) Mr President , today , we voted through the last in a long line of free trade agreement texts .
Fortunately , Parliament is , on the whole , still in favour of free trade , and that also applies to the agreement with Canada .
However , the demand for sector-specific analyses comes up again and again .
The impact assessment for the EU-Canada agreement indicates clear benefits for both sides .
Sector-specific analyses are simply a way of looking for a reason to say no , because the truth is there will always be both winners and losers .
It is our responsibility to do what is best for the majority .
Free trade is best for consumers as it provides greater choice and lower prices .
It is best for businesses because it extends their market and creates growth and jobs .
Free trade is the international division of labour , ensuring that we all do what we are best at , while allowing everyone else to do what they are best at .
( DE ) Mr President , of course I welcome any trade agreement between two countries or businesses because , if correctly managed , world trade can help improve living standards and contribute to progress .
On the other hand , I always worry that the large number of bilateral agreements will cause us to lose sight of the overall picture and that we will end up with a patchwork of agreements that makes it hard to achieve a genuine agreement within the framework of the WTO .
For me , bilateral agreements are always the second best option .
The best option really would be to continue with trade talks in the context of WTO negotiations and to conclude the agreements that world trade is waiting for and that the global economy desperately needs .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , it is an incontrovertible fact that the rating agencies have now amassed huge and unchecked power .
Their initial function was to provide valuable information to investors , but over time , they have morphed into supreme and uncontrollable arbiters of the international financial markets .
In my view , it is unacceptable that businesses and even Member States are subject to the judgments of three large American companies , whose ratings have not always been correct and indeed have , at times , led to astonishing blunders , as in the Lehman Brothers affair .
Greater controls are therefore to be welcomed and I hope that the new European authority will manage to operate at optimum capacity , with real powers to intervene and even to issue penalties where necessary .
I also believe that it is a fine idea to introduce the principle of civil liability in situations of obvious negligence .
Greater competition is required in the sector and we must break up this historic oligopoly and try to bring in new , independent and possibly European organisations , which would therefore have a proper awareness of the economic context and reality of our continent , which is entirely different from the way of thinking in the United States .
For all these reasons , I voted in favour of the report in question .
( LT ) Mr President , I am delighted with the document adopted today on guaranteeing independent impact assessments ( IAs ) .
IAs are the basis of the legislative process .
I feel that the effective independence of IAs must become a general principle , applied to all types of IAs , particularly environmental impact assessments .
A guarantee of the implementation of this principle should also be contained in the Environmental Impact Assessment Directive , which is likely to be reviewed in the near future .
I am pleased that the proposals in the Committee on the Environment , for which I provided amendments , concern environmental impact assessments , which really is crucially important .
The European Commission must also play a more active role in defending the interests of the European Union and its Member States in cases where projects being undertaken by third countries may have an impact on the European Union or on one or several of its Member States .
I believe that this document is a step towards ensuring security for us all .
( DA ) Mr President , I would very much like to speak on this subject , as I think it is somewhat absurd that we are laying down provisions on CSR here .
It is all well and good that we can presumably all agree only to enter into free trade agreements and partnerships with countries that respect human rights .
That is actually already in the Treaty .
However , I think some politicians have forgotten what CSR stands for .
It stands for corporate social responsibility .
Thus , it is a question of what enterprises do on their own account over and above complying with the legislation .
This is used as a competitive parameter in business , thus creating a drive for enterprises themselves to keep on improving this aspect of their business .
If we come along and steal this away and turn it into political legislation , we completely remove this competitive parameter , and that - if I may say so - is sheer political stupidity .
( IT ) Mr President , the external dimension of social policy includes all the European Union 's actions and initiatives to promote labour and social standards in non-member countries .
Even though both the Treaty of Lisbon and the Europe 2020 strategy attributed an unprecedented level of importance to social policy , the issues of competitiveness and economic factors continue to take priority over social issues .
However , it is becoming ever clearer that we need to stop concentrating strictly on the markets and instead take a more holistic interest in people , which means protecting them , the rights of workers and the right to work .
The European Union must make it a long-term goal to be able to ensure that men and women have the chance to gain dignified and productive employment , in conditions of freedom , equality , safety and dignity .
In future , it will therefore be necessary for Parliament and international and European trade unions to work together and add their positive and urgent recommendations to the initiative voted on here today .
( FI ) Mr President , I supported the report because European business enterprises are of especially great importance in international trade .
We always have to act in accordance with European values and international social and labour standards , even in third countries .
Corporate social responsibility is only useful as a voluntary exercise if consumers are given reliable and accurate information on the activities of companies , the origin of products and the conditions under which goods are produced and sold .
Certificates , brands and standards are important for consumers , and image and reputation are directly linked to a company 's success .
In the age of social media , it is difficult to hide information from consumers on a company 's practices abroad .
Responsible entrepreneurship is always the backbone of competitiveness and successful business .
The European Union , too , must be a pioneer in the promotion of social standards .
I think that the notion of corporate responsibility should be included in all EU policy and trade agreements .
( SK ) Mr President , it may be an interesting venture to support and promote social responsibility in external relations .
It concerns me that we are not going as far as we might in our activities .
Social responsibility must be focused on the poorest , on those at the margins of society , on those who have no qualifications and who are most exposed to manipulation .
In short , it must be focused on those who are furthest from the labour market .
The French programme on learning and working together , initiated by the organisation ATD Quart Monde and the French state , is a fine example of a solid enterprise preserving the authentic social responsibility of a partnership with the most disadvantaged workers .
In this way , the Union can bring real added value to the policy .
( IT ) Mr President , 2011 offers a strategic opportunity to draw the lessons from the four years that the regulation establishing a financing instrument for development cooperation has been in force .
Since its entry into force , the main problem which has emerged seems to be the difficulty in understanding or accepting the specific role of development cooperation in the context of the European Union 's external action .
We therefore need to clarify the fact that development cooperation is the one policy area of external action , besides humanitarian aid , which has not been designed to serve EU interests , but to defend the interests of the most marginalised and vulnerable populations on this planet .
Through today 's vote , we will underline the need for a separate development cooperation instrument that specifically and exclusively targets developing countries and expressly pursues the objectives laid down in Article 208 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union ( TFEU ) .
To conclude , Mr President , we are asking , in particular , for the delegated acts procedure to be used when taking decisions on general objectives , priority areas and expected results , as well as the allocation of funds which fulfil the criteria of Article 290 of the TFEU .
( PL ) Mr President , despite the fact that the European Parliament has repeatedly acknowledged the advantages that would be conferred upon the Internal Market by improvements to the framework of contract law , the introduction of a new system of contract law using an optional instrument has encountered a series of major problems , in terms of both substance and procedure .
Above all , the proposals put forward reflect the Commission 's position , which is not supported by the substance of public debate .
We do not know the positions held by the individual Member States , or those held by consumer and business representatives .
Diverging legal interpretations may result from the lack of clarity of some of the proposed documents , which will be used as a basis for judicial decisions .
Finally , the introduction of an optional instrument would have a significant economic impact on businesses and consumers .
There may be very high costs associated with the necessary training , the replacement of standard contract forms and possible court proceedings .
In my opinion , it is unwise to impose additional financial burdens on businesses at a time of economic difficulty .
On the basis of the above , I voted in favour of rejecting the report .
( IT ) Mr President , the possibility and ability to learn and work in an international context is a prerequisite for a successful working life in today 's strongly globalised economy .
As far as education and vocational training are concerned , the key factors listed in the European strategy for smart , sustainable and inclusive growth need to be translated into practical steps at European Union level and in the Member States .
The projections suggest that the demand for skills will continue to rise .
Industrial and technological change increases the need for workers with high and intermediate skill levels , but low-skilled labour is , conversely , being squeezed out .
Therefore , especially where young people are concerned , action needs to be taken quickly : the continuing rise in youth unemployment is one of the most important challenges facing Europe .
To attain these goals , we believe it is essential for education and vocational training to continue to be treated as a long-term common political priority , which can be translated into reality only with the participation and commitment of all stakeholders , the EU institutions and those involved at local and regional level .
Mr President , I voted against the Hirsch report as it fundamentally sees education not as a means by which people can improve their knowledge and skills , but solely as a tool for increasing the profits of big business .
I completely reject that approach .
The report claims that the implementation of the EU 2020 goals is a way to secure employment and a better standard of living .
This is simply untrue .
The EU 2020 strategy will deliver neither jobs nor a better standard of living .
It offers more neoliberal policies and a race to the bottom in wages and conditions .
This report disgracefully calls for employers to be able to terminate apprenticeship contracts should the apprentices be deemed unsuited to their employment .
That is a recipe for gross exploitation .
I reject the call for the increased involvement of private higher-education institutions in the expansion of vocational training and instead demand meaningful training opportunities provided through massive public investment .
( FI ) Mr President , I supported the report because youth unemployment is a challenge facing the whole of Europe , and one that is troubling all of society .
It is also behind the unrest in the southern Mediterranean countries .
In the prosperous societies of the Nordic countries , youth unemployment is visible , for example , as exclusion and an increase in substance use among adolescents .
Youth is all about mobility and changing jobs .
Youth unemployment is serious when young people have no access to work of any kind because they are poorly educated or lack work experience , nor are young people lacking in a proper education or work experience in a strong position when competing for jobs .
That is why we have to focus our energy on providing wide-ranging , high-quality education and , furthermore , pay attention to the perspective of gender , so that the underlying causes of youth unemployment can be eliminated .
We should also remember the role of further training because it is that which promotes lifelong learning and prepares people for changes in the labour market .
( IT ) Mr President , it is highly significant that Parliament is using this resolution to send a strong message to both the Member States and the younger generations to ask for greater commitment to European cooperation on learning , vocational training and higher education in order to bolster the Europe 2020 strategy .
We know that youth unemployment has severe repercussions on poverty and social exclusion , as does the prolonged period of insecurity in which 40 % of European young people live .
Strong backing should be given to a combination of education policies and a new incentive-based welfare system for enterprises that provide full-time employment for young people and women .
Ensuring that the skills being learned are in line with the competences - including for citizenship - required for the new goals of sustainable and intelligent growth is essential , as are policies for the transition from education to the workplace and speeding up the recognition of professional qualifications , titles and academic credits .
Those Member States which , like my own , are cutting resources for education and research at a time of crisis must know that they are hurting young people , and hurting the future of Europe .
( ET ) Mr President , I was involved in the preparation of the report in the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs , and indeed , unemployment in Europe is high , but unemployment among the young is , on average , twice as high .
There are Member States in which the figure is even higher , such as my home country , where it is actually three times higher .
I support the initiatives in the report as practical steps to turn this situation around towards improvement .
We do not see the sense in training a large number of people who have been in higher education but who then do not find any use for it in the labour market .
We must concentrate more on vocational training and retraining .
What is completely unacceptable , however , is the action taken by the Council on education in terms of budget cuts .
Their actions are also incompatible with the fulfilment of the Europe 2020 strategy , which has already been adopted .
They are not putting their money where their mouth is .
I voted for the adoption of the report . Thank you .
( GA ) Mr President , I also voted in favour of this report , especially since it is estimated that there will be 15 million jobs available to people who have tertiary qualifications between now and 2020 .
At the same time , it is estimated that there will be 12 million fewer jobs for people who have no qualification or a very poor one .
Therefore , something must be done about this and there is evidently a great need for education and training .
Twenty-one per cent of young people across Europe are out of work and it is therefore important that they remain in education until they , too , have a suitable qualification and that there be collaboration between colleges and business so that those qualifications are suitable .
In addition , it is important that there be independent evaluation of those qualifications .
If all those things are done , we can solve this problem in the future .
( IT ) Mr President , the report by Mr Garriga Polledo is a very important piece of work that allows us to set out a new financial framework for a competitive , sustainable and inclusive Europe .
We need a budget that is designed for the challenges of the present day and that can provide a strong and innovative response to current needs .
Its top priority must be research and innovation for small and medium-sized enterprises , to stimulate growth and employment , while the second objective is to reform the common agricultural policy in order to promote and support the competitiveness of agriculture in Europe .
However , particular attention should be paid to the future of the cohesion policy , which I consider to be a very important instrument and one which provides financial support for investments that drive economic growth and , above all , the creation of new jobs .
On this subject , I would like to revisit a point that I think is particularly important : the establishment of a new intermediate category .
I believe , of course , that this new category cannot be created by siphoning off resources from existing ones , which are essential for supporting the balanced , harmonious and sustainable growth of our communities .
( FI ) Mr President , this extremely important report was adopted , and I would like to mention just a few details .
The first is Amendment 18 , tabled by the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe , which states that some fairly precise cuts can be made under the common agricultural policy , according to the kinds of current reforms that exist .
In other words , we get a clear picture of the ALDE Group 's view of agricultural policy , although it has been worded very cleverly .
The obvious and basic premise here is that agricultural policy is what is to be cut , if we have to cut anything .
The other important point , on which I voted differently from my group , was Amendment 37d , which originally points to the significant savings that could be made if the European Parliament were to have a single seat .
There is no point arguing about that : savings will be made .
It does not make any difference , no matter how we vote : we know that savings will be made .
I would hope that here at long last , people understand that the public is really tired of savings being made that concern them but not savings that concern us .
This cannot be explained away to the public and nothing will be improved by voting on it .
Savings will be made and we have to make them .

( IT ) Mr President , I voted in favour of the report by Mr Garriga Polledo on the forthcoming financial perspectives of the Union because , at one of the greatest times of crisis for the so-called European spirit , I am convinced that it is vital for us to insist upon and prevail in our belief that it is essential to provide the Union with credible instruments , beginning with adequate funding .
The request for a 5 % increase in the next budget is therefore just and necessary .
Perhaps it will not be enough , but it is essential in order to provide answers to the big questions that lie ahead : these resources are needed to tackle real problems , such as greater cohesion between the regions , a greater capacity for research and innovation , and a greater capacity to generate growth and provide jobs .
Without adequate resources , none of these problems will be properly dealt with , beginning with the introduction of the intermediate category in cohesion policy , which only makes sense if it does not harm the other categories already in place .
That is why I voted in favour and I hope that the Commission and the Council will follow the recommendations of the report .
( PL ) Mr President , the economic crisis , demographic problems and growing unemployment are having a significant impact on the budgetary constraints of the Member States .
A European budget providing opportunities for long-term planning should therefore be a tool which promotes the growth of the individual countries ' economies .
The Europe 2020 strategy , which stimulates job creation and promotes social integration , is , to my mind , a key component in helping countries exit the crisis .
In this context , it is particularly important for its scope to cover small and medium-sized enterprises as well .
I therefore agree with the proposal to ensure greater support for all programmes and instruments supporting these businesses , including programmes aimed at competitiveness , innovation and use of the Structural Funds .
Maintaining competitiveness , increasing economic growth and fighting unemployment will be the greatest challenges faced by the EU .
I would therefore like to highlight the urgent need to support growth through investment in knowledge-based economic sectors .
Strengthening the link between education , scientific research and employment will promote integration , mobility and specialisation .

( IT ) Mr President , I am speaking to express my satisfaction as well as to explain my reasons for voting in favour of the report by Mr Garriga Polledo , which somehow manages to set out serious and effectives goals which contribute to strengthening the cohesion policy .
I do have one doubt , which we have expressed by voting to adopt the amendment removing the wording on the creation of an intermediate category for cohesion policies in those parts of Europe where gross domestic product ( GDP ) falls to between 75 % and 90 % of EU GDP .
This really concerns us , not because we do not believe that the focus of the cohesion policy should be extended , but because we think that without additional resources , this extension risks depriving and reducing the resources for the areas referred to in Objective 1 - the so-called convergence objective - which need just as much attention and support from the European Union .
To sum up , I am pleased with the report and I am pleased with the work that has been done , but I have some concerns about the attention that we seem to have paid to a policy that could have confirmed the so-called ' facing-out ' , as we are used to seeing .
( SK ) Mr President , the contents of the new Multiannual Financial Framework must present a clear vision of the future of the Union and its citizens .
The current economic and social challenges that we face need to be reflected not only in impressive speeches but , first and foremost , in concrete budget chapters .
Whether we look at the current difficulties and ambitions of the EU and its regions from a regional or a global perspective , the most pressing issues remain the energy shortage , the slowdown in economic growth and unemployment .
We must therefore still regard the development and innovation of European energy infrastructure as priority areas that need considerably more funding .
In my opinion , a return to coal-burning is not , in the current environmental context , a solution for the future or for the creation of a fully-fledged trans-European transport network .
These two areas are an essential precondition for developing the competitiveness of the EU as a whole and for the operation of the Internal Market and , as such , they deserve particular attention when drafting the budget .
Firstly , I welcome the commitment in the report to at least maintaining the CAP and cohesion funding at present levels in the next perspective .
There was much controversy in our group as well about the intermediate category , and it was decided to have a free vote .
It does not affect my colleagues in Ireland or ourselves at all because even though we are in the IMF - and we are broke as a country - we are well above the European average in GDP terms ; so whether there is an intermediate category or not does not affect us .
However , we do think that there is a need for a fundamental appraisal of cohesion policy going forward because , as more and more regions go above the 75 % threshold , the policy is either going to become redundant or be reformed , and that is what we expect to happen .
Written explanations of vote
The German Free Democratic Party delegation in the European Parliament assumes that the inclusion of Romania and Bulgaria in the Schengen area will further improve freedom of movement within the EU .
Now that both Member States have achieved positive evaluation results in all areas of the Schengen review , there should be no more obstacles to delay inclusion further .
There is no denying that technically securing borders will not automatically make them secure as long as problems persist in combating corruption in the justice and policing system .
Accordingly , this challenge also relates to Member States already in the Schengen area .
For this reason , the German Free Democratic Party delegation believes that criteria such as the fight against corruption must receive greater attention when evaluating the Schengen mechanism , and any misdemeanours must be punished appropriately .
I am voting for this report , given the positive results of the evaluations carried out on both countries to establish whether they meet the requirements of the Schengen acquis .
Whilst both Romania and Bulgaria are currently ready to open their borders , although the Bulgaria-Greece border is very sensitive , Bulgaria needs to take additional measures and a tripartite approach common to Bulgaria , Greece and Turkey needs to be adopted .
I voted in favour of this important resolution on the application of the Schengen acquis in Bulgaria and Romania .
I agree with the rapporteur 's position that , although there are some outstanding issues that will require regular reporting and a follow-up at some point in the future , they do not constitute an obstacle to full Schengen membership for these two Member States .
The inclusion of Bulgaria and Romania in the Schengen area is very important both for these countries , their economic growth and investment development , and for the whole of the European Union , for increasing integrity and solidarity among Member States .
I voted in favour of the report on Romania and Bulgaria joining the Schengen area .
This is the second time that Bulgaria and Romania 's application of the Schengen provisions has been examined ; the first assessment took place in 2010 .
Let us bear in mind that Romania and Bulgaria adopted the Schengen acquis ( data protection , Schengen Information System , air , land and sea borders , police cooperation and visas ) when they joined the European Union in 2007 .
Now , however , all Member States need to agree on their effective participation in the area without internal borders .
For its part , the European Parliament has been consulted .
Schengen cooperation started on 14 June 1985 , with the Schengen Agreement , allowing for the abolition of systematic border controls at the internal borders of the signatory states and for the creation of a common area , with free movement of persons .
Currently , free movement is guaranteed on a territory with 42 673 km of external sea and 7 721 km of land borders , covering 25 countries and 400 million citizens .
Bulgaria , Romania and Cyprus only partially apply the Schengen acquis at the moment and checks are therefore still carried out at the borders with these three Member States .
Romania and Bulgaria adopted the Schengen acquis when joining the EU in 2007 .
Taking into account the results of the evaluations and the necessary revisits carried out by teams of experts , the European Parliament and the Council have concluded that , although there are some outstanding issues that will require regular reporting and a follow-up , they do not constitute an obstacle to full Schengen membership for these two Member States .
I support the proposal that Bulgaria and Romania should inform the European Parliament and the Council , in writing in the course of a six-month period , of further action that they intend to take as regards recommendations , submitted in assessment reports and mentioned in subsequent reports , which have yet to be implemented .
Since the Schengen Agreement was concluded in 1985 , its five founding states have expanded to 25 , 22 of which are European Union Member States .
Schengen enabled the abolition of internal border checks between signatory states and the creation of a single external border where border checks on entry to the Schengen area are carried out .
Bulgaria and Romania adopted the Schengen acquis when they joined the European Union in 2007 .
On the basis of the results of the evaluations and of the monitoring visits carried out , the rapporteur , Mr Coelho , has reached the conclusion that all the conditions necessary for the application of all parts of the Schengen acquis have been met : specifically , checks at the land , sea and air borders , police cooperation , visas , connection to the Schengen Information System ( SIS ) , and data protection .
These countries should become full members of the Schengen area .
This is an important step forward for these countries , as well as a strengthening of European citizenship .
I am therefore voting for this report , and would congratulate the rapporteur .
I voted for this initiative because Romania and Bulgaria adopted the Schengen acquis when they joined the EU in 2007 .
Following the relevant expert evaluations , and in spite of the fact that there are still some problems to be resolved , both countries have shown they are prepared to implement the provisions of the Schengen acquis and can therefore fully accede to it .
This is a very important report concerning not only my country , Bulgaria , but also the European Union as a whole .
I am confident that our efforts will be rewarded very soon .
Our borders have been ready for some time to defend Europe 's borders .
However , the decision which was so greatly expected has still not been forthcoming .
I believe that the motive for this is completely political .
The report also refers to the inspections carried out at our border with Turkey , which meet the Schengen requirements and prove our readiness .
I sincerely hope that this report will be voted for at the next session of the European Council because the faster we move on this issue , the more we will all gain - politically , economically and socially .
I voted against the full application of the Schengen measures in Romania and Bulgaria .
Notwithstanding the generally positive judgment on the progress made by these two Member States in terms of security , the report itself admits that numerous technical and administrative shortcomings were detected in the bodies tasked with ensuring the border security of both States and , in particular , in the bodies tasked with checking and monitoring sea and land borders .
Secondly , the report acknowledges that if the two countries were included in the Schengen area , their geographical position next to the Turkish border would create two new routes for illegal migrants who currently only head for Greece , which , at this precise moment , is the only Schengen State in the Balkan peninsula .
The admission of Romania and Bulgaria would therefore considerably increase the size of the EU 's south-eastern Achilles heel and cause a threefold increase in the pressure it currently faces .
The draft resolution therefore flies directly in the face of the citizen 's need for protection - which Lega Nord has always put at the core of its programme - and I cannot support it .
The decision on admitting Romania and Bulgaria to the Schengen area now remains a purely political one .
The report supporting Romania 's inclusion in this area , adopted by the European Parliament , only serves to confirm that the opinions of the Union 's experts are correct - Romania has done a good job , made its borders secure and fulfilled all the required conditions .
The opinion of Parliament in Brussels is advisory and now , as in the past , the decision lies in the hands of the Council 's politicians .
Applying double standards and talking about mandatory criteria which , once they have been met , are regarded as ' only technical ' is not at all characteristic of a democratic , fair Union , as we know it .
This is why I can only hope that the opinions of the experts and those of the European legislative will not continue to be ignored by politicians from Member States .
Hiding behind words without resolving the matter directly can no longer be an option when admission to the Schengen area has never been a political problem , but a technical one .
The assessments of the independent experts and those of Parliament , which voted overwhelmingly in favour of Romania 's integration into Schengen , should count as a crucial factor in the European Council and , consequently , the procedure should be unblocked .
The Schengen area and , in particular , freedom of movement , is an acquis communautaire that genuinely means something to our citizens .
President Barroso reminded us that ' freedom of movement is to Europe what foundations are to a building ' .
Free movement is one of the Union 's greatest achievements .
I am delighted that Parliament has approved Bulgaria and Romania joining the Schengen area .
Huge efforts have been made to guarantee border security : their fourth generation surveillance systems are far more impressive than our second generation models .
Yet there are still barriers to the free movement of workers : firstly , legal and administrative obstacles that affect all aspects of citizens ' lives ; secondly , social dumping : although Article 45 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union guarantees equal treatment for workers , the work of the Committee on Petitions proves that the reality is quite different ; thirdly , social protection , which varies from one country to the next and so does not encourage mobility .
I would therefore like to propose a minimum basic social protection for the Union .
Although social protection falls under the competence of the Member States , the lack of harmonisation is clearly damaging the Internal Market .
in writing . - I voted against the Schengen acquis being extended to encompass Bulgaria and Romania simply because I do not think provisions have been made to make sure they adjoin the passport-free area safely and effectively .
Corruption and organised crime are still rife in these countries which are also portals for illegal immigration .
Sex trafficking , child prostitution , trafficking of children and managed criminal gangs would all potentially flourish under open border conditions and not enough has been done to curb these crimes in these Member States .
I voted in favour of Mr Coelho 's report on the full application of the provisions of the Schengen acquis in Bulgaria and Romania .
We should congratulate the two Member States on the work that they have done .
Both States have met the criteria for the full application of the Schengen acquis .
Nevertheless , this report emphasises that the region includes one of the Union 's most vulnerable external borders in terms of illegal immigration .
Bulgaria will have to implement transitional measures when it enters Schengen .
Both States will have to cooperate fully so as not to jeopardise a system which depends on mutual trust between the Member States .
I support the rapporteur 's position .
As Bulgaria and Romania meet the requirements for accession to the Schengen area , I welcome its expansion to include them .
However , I think these additional measures and the solutions given to the shortcomings mentioned are important , not least as regards the illegal immigration phenomena recorded in Bulgaria because of its peripheral geographical location .
The proper functioning of the free circulation of people , products , services and labour will depend on the robustness and harmonisation of policies on external borders , as that is the only way to preserve social peace and economic stability within the Union .
I voted in favour of the report .
Some Member States , including France , Germany and the Netherlands , want to change the rules of the game .
However it is not reasonable to add other criteria such as an assessment of policies on combating corruption and crime .
These issues are undoubtedly important , but the proposal is purely politically motivated .
Adding new criteria would create a two-tier system for the Member States .
in writing . - I voted in favour of this report on the grounds that such moves are important to reaffirm European solidarity at a time when it is being severely put to the test .
The German Free Democratic Party delegation in the European Parliament assumes that the inclusion of Romania and Bulgaria in the Schengen area will further improve freedom of movement within the EU .
Now that both Member States have achieved positive evaluation results in all areas of the Schengen review , there should be no more obstacles to delay inclusion further .
There is no denying that the technical securing of borders will not automatically make them impermeable as long as problems persist in combating corruption in the justice and policing system .
Accordingly , this challenge also relates to Member States already in the Schengen area .
For this reason , the German Free Democratic Party delegation believes that criteria such as the fight against corruption must receive greater attention when evaluating the Schengen mechanism , and any misdemeanours must be punished appropriately .
Today 's vote in the European Parliament has highlighted that Romania is ready to apply the Schengen acquis .
According to the rapporteur Mr Coelho , all the shortcomings which were identified in the past have been successfully rectified by the Romanian authorities .
Romania is capable of providing proper protection , whether at its air , sea or land borders .
This is why I find it regrettable that there are still doubts about our readiness to apply the acquis and that some Member States continue to protect their so-called ' national security ' by putting unjustified obstacles in the way of a Member State which has earned its right to be treated in a fair and non-discriminatory manner .
The European Parliament has spoken today with one voice about fairness .
For how much longer is the Council going to continue ignoring our position ?
The evaluations and additional visits by expert teams have shown that Bulgaria and Romania are ready to participate fully in the Schengen area .
I have therefore voted in favour of the report by my colleague , Mr Coelho .
The rapporteur , who has been monitoring this area over several sessions of Parliament , believes that although there remain unresolved issues that justify regular monitoring , these do not constitute an obstacle to the accession of Bulgaria and Romania to the Schengen area .
Given his experience in this area , I believe I can safely endorse his evaluation , and his demands for external border security .
The decision to open borders to these Member States will provide improved freedom of movement and , on a more practical level , will enable Bulgarians and Romanians to feel more integrated with a Union of which they are fully-fledged members .
I hope that the symbolism of the moment will also translate into greater fluidity of trade between countries , and into the handling of immigration and security issues in a more integrated way .
The rapporteur rightly warns of the sensitivity of the Bulgaria-Turkey-Greece region in terms of illegal immigration .
I agree with him when he points to the need for Bulgaria to adopt additional measures , including a special plan that includes measures to be applied at the moment of entry to the Schengen area , and an approach to combating a potential sharp increase in migration pressure common to Greece , Turkey and Bulgaria .
This report , drafted by our fellow Member , Mr Coelho , concerns the draft Council decision on the full application of the provisions of the Schengen acquis in the Republic of Bulgaria and Romania .
The Schengen Agreement was concluded on 14 June 1985 .
By abolishing checks at the internal borders of signatory countries and creating a common area , it made the free movement of people and goods throughout the European Union possible .
Given that Romania and Bulgaria adopted the Schengen acquis in 2007 ; that the documents show both Bulgaria and Romania are ready for EU accession from a technical point of view ; that all the accession headings were met in March 2011 ; and that the delay in the adoption of the new Schengen evaluation system to minimise existing problems - I fear that insecurity will increase - cannot prevent the entry of these countries into the EU , I am voting in favour .
Finally , I should like to congratulate the rapporteur on the excellent work he has done in drawing up this report , despite the obstacles the Council placed in the way of accessing certain documentation considered essential to achieving this .
Verification that new Member States meet the conditions necessary for the full application of the Schengen acquis is a precondition for the adoption of the Council decision to abolish border checks at internal borders , after it has consulted the European Parliament .
In this case , the report considers all the conditions for abolishing border checks with Bulgaria and Romania to have been met .
The decision to include these countries , which joined the EU in 2007 , in the Schengen area will have to be taken unanimously in the Council by the governments of all the countries already belonging to Schengen .
The rapporteur mentions the need for additional measures to be taken on the Bulgaria-Greece-Turkey border , which is one of the most sensitive in terms of illegal immigration .
The evaluation committee also invited Bulgaria to adopt additional measures , fearing migration flows from Turkey .
This entire context of pressure exerted on these countries , as well as the objectives of this pressure , are the reason for our abstention .
Moreover , we believe the considerations defining our position as regards expansion and the accession of new countries to the EU to be equally valid as regards the full application of the provisions of Schengen in these or other countries .
The rapporteur considers all the conditions for abolishing border checks with Bulgaria and Romania to have been met , but wants the European Parliament to be kept informed about additional measures to be taken on the Bulgaria-Greece-Turkey border , which is one of the most sensitive in terms of illegal immigration .
Verification that new Member States meet the conditions necessary for the application of every part of the Schengen acquis is a precondition for the EU Council of Ministers adopting a decision to abolish border checks at internal borders with these countries , after it has consulted the European Parliament .
However , the evaluation committee invited Bulgaria to adopt additional measures , including a special plan that includes measures to be applied at the moment of entry to the Schengen area , largely because they fear migration flows from Turkey .
The decision to include these two countries , which joined the EU in 2007 , in the Schengen area will have to be taken unanimously in the Council by all the governments of all the countries already belonging to Schengen .
The subject should be debated at the Justice and Home Affairs Council of 9 and 10 June .
Given our position on the accession of these countries , we have maintained our position of abstention , reinforced by the pressure that continues to be exerted on these countries .
Romania and Bulgaria adopted the Schengen acquis when joining the EU in 2007 .
The basic condition for the Council to decide in favour of abolishing checks on internal borders with these Member States is to confirm , within the framework of the assessment procedures , whether the new Member States have fulfilled the necessary condition of applying all parts of the Schengen acquis : data protection , the Schengen Information System ( SIS ) , air borders , land borders , sea borders , police cooperation and visas .
In order that the European Parliament can clearly assess all the elements necessary for reaching an opinion on whether these two countries are ready to join the Schengen area , it is essential to have full access to the expert assessment reports on progress in the preparations of these two countries .
In my opinion , however , Romania and Bulgaria have now proved that they are sufficiently prepared to apply all of the provisions of the Schengen acquis in a satisfactory manner .
At the same time , though , the situation must not be underestimated , and we must now think how to keep the situation under control following the full accession of these countries to Schengen .
I have nothing against our friends and neighbours in Bulgaria and Romania .
However , I do have a number of grievances against the Schengen provisions .
This appalling agreement was concluded on the sly and ratified one August back in the 1980s .
It has brought nothing but trouble .
Removing internal borders does not guarantee freedom of movement for European citizens ; rather , it creates insecurity and produces unmanageable population and migration trends within the EU , both in the countries of origin and of destination .
It also provides wonderful opportunities for illegal immigrants , who know that no matter where they enter Europe , they will be able to settle wherever they like : France is particularly hard hit .
The problems of the Roma and Lampedusa that have often been cited in this House merely serve to illustrate the problem .
I do not want Schengen to apply in my country , nor would I wish it on others .
Member States should retain full control of their borders and , where applicable , work together to strengthen the ' external ' borders .
I fully supported the adoption of this report which approves Bulgaria and Romania joining the Schengen area .
Both States have worked hard to beef up border controls and have been successful , as confirmed by the positive findings of the evaluations and expert visits organised by the Council 's Schengen Evaluation Working Group .
Both countries have met all the technical criteria laid down by the European Union .
Consequently I fully support their full participation in the Schengen area .
Member States cannot add new conditions ( such as an assessment of policies on combating corruption and crime ) or change the rules at half-time .
This week marks the 26th anniversary of the Schengen Agreement , one of the EU 's greatest achievements , which must be defended , as must freedom of movement , which is a fundamental right for European Union citizens .
I am in favour of Romania and Bulgaria joining the Schengen area .
A detailed and objective assessment of both countries ' compliance with the Schengen acquis has been completed .
Both countries have met all the criteria .
It is therefore unreasonable to add other conditions such as an assessment of policies on combating corruption and crime .
These issues are undoubtedly important , but the proposal is purely politically motivated .
Adding new criteria would create a two-tier system for Member States .
This vision of a two-speed Europe , with different rules for old and new Member States , is quite simply unacceptable .
The German Free Democratic Party delegation in the European Parliament assumes that the inclusion of Romania and Bulgaria in the Schengen area will further improve freedom of movement within the EU .
Now that both Member States have achieved positive evaluation results in all areas of the Schengen review , there should be no more obstacles to delay inclusion further .
There is no denying that the technical securing of borders will not automatically make them impermeable as long as problems persist in combating corruption in the justice and policing system .
Accordingly , this challenge also relates to Member States already in the Schengen area .
For this reason , the German Free Democratic Party delegation believes that criteria such as the fight against corruption must receive greater attention when evaluating the Schengen mechanism , and any misdemeanours must be punished appropriately .
Romania and Bulgaria adopted the Schengen acquis when joining the EU in 2007 .
According to the Act of Accession , verification , by means of evaluation procedures , that the necessary conditions for the application of all parts of the Schengen acquis ( data protection , the SIS , air borders , land borders , sea borders , police cooperation and visas ) have been met by the new Member States is a precondition for the Council to decide on the abolition of checks at internal borders with those Member States .
I did not endorse this document because taking into account the results of the evaluations and the necessary revisits carried out by teams of experts , the committee responsible has concluded that there are some outstanding issues that will require regular reporting and a follow-up at some point in the future .
It should be taken into account that the area made up by Bulgaria , Turkey and Greece is one the most sensitive points in the EU 's external borders in terms of illegal migration .
It is therefore essential for Bulgaria to adopt some additional measures , namely , to prepare a special plan containing actions to be implemented at the moment of entering Schengen and also a joint approach ( between Greece , Turkey and Bulgaria ) in order to be able to respond to the possible increase in migration flows .
I feel that the Member States concerned should be requested to inform the European Parliament and the Council , in writing in the course of a six-month period , beginning on the date of the entry into force of this decision , on the implementation of these additional measures and shortcomings .
I voted in favour of Mr Coelho 's report on the application of the provisions of the Schengen acquis in Bulgaria and Romania .
Indeed , Romania and Bulgaria adopted the Schengen acquis when joining the European Union in 2007 .
According to Article 4 ( 2 ) of the Act of Accession , verifying that the necessary conditions for the application of the Schengen acquis have been met by new Member States is a precondition for the Council to decide on the abolition of checks at internal borders with those Member States .
The assessments carried out show that both Romania and Bulgaria have proved that they are sufficiently prepared to apply all the provisions of the Schengen acquis in a satisfactory manner .
I therefore support the rapporteur 's request .
However , we cannot forget that the area in question is one of the most sensitive parts of the EU 's external borders in terms of illegal migration .
This means that additional measures need to be adopted because , as we know , the abolition of internal border controls requires a high level of mutual trust between Member States and also the existence of effective controls on external borders , since the security of the Schengen area depends on the rigour and efficiency with which each Member State carries out its external border checks .
Today in the European Parliament , we voted on the Coelho report on the application of the provisions of the Schengen acquis in Bulgaria and Romania .
It is worth noting that the end of preparations for these countries to join the Schengen area coincides with the debate on the EU migration policy and the growing opposition of some of the countries in the Schengen area to plans for its expansion .
It is worth emphasising the fact that Romania and Bulgaria have met almost all the requirements imposed upon them , in particular : land , air and sea border checks , the issuing of visas , police cooperation and data protection .
We must also not forget that these are EU border countries , which are contending with the problem of an influx of illegal immigrants .
Sofia and Bucharest are jointly applying for membership , and the current state of preparations in both countries has been rated highly , so I voted in favour of adopting the report .
I naturally voted for the accession of Romania and Bulgaria to the Schengen area .
Like all Romanian and European citizens , I want the reforms to the justice system in my country to continue , the level of corruption and fraud to be reduced , cases to be judged justly and more quickly , and the guilty to be punished harshly .
We joined the European Union because we wanted to adopt its internal rules .
I feel it is normal for us to abide by them and to keep the promises which we made on joining .
I thank the Union and Member States which are helping us carry out permanent reforms to the justice system and implement anti-corruption measures because this is also what Romanian citizens want .
in writing . - I voted for this report on the basis of expert reports which say that at this moment , both Romania and Bulgaria have proved that they are sufficiently prepared to apply all the provisions of the Schengen acquis in a satisfactory manner .
Bulgaria and Romania satisfy the requirements for full integration into the Schengen area , based on their evaluation reports and the reports by the expert monitoring teams .
However , the European Parliament should be informed about the additional measures to be taken in the area between Bulgaria , Turkey and Greece in order to address a possible increase in immigration flows .
Bulgaria and Romania have completed all the work demanded by Fortress Europe in order for their citizens to be able to move freely within the Schengen area .
This report asks for even more .
It calls for a joint approach in conjunction with Greece to tackle migration from Arab countries .
This demand is unacceptable .
I am abstaining so as not to vote against freedom of movement within the Union .
Bulgaria and Romania have been subjected to the evaluation of the proper application of all parts of the Schengen acquis : control of the land , sea and air borders , police cooperation , visas , connection to the Schengen Information System ( SIS ) , and data protection .
This is a precondition for the EU Council of Ministers in deciding to abolish checks at internal borders with those Member States , following consultation with the European Parliament .
Following the positive results of the evaluations and follow-up visits by teams of experts , it can be concluded that although some issues remain outstanding and regular reports and future follow-up visits are being demanded , these do not constitute an obstacle to the full accession of Bulgaria and Romania to the Schengen area .
We cannot , however , neglect the Bulgaria-Turkey-Greece region , which is one of the EU 's most sensitive external borders in terms of illegal immigration .
There is a need to strengthen the measures already taken and to be prepared to combat a possible sharp increase in migration pressure .
Bulgaria should adopt additional measures , including a special plan that includes measures to be applied at the moment of entry to the Schengen area .
The right to freedom of movement is one of the most fundamental and most visible rights conferred on citizens of the Union .
Within the Schengen area , it is now possible to move freely without border controls .
What a change in comparison to the era when Europe was scattered with border posts where checks - nit-picking ones at times - were the norm , not to mention the impossibility for citizens in the East to cross the iron curtain without risking their lives !
Currently , this space comprises 25 participating States .
Romania and Bulgaria should join this circle soon - at least that is my hope .
These two countries have adopted the Schengen acquis since their accession to the European Union in 2007 .
Taking into account the results of the evaluations and the visits carried out by teams of experts , I am completely in favour of full accession to the Schengen area for these two Member States , even though certain problems are still to be resolved and will require follow-up .
I would add , however , that it would be unfortunate if new conditions , which were unknown at the time of the request and evaluation , were imposed along the way .
in writing . - It seems that Romania and Bulgaria have proved that they are , to a sufficient extent , ready to fulfil the Schengen acquis .
There are many unresolved issues in the report on the expansion of the Schengen area prepared by Carlos Coelho .
From the assumptions of reports of evaluation missions and results of repeated evaluation visits , I came to the conclusion that there are separate areas which require constant monitoring .
The report , which has not been adopted yet , is the conclusion of a repeated visit by the evaluation mission regarding the external border of Bulgaria .
Therefore , it is clear that the triangle Bulgaria-Romania-Greece is one of the most sensitive regions from the point of view of illegal migration and that requires Bulgaria to prepare additional measures to resist migration pressure .
I think that the report should be accepted . I voted in favour .
I voted for the Coelho report on applying the Schengen acquis in Romania and Bulgaria and I welcome the realistic attitude and good faith shown by all my fellow Members who also voted for this report .
Romania and Bulgaria have fulfilled the technical conditions for joining the Schengen area and this must be the only factor to be considered in adopting this decision .
Romania and Bulgaria have proven their ability to adopt the necessary domestic legislation and make their borders secure .
Furthermore , great strides have been made in the fight against corruption , a topic which often has been associated wrongfully and , to an exaggerated extent , with accession to the Schengen area .
Today , the European Parliament adopted a resolution on the application of all the provisions of the Schengen acquis to Bulgaria and Romania .
These countries , which joined the European Union in 2007 , adopted only some of the provisions concerning the Schengen area , and have applied them within this limited scope ever since .
The upshot of this situation is that border checks are still carried out along the borders of these countries .
When they joined the EU , these countries were not ready to adopt the Schengen package in its entirety , and have therefore had to reform and extend their policies on border checks .
In addition , the section of the border between Bulgaria , Turkey and Greece , which is one of the EU 's most vulnerable external borders in terms of illegal emigration , poses an extremely significant problem .
Since joining the EU , Bulgaria and Romania have taken numerous measures aimed at properly preparing and protecting their borders .
During this entire period , the Schengen Evaluation Working Party has carried out systematic inspections and checks , which have now shown that both countries are sufficiently well prepared to apply the provisions of the Schengen acquis satisfactorily .
The abolition of internal border control is particularly important for the entire European Union and each Member State individually .
In order for the Schengen area to be able to function effectively and for the goals set to be achieved , it is necessary to ensure that the abolition of border control does not have negative consequences , particularly as regards illegal migration .
Every country aiming to join the Schengen area must meet , without exception , all of the conditions of the Schengen acquis concerning data protection , the Schengen Information System , borders in the air , on land and at sea , police cooperation and visas .
Moreover , it is very important to ensure that every Member State has strict and effective external border controls .
I believe that Romania and Bulgaria will soon be able to become real members , capable of applying all of the provisions of the Schengen acquis .
At the moment , particular attention should be paid to Bulgaria , because this country , like Turkey and Greece , lies on the EU 's external borders .
It is the most sensitive and fragile place in the Union .
When they become full members of the Schengen area , it is therefore crucial for Bulgaria and Romania to be properly prepared to manage increased migration flows , to be able to implement measures to combat illegal migration appropriately and effectively , and to guarantee well-functioning external border control mechanisms .
I voted in favour of admitting Romania and Bulgaria to the Schengen area .
Following careful examination , the EU committee responsible recognised that these countries have fulfilled all the criteria for membership of the Schengen area : they offer sufficient assurances as regards the protection of national borders on land , at sea and in the air and they have mastered the Schengen Information System for data exchange and reliably ensure data protection .
My group considers the introduction of new criteria for membership at this point to be wrong because this would mean applying double standards for these countries .
The difficulties that Romania and Bulgaria still face - organised crime and corruption - are , undoubtedly , serious accusations against the governments of these countries , which should combat these phenomena more effectively .
However , in my opinion , closing Schengen 's gates to Romania and Bulgaria should not penalise honest citizens , who would suffer the most if they now lost the opportunity to travel freely throughout Europe .
In the context of the free movement of European citizens within the European Union , I think Bulgaria and Romania joining the Schengen acquis is an excellent step forward and I therefore voted in favour of the relevant provisions being implemented .
I also believe that even though both countries have worked hard for the free movement of their citizens within Europe , they should , in any case , continue to bring their controls and rules into line with European standards , given the sensitive nature of the eastern European borders in the Balkans .
I voted today in favour of the opinion of the European Parliament on the full application of the provisions of the Schengen acquis in the Republic of Bulgaria and Romania .
This is a balanced approach , as the opinion recognises the progress made by these two countries in terms of the criteria which must be satisfied for integration into the Schengen area ( control of land , sea and air borders , visas , police cooperation , readiness in terms of connecting to and using the Schengen Information System and data protection ) , but also requires regular progress reports on certain issues which are considered to be outstanding .
Thus , Parliament has given the go-ahead for the integration of these two countries into the Schengen area and equal rights for their citizens , who have not enjoyed the right to move freely in the past .
We trust that the European Parliament 's message will act as a guide and that unanimity will be achieved in the Council so that a final decision can be taken .
I would congratulate my colleague , Mr Coelho , on his excellent work on the report on the draft Council decision on the full application of the provisions of the Schengen acquis in the Republic of Bulgaria and Romania .
Romania and Bulgaria adopted the Schengen acquis when they joined the European Union in 2007 .
The report says that compliance with the necessary conditions for application of the acquis in question - data protection , the Schengen Information System ( SIS ) , air borders , land borders , sea borders , political cooperation and visas - was evaluated on the ground , and progress in the implementation of measures aiming for the abolition of checks at the internal borders with these Member States was confirmed in situ .
According to the rapporteur and shadow rapporteurs who have been monitoring this process , the outstanding issues , which will require regular reports and monitoring in the future , do not constitute an obstacle to these two Member States ' full accession to the Schengen area .
For these reasons , I support the decision to open the borders to these Member States .
I am voting for this report and welcome Bulgaria and Romania to the Schengen area .
I voted in favour of the report by Mr Coelho proposing the accession of Bulgaria and Romania to the ' Schengen area ' .
This is one of the greatest achievements of the European integration process .
The accession of a new State is conditional on strict compliance with the criteria of the Schengen Agreement .
In the case of Bulgaria and Romania , the European Parliament 's Committee on Civil Liberties - like the European Commission - has concluded after evaluation that these two States meet the conditions laid down in full .
Consequently , there is no longer any reason why they cannot integrate into this area of free movement .
I would find it unacceptable if certain States , under false pretexts and motivated by internal political calculation , continued to oppose it .
The Community acquis should not be regarded as an à la carte system where Member States can adapt or suspend provisions as circumstances dictate .
Therefore , I solemnly call upon the Council to acknowledge the improvements made by Bulgaria and Romania and admit them into the Schengen area .
Taking into account the results of the evaluations and the necessary revisits carried out by the expert teams , it is evident that Romania is now in a position to implement the Schengen acquis fully , all the points meriting attention or reviewing have been remedied ( improvement of risk assessment , upgrade of the security features of the buildings , improvement of the process for submitting and processing visa applications and so on ) and , in some aspects , it could be considered as a model of best practice .
According to the evaluation reports , Romania has shown that it is sufficiently prepared to apply both the non-SIS related provisions of the Schengen acquis , as well as its SIS-related provisions , in a satisfactory manner .
The preconditions have been fulfilled for the Council to take the decision referred to in Article 4 ( 2 ) of the Act of Accession , allowing for the lifting of internal controls at air , land and sea borders .
This means that the removal of internal border controls requires a high level of mutual trust between Members States regarding the existence of effective external border controls because the security of the Schengen area depends on how rigorously and effectively each Member State controls its external borders .
I voted for this report because the full application of the Schengen agreement in Bulgaria and Romania certainly means the abolition of border checks for these countries as well .
At a time when some governments are daring to suggest the reestablishment of checks at internal borders , it is even more important to demonstrate our support for the extension of what is , today , one of the European Union 's best achievements .
Full application in these Member States is also a question of equality and non-discrimination within Europe because excluding those two countries would send an extremely negative signal to their populations , which are very keen to join the area of freedom of movement .
For these reasons , it is important to give this stage broad support .
The Balkan region is one of the most sensitive areas of the EU 's external borders in terms of illegal migration .
This phenomenon is of great significance and has repercussions on the daily lives of many of our citizens , exacerbating the insecurity they face .
Before being able to think about the possible admittance of Bulgaria and Romania to the Schengen area , special and detailed plans must be drawn up to contain migratory pressures .
In addition , improving controls at external borders must be combined with fighting the corruption of local authorities .
I voted against this measure for the reasons stated and to better protect our citizens against illegal immigration .
Accession to the Schengen acquis involves the need to comply with various evaluation procedures : candidate countries have to comply with a range of conditions in order to be admitted to the area of freedom of movement , which currently covers 25 countries and 400 million Europeans .
This report evaluates the positions of Bulgaria and Romania , stressing , on the one hand , that Bulgaria follows best practices in various activities and , on the other , the efforts made by Romania as regards the shortcomings that were being detected .
In conclusion , while I would stress the need to resolve a number of issues , the evaluation of these two Member States ' behaviour is positive overall .
The German Free Democratic Party delegation in the European Parliament assumes that the inclusion of Romania and Bulgaria in the Schengen area will further improve freedom of movement within the EU .
Now that both Member States have achieved positive evaluation results in all areas of the Schengen review , there should be no more obstacles to delay inclusion further .
There is no denying that the technical securing of borders will not automatically make them impermeable as long as problems persist in combating corruption in the justice and policing system .
Accordingly , this challenge also relates to Member States already in the Schengen area .
For this reason , the German Free Democratic Party delegation believes that criteria such as the fight against corruption must receive greater attention when evaluating the Schengen mechanism , and any misdemeanours must be punished appropriately .
in writing . - We support the accession of Bulgaria and Romania provided that all preconditions are met ( as is the case , according to the experts ' opinion ) .
According to Article 4 ( 2 ) of Romania and Bulgaria 's Act of Accession to the Schengen acquis , the precondition for the abolition of checks at internal borders with those countries is verification that the Schengen requirements are being met .
Since both Romania and Bulgaria have proved that they are sufficiently prepared to apply all the provisions of the Schengen acquis in a satisfactory manner , both Member States should become fully-fledged members of the area .
I would underline , however , the importance of rigorous controls at external borders for the purposes of internal security .
As it is located in a sensitive area in terms of illegal migration , Bulgaria should adopt additional measures to respond to a possible increase in migratory pressure at its borders .
The Bulgaria-Turkey-Greece area is one of the most sensitive parts of the European Union 's external borders in terms of illegal migration .
I disagree with the rapporteur , Mr Coelho , in that the admission of the Republic of Bulgaria and of Romania to the Schengen area cannot be completed in the short term because of the deficiencies in the fields of equipment , performance of border checks , training of personnel and the obligation to exchange information .
Romania and Bulgaria adopted the Schengen acquis when they acceded to the EU in 2007 .
The integration of Romania and Bulgaria to the Schengen area is acceptable , provided that they satisfy certain technical requirements noted in the relevant procedure .
As the rapporteur quite rightly points out , the accession of Bulgaria to the Schengen Agreement should be followed by a special plan to combat illegal immigration .
Cooperation is needed on the question of land border management .
In 2010 , 47 000 immigrants were arrested crossing the Greco-Turkish border , passing to the Greek side of the River Evros , which marks the border between Greece and Turkey .
This number accounts for 90 % of the total in Europe for that year .
Within this framework , I welcome the rapporteur 's proposal for a special plan to be prepared as soon as Bulgaria joins the Schengen area , containing actions in this direction and a joint approach between Greece , Turkey and Bulgaria , so that it is in a position to cope with what may be a large increase in immigration flows .
I voted against Bulgaria and Romania becoming full members of the Schengen cooperation at this point in time .
The issue concerning Bulgaria giving its military police access to information from Schengen records demonstrates that there are problems with those parts of Schengen that these countries are already included in .
There are also problems with corruption and organised crime .
Europol points out that the full admission of Bulgaria and Romania into the Schengen cooperation will give criminal groups from the Balkans and the former Soviet Union easier access to the EU .
Until these problems are resolved , full admission of Bulgaria and Romania to Schengen will bolster cross-border corruption and crime whilst , at the same time , giving certain forces the opportunity they were waiting for to demand increased monitoring and undermining of the rule of law .
At a time when more and more people are talking about a crisis of trust in the European Union , the fact that the overwhelming majority of MEPs support the opinion of the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs should be seen as confirmation that the idea of European integration still continues to be relevant .
The fact that Bulgaria and Romania have external EU borders should not be regarded as a barrier preventing them from joining the Schengen area .
Criteria for joining the area were established with the aim of ensuring the highest possible level of security .
Experts have confirmed that the appropriate technical standards have been put in place .
The countries have met the requirements imposed on them to an extent which makes it possible to abolish border checks with the remaining EU Member States .
It should be emphasised that , as was the case for my country , joining the Schengen area does not mean that Romania and Bulgaria no longer have any work left to do as regards full implementation of the cooperation instrument .
Both countries will have much work ahead of them in order to establish good working practices .
The example of Poland shows clearly that the new Member States are able to meet the Schengen requirements effectively .
In the opinion of the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs , we have the chance to implement the next stage of the political project known as the area of freedom , security and justice , provided appropriate monitoring is carried out by the European institutions .
The European Parliament should play a key role in this process , and it must be kept up-to-date with the situation in Bulgaria and Romania .
in writing . - I welcome this report which proposes to apply the provisions of the Schengen acquis relating to the Schengen Information System to Bulgaria and Romania .
I am also pleased that the report contains safeguards for data protection .
Today , Parliament has adopted the report produced by Mr Coelho on the full application of the provisions of the Schengen acquis in Bulgaria and Romania .
This report follows on from the evaluations carried out under the auspices of the Council 's Schengen Evaluation Working Group .
The evaluations have not found any obstacles to Romania and Bulgaria joining the Schengen area .
Opening the borders has been one of the European Union 's greatest achievements .
I am therefore delighted that Parliament has voted in favour of these two new States joining the Schengen area .
The Council now needs to be realistic and show solidarity by giving its unanimous approval .
The creation of the Schengen area dates from 1985 and currently includes a territory of 42 673 km of external sea borders and 7 721 km of land borders , taking in 400 million Europeans .
The Schengen Agreement currently covers 25 Member States with a common area for the free movement of people , by removing systematic checks at internal borders and creating a single common border .
In order to fully realise this agreement , common rules were established - regarding , inter alia , checks along the entire external border , common visa policy , police and judicial cooperation - and the Schengen Information System ( SIS ) was created .
This report concerns the entry of Bulgaria and Romania to the Schengen acquis and , following the evaluation visits and a final report , it concludes that both countries are ready for full accession .
However , some issues remain outstanding , in particular , the need to establish a plan to combat possible pressure from illegal migration .
I therefore agree with the rapporteur that there is a need for the Member States in question to inform Parliament and the Council within a six-month period , beginning on the date of entry into force of this decision , on the implementation of these additional measures and progress with the shortcomings identified .
The German Free Democratic Party delegation in the European Parliament assumes that the inclusion of Romania and Bulgaria in the Schengen area will further improve freedom of movement within the EU .
Now that both Member States have achieved positive evaluation results in all areas of the Schengen review , there should be no more obstacles to delay inclusion further .
There is no denying that technically securing borders will not automatically make them secure as long as problems persist in combating corruption in the justice and policing system .
However , this challenge also concerns Member States already in the Schengen area .
For this reason , the German Free Democratic Party delegation believes that criteria such as the fight against corruption must receive greater attention when evaluating the Schengen mechanism , and any misdemeanours must be punished appropriately .
In 2007 , when Romania and Bulgaria joined the EU , they adopted the Schengen acquis .
According to Article 4 ( 2 ) of the Act of Accession , ' the verification , through evaluation procedures , that the necessary conditions for the application of all parts of the Schengen acquis ( data protection , the SIS , air borders , land borders , sea borders , police cooperation and visas ) have been met by the new Member States is a precondition for the Council to decide on the abolition of checks at internal borders with those Member States ' .
According to the evaluation reports compiled by experts , both Romania and Bulgaria have shown that they are prepared to apply the provisions of the Schengen acquis in a satisfactory manner .
This is why we call on the Council to approve the entry of Romania and Bulgaria into the Schengen area .
The Union must apply the same criteria to all Member States , including when it comes to joining the Schengen area .
The Cooperation and Verification Mechanism for the justice system does not feature among the criteria for joining the Schengen area and cannot be referred to in connection with Romania and Bulgaria joining the area .
Since Romania and Bulgaria fulfil the technical conditions for joining the Schengen area , on behalf of the citizens of Romania , Bulgaria and Europe , we call on the Council to approve the accession of Romania and Bulgaria to the area .
Bulgaria and Romania should join the Schengen area , since both countries are ready to do so and the objections of certain Member States are unfounded .
I voted in favour of the report on the integration of Romania and Bulgaria into the Schengen area because both countries have met the technical criteria in question .
However , additional measures should be taken by Bulgaria , in cooperation with Greece and Turkey , to address the problem of illegal immigration .
in writing . - As a friend , albeit critical friend , of Bulgaria , I wish to do all I can to assist progress in that country , but not at the expense of my own country 's well-being .
I therefore abstained in the vote .
On the accession of Bulgaria to the EU on 1 January 2007 , weaknesses remained in the areas of judicial reform and the fight against corruption and organised crime .
The Bulgarian authorities undertook to bring about radical improvement .
The EU established a ' Cooperation and Verification Mechanism ' to assist Bulgaria and to verify progress against six benchmarks .
Improvement has been disappointingly slow .
In its most recent report on these matters ( February 2011 ) , the Commission stated that Bulgaria needed to improve further the way the judiciary , police and other investigative bodies are structured , managed and cooperate .
Nevertheless , the 27 governments in Council concluded , perhaps surprisingly , that Bulgaria fulfilled the conditions for Schengen , a system which is itself under question at the moment .
The UK , of course , remains outside the Schengen area .
I welcome the majority of over 80 % received in the European Parliament during the vote in favour of adopting the report on the fulfilment of the Schengen acquis by Romania and Bulgaria .
This vote sends out a powerful political signal .
In the European Parliament 's view , Romania and Bulgaria are ready to join the Schengen area .
According to the position of the UDMR ( Democratic Union of Hungarians in Romania ) , Romania and Bulgaria must receive a definite prospect in 2011 of joining this area of free movement .
I do not think that the rules should be changed during the game , and the decision on joining the Schengen area must take into account what has been achieved under the Schengen Agreement and not be based on political assessments .
The situation which has been created over the accession of Romania and Bulgaria to the Schengen area highlights how weak the sense of solidarity is within the EU .
The fact that there are Member States prepared to give up one of the basic freedoms of European integration , the freedom of movement , sounds an alarm bell .
At the same time , this is a mistaken response to the tensions caused by the economic crisis and to its social consequences .
The UDMR believes that we need a strong Europe , which can be achieved through greater solidarity and by firmly rejecting internal protectionism and populism .
Despite having a few doubts about the excessive reach of the text - which falls within the ambit of the Europe 2020 strategy - I think the objectives of the resolution are most welcome .
I therefore voted in favour of Mr Coelho 's report on verifying the necessary conditions for the application of the Schengen acquis , which is a prerequisite for the abolition of internal border controls with Bulgaria and Romania .
This report will be adopted despite the controversy in the working party of the Group of the Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats in the European Parliament on the amendment raising the nuclear issue , and the amendment of the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) removing the issue of additional permanent members of the United Nations ( UN ) Security Council .
There needs to be a substantial change in the international order so that the EU can better overcome its challenges using concerted global action .
I would also draw attention to the fact that , according to Article 21 of the Treaty , the EU is formally committed to effective multilateralism and to the role of the UN in particular .
in writing . - I voted in favour of this resolution , not only because of the importance of the upcoming 66th session of the UN General Assembly , but also because it is vitally important that the EU finally steps up cooperation and coordination in this and all other UN bodies .
Article 34 of the Treaty on European Union clearly stipulates that Member States shall coordinate their action in international organisations and that Member States , which are also members of the UN Security Council , will concert and , in the execution of their functions , defend the positions and the interests of the Union .
So far , cooperation was not exemplary in the UN General Assembly .
Neither was it in the UN Security Council .
We all know well that Member States that belong to the UN Security Council ( France , the United Kingdom and Germany ) failed to act in concert and come up with a single position vis-à-vis military intervention in Libya , in particular , with regard to the vote on the UN Security Council Resolution 1973 .
I would therefore urge EU Member States to strive for a common position on issues vital to international peace and security , especially in areas where there is already a broad international consensus .
In a rapidly changing world , the European Union is faced with numerous challenges requiring a concerted global response .
All these major transformations are making the European Union commit itself actively , alongside the other partners , to promoting effective solutions to the problems affecting both European citizens and the whole of humanity .
The European Union is the world 's biggest provider of development aid and the United Nations ' main partner in supporting the latter 's efforts in carrying out its activities .
The European Union must play a proactive role in creating a United Nations Organisation which makes an effective contribution to global solutions , peace and security , as well as democracy and international order , based on the rule of law .
According to Article 21 of the Treaty on European Union , the EU is formally committed to effective multilateralism , which has a powerful UN organisation as its focal point , making a vital contribution to tackling the global challenges .
We are currently witnessing radical changes in the international order ; changes to which the European Union can no longer be a mere spectator .
I think the European Union should see this as a starting point and take a truly active role in dealing with both current and emerging world powers , shaking off once and for all its reputation as a political dwarf in terms of international policy .
In the same vein , I agree with the need expressed in Mr Lambsdorff 's proposal for the Member States to exert pressure during discussions to reform the United Nations Security Council in order to obtain a permanent seat for the European Union .
By strengthening the role of the European Union at the United Nations , we will succeed in ensuring that the EU takes a leading role in regional and global affairs .
Otherwise , we shall have to keep facing up to the continuous lack of coordination of Member States ' interests on the international scene .
in writing . - I strongly supported the main thrust of this report .
It calls for an enhanced role for the EU in the UN system , taking into account the institutional changes brought by the Lisbon Treaty .
Today 's vote comes after a relevant success for the EU in the UN : the adoption of a set of modalities granting the EU delegation in the UN General Assembly the right to make interventions , as well as the right of reply and the ability to present oral proposals and amendments .
These improvements reflect a clear reality : The EU and its Member States are the biggest financial contributors to the UN system , with EU funds amounting to 38 % of the UN regular budget , more than two fifths of UN peacekeeping operations and close to half of the contributions to the UN funds and programmes .
Moreover , the EU , in spite of all its limitations , is a major global actor whose weight must be properly recognised at every level .
I supported the report by Alexander Graf Lambsdorff because I think that we need to foster greater cohesion between the Member States ' positions and enhance our ability to negotiate with other regional groups .
It is a question , then , of improving the efficiency and transparency of the United Nations and enhancing the management of its financial resources .
I am certain that reforming the working methods and composition of the United Nations Security Council is necessary in the medium term .
A major transformation of the world order is taking place , challenging the European Union to engage more actively with current and emerging world powers and with other bilateral and multilateral partners , in order to promote effective solutions to problems which affect both EU citizens and the world at large .
In accordance with Article 21 of the Treaty on European Union , the EU is formally committed to effective multilateralism with a strong UN at its core , which is essential in order to address global challenges , such as climate change and environmental degradation , the universality and indivisibility of human rights , poverty reduction and development for all , the consequences of demographic change and migration , and international organised crime .
I agree that the EU should play a proactive part in building a United Nations that can effectively contribute to global solutions , peace and security , democracy and a world order based on the principles of the rule of law .
I voted for the report drafted by Mr Lambsdorff because I think that the EU is creating a new identity for itself on the global stage at the moment .
I should remind you of the lengthy period of cooperation between the two international organisations , as well as of the EU 's involvement in numerous projects launched by the UN .
I must mention at this point the commitment made by European leaders to achieve the Millennium Development Goals .
The eradication of poverty globally now features among the Union 's foreign policy priorities .
I welcome the initiative for strengthening cooperation on bringing stability to crisis zones and on drawing up new safety standards for nuclear power plants .
The course of events in Japan highlights the need for this partnership .
In view of the social upheaval in the Mediterranean region , I think that coordinated action between the EU and UN would ensure a peaceful transition to democracy .
In this regard , I welcome improving relations with regional organisations .
I am in favour of this proposal for a European Parliament recommendation to the Council on the next session of the United Nations General Assembly .
The proposal underlines that the European Union and the United Nations share the common commitment to promoting democracy , respect for human rights and peace among the international community .
The proposal states that the further enlargement of the United Nations Security Council in order to include the EU is a key factor for effectively pursuing the objectives mentioned above .
The proposal rejects Germany 's request to occupy the potential new EU seat at the United Nations on a permanent basis and instead incorporates the Italian proposal to allow all Member States to occupy the seat in rotation in order to respect the principle of the equal dignity of all Member States .
The German request had been seen as an attempt to impose the political authority of Germany and the Anglo-French-German bloc within and outwith the EU .
However , the adoption of the Italian position through this proposal confirms that the possible enlargement of the Security Council would also assure Italy the chance of having its voice heard on crucial international issues outside the EU .
I have therefore voted in favour .
in writing . - It is important that Europe reaffirms its commitment to , and cooperation with , international movements like the UN at this time .
The attention that the European Parliament gives the UN is most important .
The times we live in make it clear that there is a need to link up the Member States and the European Union in the most diverse situations and instances .
This coordination is also very important in the United Nations ( UN ) .
I would even say it is essential to ensure European interests and values are defended and safeguarded in what is the most comprehensive and decisive international organisation .
Regardless of future changes to how the Union is represented within the UN , and in the Security Council - a debate which is still open - in particular , there is increasingly a need to join up the efforts of European countries so as to , alongside the Union 's representatives overseas , encourage a collective capacity for intervention and influence .
Regular consultations between the ambassadors of the Member States and those of the EU will be an important step along this path .
At the same time , the Union should contribute to making the UN more efficient and transparent , and improve the management of its financial resources .
The creation of a United Nations parliamentary assembly within the framework of the United Nations system is an interesting proposal that is worth studying and debating .
This report by Mr Lambsdorff concerns a proposal for a European Parliament recommendation to the Council on the 66th Session of the United Nations ( UN ) General Assembly .
The transformation of the present international order at global level through conflicts in various parts of the world , and the self-determination of many peoples that have been downtrodden for decades , or even centuries , make the upcoming session of the UN General Assembly unusually significant .
Pursuant to Articles 21 and 41 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union , the European Parliament could not fail to take advantage of this session to push its positions on a number of subjects : not least , the role of the EU in the UN system ; the EU and global governance ; peace , security and justice ; development ; human rights ; and climate change .
I therefore agree with the rapporteur 's proposals mentioned above , as well as with the need to foster a debate on the role of parliaments and national assemblies in the UN system , and on creating a UN parliamentary assembly .
The report advocates giving the European Union a seat on the United Nations ( UN ) General Assembly and a permanent seat on the Security Council .
A number of voices have been heard advocating this idea in recent times , supported by the amendments introduced by the Treaty of Lisbon , specifically , the attribution of ' legal personality ' to the EU .
These are amendments whose legitimacy we have always contested .
This demand - which subverts the spirit of the organisation : an organisation of states and not of supranational organisations - is not being made with the intention of making the UN 's workings more democratic or of creating a new world order that is fairer and more peaceful .
The EU 's alliance with the North Atlantic Treaty Organisation ( NATO ) and the United States to undertake wars and carry out acts of aggression in countries like Libya is proof of this .
It is fundamental principles of the UN Charter , such as non-intervention in states ' internal affairs , respect for their sovereignty and independence , and recognition of their right to development , that the EU has been placing at risk .
Sovereignty comes from the people and the peoples of Europe have not given it to this EU , which is increasingly anti-social and anti-democratic .
This report again makes the unacceptable demand that the European Union have a seat at the United Nations ( UN ) General Assembly and a permanent seat on the Security Council , as a result of the anti-democratic Treaty of Lisbon and the ' legal personality ' acquired from it .
It is not with the intention of making the workings of either the UN body more democratic , or of creating a new , fairer world order , that the majority in the European Parliament is doing this .
How can an EU which , in alliance with the North Atlantic Treaty Organisation ( NATO ) and the United States , is promoting a war , and violating international law and the UN Charter in Libya , contribute to making the UN more democratic , or to humanity 's peace and progress ?
How can the EU contribute to non-intervention in states ' internal affairs , and respect their sovereignty and independence , and their right to development - rights enshrined in the UN Charter and in international law - when , in partnership with the International Monetary Fund ( IMF ) , it is imposing an unprecedented programme of aggression against the workers and people of Portugal , and of the usurping of their resources ?
It cannot .
Sovereignty comes from the people and the peoples of Europe have not given it to an EU that is increasingly anti-social and anti-democratic .
The European Union should play an active role in developing the UN so that it can contribute effectively to global solutions , peace , security , democracy and international order based on the rule of law .
There is a need to support multilateralism as a primary strategic interest of the EU , and to strengthen cohesion and the visibility of the EU as a global player within the UN .
The ongoing transformation of the international order presents the EU with a challenge to focus more actively on current and emergent global powers and other bilateral and multilateral partnerships , in order to support effective solutions to the problems affecting EU citizens and the whole world in general .
The document under discussion sets out the European Union 's priorities to take to the United Nations General Assembly .
The key point , which has now been under discussion for some time , is the debate about reforming the Security Council .
The proposal for a European Union seat that may be rotated between the Member States seems like an excellent idea .
I therefore support the report .
I endorsed the document because it advocates advancing effective multilateralism as the overriding strategic concern of the Union and strengthening the coherence and visibility of the EU as a global actor at the UN , inter alia , by better coordinating internal EU consultations on UN issues and by promoting greater outreach on a wide range of issues .
It also promotes engaging with the EU 's strategic partners within the UN system and giving the strategic partnerships a multilateral dimension by including global issues on the agendas for the EU 's bilateral and multilateral summits , as well as contributing to improving the efficiency and transparency of the UN and enhancing the management of the UN 's financial resources .
Furthermore , it touches on important issues , such as strengthening the role of the International Criminal Court and the international criminal justice system , promoting accountability , putting an end to impunity , and strengthening the crisis-prevention structures and their effectiveness within the United Nations Development Programme , with a view to transforming this organisation into a global leader in crisis prevention and recovery .
It also stresses the need for close cooperation between the EU and the UN in the area of civilian and military crisis management , particularly in humanitarian relief operations , and the need to thoroughly reform the International Atomic Energy Agency ( IAEA ) , by bringing to an end its dual function of both monitoring and promoting nuclear energy use , and to limit the IAEA 's responsibilities to overseeing the nuclear energy industry and verifying compliance with the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty , as well as other important issues , which I basically agree with and support .
In the run-up to the 66th ordinary session of the UN General Assembly , the European Parliament , as usual , addressed its recommendations to the Council , representing the Member States , who are the only fully fledged members of the organisation .
However , this year , the Union will be able to take advantage of its new ' super-observer ' status , which confers special rights to speak during sessions .
I voted in favour of this resolution because it is commensurate with the Union 's new ambitions at international level .
The Treaty of Lisbon grants the EU new prerogatives , confirms the development of its international capacity and puts new tools in place .
Following this act , the Union must use this new ambition in the service of effective multilateralism , with the full strength of its values at the core .
It also calls for a strengthening of global governance at a time when global challenges require global solutions .
Finally , it focuses on core themes that the Union must play a role in advancing , as is its custom : development , human rights and climate change .
The current change in the international order is pushing the European Union to make a more active effort in its dealings with world and emerging powers so that it can take a proactive role in building a United Nations that can make an effective contribution to global solutions : peace , security , democracy and an international order based on the rule of law .
This represents an essential starting point for dealing with climate change and environmental degradation , the universality and indivisibility of human rights , poverty reduction and development for all , the consequences of demographic change , migration and international organised crime .
Thanks to the Treaty of Lisbon , we now have permanent structures for external representation .
This allows us to take an international role in line with our pre-eminent economic status and to act as a global player capable of sharing the responsibility for security around the world .
It is down to us to clearly identify our interests and strategic objectives in order to be able to act effectively .
The European Union is the world 's largest provider of development aid and a major partner of the UN in crisis and post-crisis situations .
We therefore feel duty bound to promote effective multilateralism as the overriding strategic concern of the Union and to strengthen the consistency and visibility of the EU as a global player .
The EU cannot forget its role in every respect as a leading actor on the world stage .
As such , it needs to increase its role in all the multilateral organisations and , in particular , the United Nations ( UN ) , where its role must be increasingly active following the launch of the European External Action Service ( EEAS ) .
Given that global partnerships are instrumental in achieving jointly identified global goals ; that the EU is the world 's largest provider of development aid and a major partner of the UN in its efforts across all three pillars of its work , including in crisis and post-crisis situations ; and that Member States ' contribution amounts to 38 % of the UN 's regular budget , we believe a solid and stable EU-UN partnership is fundamental to the work of the UN and key to the EU 's role as a global player .
in writing . - In keeping with past practice , the Committee on Foreign Affairs draws up Parliament recommendations to the Council for the session of the United Nations General Assembly .
As I understand it , EP priorities are : an enhanced role for the EU in the UN system , taking into account the institutional changes brought by the Lisbon Treaty ; a need for guidelines ensuring proper consultations between the ambassadors of the Member States in order to avoid discordance of EU voices as in the case of Libya ; an adequate budget for UN Women ; further strengthening of the role of the ICC ; support for the UN Mediation Unit and a key role for the EEAS in this context ; improvement of the relationship between the UN Peacebuilding Commission and the EU Peace-building Partnership ; and finally , stronger EU leadership in the area of global climate governance .


All the abovementioned issues are timely and I voted in favour .

in writing . - I voted for this proposal because it gives an extensive review of the current global issues in the EU and UN , pointing out the challenges and the opportunities that the EU is facing .
It has also addressed solid and far-reaching suggestions for the EU in various areas on the international level , such as engaging with the EU 's strategic partners within the UN system , ensuring the important role of the EEAS , enhancing peace , security and justice , and combating climate change .
I believe that these are the issues that are critical on the global stage right now , and the EU has to involve itself and play a vital role in all these aspects .
Therefore , I support this proposal and recommend to the Council that it should give careful consideration to this report .
I voted for this report because I agree with the recommendations being made to the Council in view of the 66th Session of the United Nations ( UN ) General Assembly .
I agree that the UN 's role should be strengthened .
In fact , and as the rapporteur mentions , the European Union carries insufficient weight in UN bodies , taking into account the major contributions made by the EU and its Member States .
The Council needs to make its positions heard more vigorously in the UN , whilst ensuring greater coordination in achieving the Union 's goals there and fostering greater cohesion between the Member States ' positions .
I agree with the rapporteur 's call for the Vice-President of the Commission / High Representative of the Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy and the President of the European Council to make achieving enhanced observer rights for the EU a strategic priority , and to show greater visibility at the UN by way of intensifying consultations with the governments of third-country UN Member States .
in writing . - In favour .
We recommend that the Council advances effective multilateralism as the overriding strategic concern of the Union and strengthens the coherence and visibility of the EU as a global actor at the UN , inter alia , by better coordinating internal EU consultation on UN issues and by promoting greater outreach on a wide range of issues .
The Vice-President / High Representative ( VP / HR ) should be authorised to draft guidelines for regular consultations between the ambassadors of the Member States and the EU ambassadors , especially between those working at a multilateral level in places like Geneva and New York , so that the EU can successfully pursue its UN agenda and meet the expectations of UN members regarding its ability to act .
Greater cohesion should be fostered both within the UN system and between the positions of EU Member States and candidate and potential candidate countries , so as to maximise the potential offered by the Lisbon Treaty to strengthen the EU 's impact through the coordinated and strategic use of its various and distinct ( EU and Member State ) entry points .
Its ability to negotiate with other regional groups should be enhanced in a timely manner and the EU representatives provided with a proper mandate to negotiate effectively on behalf of the Member States .
With regard to the 66th United Nations General Assembly , I support the view that Parliament ought to urge the Council to take a leading role in promoting the Millennium Development Goals .
In fact , we must start a debate on how to sustain the international community 's commitment to sustainable development and the elimination of poverty - which must also continue beyond 2015 .
Making progress on statebuilding , good and democratic government , conflict prevention , and the adoption of the required measures to combat corruption , tax evasion and the flight of capital , is an absolute priority .
I voted in favour of the report by Mr Lambsdorff because I consider that the challenges facing the EU , in a fast-changing world , require coordinated action at global level .
The EU has more and enhanced opportunities for external representation under the Treaty of Lisbon and cooperation with the UN and other international organisations is both desirable and necessary for the purpose of crisis management , to maintain and build peace and to respond to international challenges , such as recent developments in Japan .
As rapporteur for the opinion of the Committee on Development on this report , I am delighted that it has been adopted today by the plenary of the European Parliament .
It is essential to reaffirm the need to harmonise the efforts of different United Nations bodies in order to better promote the efficiency and effectiveness of action on development .
Development assistance implemented by the United Nations must focus especially on achieving the Millennium Development Goals , with particular attention to the Least Developed Countries .
I am voting for this report , firstly because it criticises the Commission for delaying publication until 9 February 2011 , even though it was obliged to table it in 2010 , and because , like the rapporteur , I regret the weakness of the Commission communication as regards new developments .
I also regret the lack of good results as regards small and medium-sized enterprises .
I do , however , acknowledge that the joint technology initiatives help make European industry more competitive , although the already existing legal and administrative obstacles need to be dealt with quickly .
I voted in favour of this important resolution on the mid-term review of the Seventh Framework Programme of the European Union for research , technological development and demonstration activities .
By adopting this resolution , the European Parliament is sending a clear signal to the European Commission on the future implementation of the Framework Programme for research .
One of the most important proposals , which I also support , is the simplification of administrative requirements for projects implemented according to this programme .
In fact , one of the difficulties noted is the complexity and burden of administrative procedures , as a result of which researchers seeking European financing are diverted towards national financing and Europe is made unpopular with regard to research .
It is also very important for research and development policies to be territorialised so that research is distributed harmoniously in relation to all universities .
The excellence often found in urban areas could be ensured by intensifying virtual links , for example , through permanent videoconferencing and a smart connection between territorialised research centres and centres of excellence .
The Seventh Framework Programme of the European Union for research , technological development and demonstration activities is the largest research support instrument in the world and the primary tool of European Union research policy .
Research is the process of converting economic power into knowledge , while innovation is the reverse process of transforming knowledge into economic power .
The European Union and its Member States must create for themselves the means to respond jointly to the major social , economic , environmental , demographic and ethical challenges facing Europe 's states , such as an ageing population , citizens ' health , food supply , sustainable development and the major environmental issues .
A better relationship is essential between the academic , research and industrial worlds to enable research results to be converted more effectively into products and services , generating economic growth and benefits for society as a whole .
Member States should also step up their communication efforts regarding the use of new technologies , such as smart research information services , by announcing forthcoming research challenges and distributing research findings .
This is why I voted in favour of this report .
Despite a series of hindrances - such as the economic crisis , the persistent inability to close the gap with the United States and increasing competition from emerging countries - the Seventh Framework Programme ( FP7 ) has proved that it can offer added value to European research and development .
FP7 is a chance for the European Union to make its research policy match its economic and social ambitions , particularly by consolidating the European Research Area ( ERA ) .
Looking at Mr Audy 's report , I agree on the objectives highlighted in the mid-term review , particularly with regard to the simplification of administrative procedures , the participation of small and medium-sized enterprises through the Cooperation programme , and revamping and intensifying the Risk-Sharing Finance Facility .
With a view to negotiating the future financial perspective from 2014 , these measures will pave the way for the Europeanisation of research .
The report by my colleague , Mr Audy , on the Seventh Framework Programme of the European Union for research , technological development and demonstration activities ( FP7 ) reveals a low level of participation by SMEs and industry in general , a low number of female researchers and under-representation of certain Member States .
I think it is necessary to develop effective coordination of research between the EU and national and regional authorities .
That is why I voted in favour of this excellent report .
The Seventh Framework Programme , with a total budget of € 54.6 billion , is the world 's largest instrument for supporting research , and that programme is definitely at the heart of EU research policy .
It must be reviewed and adapted to a changing world , however , particularly in light of the financial crisis and varying fiscal circumstances .
Currently , Irish bodies receive about € 1 million a week from EU research funds , and other opportunities remain for Irish small and medium enterprises ( SMEs ) .
It is the SMEs that create 70 % of the jobs in the euro area , and the SME sector is at the heart of the European economy .
Therefore , transparency must be increased and the administrative burden reduced so that more SMEs would be interested in becoming involved in programmes in the future , to ensure the Union 's effectiveness in relation to research , development and innovation .
Time-to-grant must be reduced and European cooperation and coordination improved in order to tackle the fragmentation which is currently damaging to the programme .
On 23 and 24 March 2000 , the European Council , meeting in Lisbon , set the European Union ( EU ) an ambitious strategic objective : to become , by 2010 , the most competitive and dynamic knowledge-based economy in the world .
The central role played by research in this strategy has been acknowledged .
Allocated a budget of around EUR 54 billion for the period 2007-2013 , the Seventh Framework Programme ( FP7 ) has become one of the largest research support programmes in the world and represents the primary tool of EU research policy .
Its aim is to enable the EU to respond to the great societal challenges that concern all Member States and to which they cannot respond alone ( ageing population and health , energy and water supplies or food supplies , sustainable development , climate change , and so on ) , as well as to develop the knowledge to enable our businesses to innovate more and enhance their competitiveness .
In this report , the European Parliament is carrying out a mid-term review in order to ensure that FP7 meets the needs of European policies .
I agree that in order to ensure that this programme is as effective as possible , it is necessary to simplify complicated and burdensome administrative procedures so as to successfully create a European Research Area .
The EU 's Seventh Framework Programme is a crucial programme for improving the European added value in terms of research , development and innovation , at a time when Europe is lagging behind the United States in these areas , and is losing the headway it had over the emerging economies .
Therefore , this report serves to highlight the relevance of an unknown programme while calling for changes : to alter the overly burdensome administrative and financial regulations and the low rate of success that make this programme still too prohibitive for small and medium-sized enterprises ( SMEs ) , at a time when they play an important role in turning research outcomes into products and services ; to ensure better cooperation and coordination between the various stakeholders at a time when the funding of research still remains split between national and European sources .
These are a few initiatives that could at last enable us to reach the goal of financing research and development set at 3 % of GDP by 2020 , which is far from being achieved , in particular for France , which still only devotes 2 % of its GDP to R & D.
In March 2000 , the Council set the European Union the ambitious objective of becoming ' the most competitive and dynamic knowledge-based economy in the world ' by 2010 .
The central role played by research in this strategy has been acknowledged .
I think that examining the review of the Seventh Framework Programme ( FP7 ) for research and technological development offers an opportunity to cement the precious link between knowledge , education and research .
Over the years , FP7 has become one of the largest research support programmes in the world and represents the primary tool of EU research policy .
It also offers a chance for the EU to make its research policy match its economic and social ambitions by consolidating the European Research Area .
In my view , there are two main aspects that the review should focus on in particular : overcoming the problems related to the burden and complexity of administrative procedures , as a result of which those seeking European financing are diverted towards national financing .
Added to which , despite the progress made in recent years , the participation of small and medium-sized enterprises in the Framework Programme should be stepped up in order to develop the skills that would allow them to boost their competitiveness .
I voted for the resolution because the Europe 2020 programme considers research and innovation to be central for emerging from the crisis by means of smart , sustainable and inclusive growth .
For that to happen , the Seventh Framework Programme must increase its funding from 2013 onwards .
The Member States must commit themselves to continuing with the programmes as there must be increased collaboration between technology platforms , universities and the industrial sector as well as further simplification of procedures to eliminate the difficulties faced by small and medium-sized enterprises in accessing the research and development programmes .
The report by Mr Audy on the mid-term review of the Seventh Framework Programme of the European Union for research , technological development and demonstration activities certainly contains a number of pleasing aspects .
For example , it looks at the fact that the programme has had a low success rate with small and medium-sized enterprises and also considers the request to shorten time-to-grant periods .
However , I abstained in the vote because this own-initiative report contained a point which I thought was particularly weak , which made it impossible for me to vote in favour .
Specifically , I do not support Mr Audy 's call to increase funding for the European Research Council , as well as making it an independent legal entity with decision-making power which would be directly responsible for its own scientific strategy and administrative management .
I voted in favour of this report because I believe that an appropriate mid-term review of the Seventh Framework Programme of the European Union for research , technological development and demonstration activities is particularly important for establishing whether the programme 's implementation accords with the objectives set .
This programme is one of the most important research support programmes in the world and represents the primary tool of EU research policy .
Furthermore , in many of the documents it has adopted recently , setting out its development goals and guidelines for the next decade , the European Union stresses the importance of research and innovation for strengthening the EU economy and helping it remain one of the most competitive in the world .
In addition to the generally positive assessment , the report draws the Commission 's attention to many aspects of the programme 's implementation and provides specific proposals as to how they might be improved .
For example , the report proposes increasing the programme 's financing but , at the same time , it proposes identifying common research areas among those which appear most promising in terms of concrete applications , enabling the highest extent of sharing in an ethical context , so that tangible results are achieved when implementing this programme .
Despite the fact that Europe is still behind the US and is losing the lead it had over the developing economies , the results of the Seventh Framework Programme demonstrate the added value of this European programme for research and development in Europe .
Unfortunately , however , there is still no method for evaluating how far the projects funded by the Seventh Framework Programme have advanced scientific knowledge .
It is also necessary to point out the considerable imbalance between the participation of entities from the old and new Member States .
Equally , the level of involvement particularly of small and medium-sized enterprises remains relatively poor .
The situation could be improved by simplifying the administrative and financial rules .
It is necessary to emphasise the importance of the Joint Technological Initiatives ( JTI ) for the competitiveness of European industry .
It is also necessary to point out the legal and administrative obstacles ( legal subjectivity , funding rules and sometimes also intellectual property ) which may dissuade many key research players and SMEs from participating .
We must change the situation where the funding of research in Europe is too fragmented , while there are many sources of funding in the Member States and the EU applying different priorities , evaluation criteria , definitions and procedures , which necessarily leads to overlaps , confusion and errors .
Given the still fragile economic situation resulting from the financial crisis that has rocked Europe , in his mid-term review , the rapporteur mentions important aspects that should be improved so as to use the available public funding as efficiently as possible .
I agree with the emphasis given by the rapporteur to two issues that are very important for future European research : increased simplification of payments between the European Commission and other entities , and increased participation by small and medium-sized enterprises , and industry in general , in responding to the great social challenges .
The unanimity of the committee vote on this important report and the vote taken today show , once again , that Parliament knows how to take a clear and decisive stance on crucial issues for citizens and enterprises .
I think the report really highlights the critical aspects of the Seventh Framework Programme .
It also sets out valid proposals to ensure that the remaining funds to be allocated can make a real contribution to increasing competitiveness and quality in the European market .
In my view , simplifying administrative procedures and cutting red tape is still the most important challenge if we really want to let our businesses - and particularly small and medium-sized enterprises - have access to funds .
We must use these funds to improve our ability to work in an integrated way by improving public / private partnerships , incentivising inter-regional clusters and ensuring good coordination between cohesion funds and funds for research and innovation .
This report helps to draw attention to the factors which are crucial in meeting the requirements of the future of research in Europe , in particular , in the context of the objectives assigned by the Europe 2020 strategy .
It has now become essential to reduce excessive administrative burdens , in particular , to encourage greater participation by SMEs in the Seventh Framework Programme .
Furthermore , it is imperative that EU programmes consolidate at all times the advantages of research and innovation , for the benefit of education and job creation .
The Seventh Framework Programme for research and development for the period 2007-2013 has been subject to a mid-term review by the European Parliament .
This is an opportunity to remind the European Commission of the importance of making the right choices when investing in research and innovation for the future of Europe .
EUR 28.5 billion remains to be programmed for the years 2011 , 2012 and 2013 .
This sum must be allocated as a matter of priority to projects put forward by SMEs and industry in general , particularly in the areas of energy provision , sustainable development and the fight against climate change .
We must ensure a better distribution of research infrastructure throughout the European Union , while respecting the principle of excellence which allows Europe to attract the best researchers in the world .
In 2010 , the EU had not met the Lisbon strategy target of spending 3 % of its GDP on research and development .
This goal was revived in the Europe 2020 strategy , but the EU must now find the means to meet that target in order to remain an internationally competitive economy .
I welcome the adoption of the Audy report on the mid-term review of the Seventh Framework Programme , taking into account the impact of the recent economic crisis , which has particularly affected the capacity of small and medium-sized enterprises to invest in research and development .
In order to avoid red tape and facilitate companies ' access to European funding , simpler and more transparent procedures are absolutely vital .
With the publication of the Europe 2020 strategy , it became clear that commitment to research and development is crucial in order for Europe to return to economic growth and win the competitiveness game .
That is why any evaluation of the Seventh Framework Programme ( FP7 ) of the European Community for research , technological development and demonstration activities should be linked to the objectives of the Europe 2020 strategy and its implementation .
I am convinced that , through research and development , Europe can manage to find efficient and effective responses to the energy problem , to the challenges of climate change , and to improving European competitiveness and productivity , leading us to a new growth cycle that is more sustainable this time .
This report by Mr Audy is on the mid-term review of the Seventh Framework Programme ( FP7 ) of the European Union for research , technological development and demonstration activities .
On 23 and 24 March 2000 , the European Council , meeting in Lisbon , set the European Union an objective : to become , by 2010 , the most competitive knowledge-based economy in the world .
It has not been possible to achieve this ambitious goal .
I hope that the objectives of the Europe 2020 strategy will be met , in particular , the EU 's commitment to invest 3 % of gross domestic product ( GDP ) in research and development by 2020 .
Europe 2020 cannot wait for the next Multiannual Financial Framework ( MFF ) : it must start now .
Therefore , this review is of crucial importance , since 50 % of the funding for FP7 has still not been spent .
I therefore agree with the rapporteur , specifically as regards the recommendations regarding the need to simplify mechanisms for accessing funds , making procedures simpler and more transparent , and facilitating the activities of small and medium-sized enterprises .
It should also invest in flagship areas like health , energy and nuclear safety , responding to the new challenges of innovation and research .
The report introduces several important aspects of the mid-term review of the Seventh Framework Programme ( FP7 ) of the European Union for research and technological development .
It also makes relevant observations , such as that the majority of the EU 's scientific work is still undertaken by researchers and technicians - mainly young people - in insecure jobs ; the Portuguese case is paradigmatic .
We believe that there is a need to support public research and make its results available in a simple way , without bureaucracy , by promoting : productive and business activity , and small and medium-sized enterprises , in particular ; the creation of skilled jobs , with rights ; social progress and sustainable development .
There is a need for a commitment to areas as diverse as , inter alia , energy efficiency , new energy sources , efficient resource use , recycling and new productive processes .
We cannot fail to express our concern about some of the principles guiding the European Research Area .
We believe it should be founded on cooperation and mutual benefit , mitigating the currently existing inequalities in national research systems , and reversing any trends towards concentration of scientific and human resources in the more developed countries , which is the same as in so-called ' centres of excellence ' .
This report introduces several relevant aspects of the mid-term review of the Seventh Framework Programme ( FP7 ) for research and technological development .
Particularly important is its concern to ensure that 40 % of those taking part in research are women , as this figure is currently no higher than 25.5 % , and to recognise that ' Europe continues to lag behind the US and is losing the lead it had over the emerging economies ' .
The report also ' regrets that most of the scientific work carried out within the EU is still done under precarious working conditions ' .
However , we are concerned about some aspects , not least the principles guiding the European Research Area , since it should be focused on cooperation between genuine research and collaboration networks , reversing any trends towards concentration of scientific and human resources in the more developed countries and mitigating the currently existing inequalities in national research systems .
Innovation in micro- , small- and medium-sized enterprises requires support for public research and its results must be made available in a simple way , without bureaucracy , whether it be in terms of energy efficiency , using new sources of energy and new production processes , recycling and making better use of resources , or creating jobs with rights , or whether it be in human and social terms , with a view to social progress .
The report assesses whether the EU 's Seventh Framework Programme for research and technological development will offer the possibility of consolidating the golden triangle of knowledge , education and research , which is of key importance for Europe .
Among other things , the programme welcomes the level of participation and excellent results in the selection of projects , but it is a pity that the success rate in the programme generally remains relatively low .
The correct management of public funds within the framework of this programme is essential , and I firmly believe that every change or reorientation must take place in a way that respects stability , overall cohesion and legal certainty , which underpin the mutual trust of the participants .
Research and development play a large part in modernising our economies and strengthening our competitiveness .
With a budget of EUR 54 billion for the period 2007-2013 , the Seventh Framework Programme for research and development is the world 's largest programme of support for research .
The adoption of this report by a strong majority is testament to Parliament 's keen interest for the success of this programme and subsequent ones .
Efforts still need to be made to ensure sound management of public money and prevent funds from being spread too thinly in projects that are not very efficient or that do not meet our needs .
The future of European research will involve simplifying how programmes are implemented , facilitating access to funding , the participation of small and medium-sized enterprises ( SMEs ) but , above all , adapting our priorities to society 's great challenges ( ageing population , climate change , and so on ) .
I am convinced that the European Union has a leading role to play in the development of large research programmes and that it can bring real added value by consolidating the European Research Area ( ERA ) .
That is why I decided to lend my full support to this report .
I voted in favour of this resolution because it calls for the use of the Seventh Framework Programme ( FP7 ) to take account of the different consequences in each Member State of the economic crisis for the final years of the programme ( 2011-2013 ) , given the considerable sums ( EUR 28.8 billion over three years ) still to be programmed , the objectives to be achieved for EU 2020 and preparation for a European Research Area and the Innovation Union .
It calls , in particular , for the alignment of the FP7 objectives with EU strategies on resource efficiency , raw materials and the Digital Agenda .
The remaining sums should not be diverted from research and used for other programmes or instruments that do not come within the research and innovation sector or the objectives and scope of FP7 .
There is a need to enhance , stimulate and secure the financing of research and development in the European Union via a significant increase in relevant expenditure from 2013 onwards , because such an increase in funding , ideally by increasing the budget , must foster sustainable growth and competition via excellence .
This increase in funds must be coupled with a more result-oriented , performance-driven approach and with a radical simplification of funding procedures .
I believe that we need to support further cooperation between different EU research , technological development and innovation programmes , and feel that the continuity of the future programme , once established , is important for all actors involved .
Europe 's rapidly ageing society requires innovative solutions in diverse areas which will make it possible for it to function efficiently in spite of the reduced workforce .
Similar challenges are posed by climate change , unexpected deficits of raw materials and biological threats , for example , the recent developments concerning E coli bacteria in vegetables .
The way to find solutions to such unusual situations is investment in science and technological development .
Although we have held many debates on this issue , the measures taken in Europe have , unfortunately , been ineffectual , despite the threat posed to our continent and our economy .
The latter is not self-sufficient , and is additionally faced with the domination of the Chinese , Indian and Brazilian economies , which are developing extraordinarily rapidly .
Financial support and the simplification of legislative procedures for scientific development should be a priority for the EU .
To stand still is to move backwards .
I support the report on the mid-term review of the Seventh Framework Programme of the European Union for research , technological development and demonstration activities because I believe that it truly reflects what has been achieved , as well as existing problems .
The European Union has the potential to become the world leader in innovation and inventions .
This would give a new impetus to our economic growth and an improvement in the standard of living of our citizens .
We have the ability to meet this goal by performing a series of domestic tasks , the most important of which is the reduction of bureaucratic hurdles .
In order to become the citadel of innovation , we must sacrifice the bureaucracy that does not allow for funds to flow to researchers and entrepreneurs .
Saddled with the old and rigid system of bureaucracy hindering the development of new and dynamic businesses , the European Union will not reach its target - to invest 3 % of GDP in research and innovation by 2020 .
The European Union must change with the times and must cast off the chains of red tape .
This approach must be implemented beginning with the research programme , which is a source of funding for new inventions , for the realisation of new ideas , and new jobs .
Paragraph 27 of this report contains information which contradicts the truth .
The assertion that web sites and individual computer systems are constantly monitored by INDECT is false , as confirmed by the ethical review carried out on the INDECT project in Brussels on 15 March 2011 , with the participation of specialists from Austria , France , Holland , Germany and the United Kingdom .
The ethical review of the INDECT project had a positive outcome , and no infringements relating to the project 's ethical aspects were identified .
INDECT has been subject to constant monitoring by the European Commission from the outset .
The Commission has not identified any infringements to date .
Furthermore , this issue is out of place in the report as a whole , and specific reference is made to the INDECT project , with no mention of other similar projects which receive European Union funds .
The main aim of the INDECT project ( Intelligent information system supporting observation , searching and detection for security of citizens in urban environment ) , which is implemented by the AGH University of Science and Technology in Kraków , is the development of research into information technologies which increase the safety of citizens of urban areas .
The INDECT system is intended to identify threats by means of monitoring , including , in particular , pornography , arms trading and trafficking in drugs and human organs , and it is also intended to protect data and privacy .
The Seventh Framework Programme of the European Union for research , technological development and demonstration activities ( FP7 ) is the largest research support instrument in the world and represents the primary tool of European Union research policy .
The actions taken so far to develop knowledge in the most varied of fields demonstrate the ever more acute need to move towards spreading innovations and implementing them in our daily lives .
It was precisely the direct impact of this instrument on everyday life that led me to vote in favour of the report by Mr Audy , in the hope that future innovation policies will make the absolute most of the synergies in the whole research and development value chain .
The Seventh Framework Programme - which is mainly oriented towards research and technological development - is currently the only instrument for achieving the objectives laid down in the Innovation Union initiative and for expediting the transformation of Europe into a knowledge-based society .
Thinking about the future of innovation implies creating jobs , leveraging research capital and translating it into practices that apply to normal life , as well as developing human resource potential - all of which are factors that should be included in the next Framework Programme .
Every year since 2007 , the EU has spent over EUR 6 billion funding research and development on the continent .
This will present a major challenge for the EU in the decades to come .
Indeed , Europe lags behind the United States and is being caught up very quickly by the emerging countries ; it must therefore quickly re-establish innovation at the forefront of its social model .
The report by Mr Audy learns lessons from the first part of the Framework Programme for research .
In order to achieve the Europe 2020 goals , it proposes that the rest of the programme should focus on the Union 's most pressing challenges within the sectors identified in the ' Cooperation ' chapter of the Seventh Framework Programme : health , food and biotechnology , information and communication technology , nanoscience and nanotechnologies , energy , the SET Plan and the use of biogas , environment , sustainable transport , social sciences , economics and humanities , and space and security .
I voted in favour of this report because it not only makes an assessment of the situation but also sets ambitious targets for the Union which live up to the expectations of European citizens .
in writing . - FP7 is a chance for the EU to make its research policy match its economic and social ambitions , in particular , by consolidating the European Research Area ( ERA ) .
Allocated a budget of around EUR 54 billion for the period 2007-2013 , FP7 has , over the years , become one of the largest research support programmes in the world and represents the primary tool of EU research policy .
Four main objectives have been identified and correspond to four specific programmes that must structure the European research effort : the Cooperation Programme , the Ideas Programme , the People Programme and the Capacity Programme .
The aim is to enable the EU to respond to the great societal challenges that concern all Member States and to which they cannot respond alone ( ageing population and health , energy , water and food supplies , sustainable development , climate change , and so on ) , as well as to develop the knowledge to enable our businesses to innovate more and enhance their competitiveness .
Over the years , the Seventh Framework Programme ( FP7 ) for research and technological development has become one of the largest research support programmes in the world and represents the primary tool of European Union research policy .
After the failure of the so-called ' Lisbon strategy ' , which aimed for the EU to become the most competitive and dynamic knowledge-based economy in the world by 2010 , we decided to consider whether the review of FP7 might offer an opportunity to consolidate the golden triangle of knowledge , education and research .
We believe that FP7 is a chance for the EU to make its research policy match its economic and social ambitions , in particular , by consolidating the European Research Area ( ERA ) .
In addition , research and development policies need to be territorialised and the Union must adopt an ambitious European research plan for defence technology with a view to enhancing the sector 's industrial and technological base , while also improving the efficiency of military public spending .
Lastly , we agree with the Committee on Budgets that the design and implementation of all framework programmes must be based on the principles of simplicity , stability , legal certainty , consistency , excellence and trust , while also strengthening links between European institutions for research and industry .
The Seventh Framework Programme ( FP7 ) for research and technological development ( R & TD ) is the European Commission 's largest financial instrument for supporting and promoting research activity .
It has a budget allocation of EUR 50 billion for the period 2007-2013 .
This report points to the paths to be followed as regards this Framework Programme for R & TD : it should be linked to the Europe 2020 strategy , but also to the Innovation Union initiative , and its main objective should be the areas of climate change , energy policy , competitiveness and population ageing .
If we achieve the goals set out here , I have no doubt that we will enter a new economic cycle of growth .
in writing . - The seventh EU programme aims to build a united European Knowledge Area based upon achievements of former programmes and to implement further research towards strengthening socio-economic factors in the development of Europe .
Scientific research is one of the bases of the European strategy for economic development , ensuring competency , development of the social area and environmental protection .
Therefore , I voted in favour .
The Seventh Framework Programme is not just about research in general ; it is also about a specific field of research that ought to be of particular concern to all of us following the Fukushima disaster .
It is a question of funding from the Euratom programme .
What is the use of productive reactors if they buckle under water masses and in the event of earthquakes ?
What is the use of the most productive nuclear power station if a minor fault is enough to make not only the immediate surroundings , but broad swathes of land , uninhabitable for decades ?
It is important for us to focus more on nuclear safety and to push ahead with the development of alternatives .
Now that the Euratom research programme is shortly to be extended for the period 2012-2013 , Fukushima ought to be taken as an opportunity for a rethink .
We need to focus more on protection against radiation and final storage .
It is a matter of life or death that we should not stick to the same priorities , in other words , the expansion of nuclear power , but rather that we should concentrate on safety aspects .
The present research programme is , of course , unaffected by this .
I have taken this into account when voting .
During my time in Parliament , I have campaigned on many occasions for nuclear safety in the EU .
Such a risky technology for generating energy with all its hazardous by-products and fatal consequences for both man and nature in the event of nuclear meltdown should not be glossed over under the pretext of climate protection .
Unfortunately , the Seventh Framework Programme also includes funding for research in the field of nuclear power .
However , the report also calls for stricter regulations for the EU 's INDECT programme .
It states that the EU Commission should immediately publish all project documents and define a clear and strict mandate for the research goal , the application and end users of INDECT .
This is an initial success in which the rights of the EU 's citizens are taken seriously on a rudimentary level at least .
Having weighed up the issues , I abstained from voting .
I voted in favour of the report by Mr Audy because the Seventh Framework Programme ( FP7 ) needs to be thoroughly revised in order for it to achieve and come into line with the goals of the Europe 2020 strategy .
The negative results of the mid-term review mean that we need to amend its priorities .
I therefore agree on rewording the main objectives and stress the need for a more efficient research policy that cuts out the burden of red tape and provides for greater participation from small and medium-sized enterprises , as well as innovation and funding integration .
By making these changes , we hope that the projects of the second phase of FP7 will end in success .
This report on the mid-term review of the Seventh Framework Programme ( FP7 ) of the European Union for research , technological development and demonstration activities is based on the premise of reconciling the public with science .
The Lisbon strategy set an ambitious goal for the European Union : to become , by 2010 , the most competitive and dynamic knowledge-based economy in the world .
The central role played by research was acknowledged in this strategy .
This desire was not realised , for a number of reasons .
The decade 2000-2010 , which ended with an extremely serious economic crisis , will be evaluated in the future .
It is now important , and I share the rapporteur 's ambition in this respect , to analyse the work done and reorganise future work .
FP7 is another opportunity for the EU to put its research policy on a par with its economic and social ambitions , not least by consolidating the European Research Area .
FP7 is one of the largest research support programmes in the world and represents the primary tool of EU research policy .
The specific existing programmes , like the Cooperation programme , the Ideas programme , the People programme and the Capacity programme , can and should enable the development of knowledge to enable our businesses to innovate more and enhance their competitiveness .
The Seventh Framework Programme ( FP7 ) needs to be reviewed in order to bring it further into line with the objectives of the Europe 2020 strategy .
If European research policy is to be more competitive and in tune with the EU 's economic and social ambitions , FP7 needs to be tailored to four major objectives : promoting the simplification of the framework programmes for research and cutting the burdens of administrative procedures ; improving the participation of small and medium-sized enterprises ( SMEs ) ; strengthening the innovation dimension and intensifying the Risk-Sharing Finance Facility .
In addition , we need to focus on the importance of collaboration between the academic world , public research institutes and the industrial sector .
We must place greater emphasis on proposals for collaborative research between the public and industrial sectors , ease cooperation between networks of SMEs , universities and public research institutes , and the main criteria for choosing FP7 projects must now include an assessment of the possible impact on the market , technology transfer and the commercial use of research outcomes .
I voted in favour of reviewing FP7 for these very reasons and also so that the EU can be more competitive in the field of research without having to wait for the Eighth Framework Programme .
I voted in favour of the Audy report on the mid-term review of the Seventh Framework Programme on research and development .
With this text , the European Parliament confirms its support for this programme , which is of vital importance for developing European research and improving the competitiveness of our businesses .
It defends the establishment of a permanent budget , which is essential if it is going to be able to meet its targets .
This report then sets out specific proposals with the aim of resolving the programme 's weaknesses .
It rightly highlights the need to simplify funding procedures and optimise existing instruments , so as to facilitate access for small and medium-sized enterprises .
Finally , this report reminds us that the European Commission needs to ensure that promoting innovation does not endanger the progress made in basic research .
in writing . - This report considers whether the review of the Seventh Framework Programme for research and technological development ( FP7 ) may offer an opportunity to consolidate the golden triangle of knowledge , education and research that is the key to Europeans ' destiny .
I welcome the level of participation and excellence in project selection but regret , however , that the success rate under this programme generally remains quite low and is a disincentive , particularly for SMEs .
I support , within the framework of the ' People ' chapter , the Marie Curie Actions , which are of great value to researchers in their career and acknowledge that ' Joint Technological Initiatives ' ( JTIs ) assist the competitiveness of European industry .
in writing . - Given the economic crises the EU is facing , it is essential we identify which areas of our activities lend themselves to helping us overcome our difficulties .
Research and innovation are central to smart , sustainable and inclusive growth , so investment in R & D is the best possible response .
Considering the numerous political and economic changes that have taken place since the Seventh Framework Programme was adopted , it is necessary to amend FP7 to reflect the situation of the new reality .
Given the importance of knowledge-based industries to Europe and our thriving R & D sector , we cannot afford to wait until FP8 to take action .
The ' Lisbon strategy ' of becoming the most competitive knowledge-based economy in the world by 2010 may have failed , but this does not mean we should abandon it entirely .
We must continue to work towards this goal by amending FP7 .
In doing so , we should address a serious failure under FP7 to provide funding for research in maternal and child health .
Close to 400 000 babies are born prematurely annually , yet there is no funding for research in this area .
Pre-term birth is the number one cause of infant death and premature babies are far more likely to develop lifelong chronic illnesses .
The Seventh Framework Programme ( FP7 ) of the European Union for research , technological development and demonstration activities should be evaluated with a view to the current state of the European Union , but with an eye on the future .
The rapporteur rightly points out the failure of the goal set by the European Council in 2000 of becoming the most prevalent knowledge-based economy in the world by 2010 .
However , although this same goal was not achieved by the deadline , it remains the true purpose of common action .
Therefore , the evaluation of the Framework Programme can play a significant role in this respect : in other words , by seeking to reduce the obstacles to the European economy 's growth that have been emerging , specifically by cutting red tape in procedures for accessing research support programmes .
in writing . - In favour .
The report was already adopted unanimously by the ITRE Committee , takes on board the recommendations of the expert group and identifies further scope for improvement of the various EU research instruments .
For instance : more open access and dissemination of research results , wider calls in the field of socio-economic sciences , more collaborative research , efforts to improve the mobility of researchers , more actions for innovative SMEs , better coordination with the Member States .
The report does not cover the issue of ITER or of Galileo investments .
On the negative side , the text is sometimes too much oriented towards the economic role and competitiveness of research and innovation rather than towards what research and innovation can bring to society as a whole .
Research is an essential component of the world of knowledge and , in a globalised economy , it is certain to bolster growth and employment levels in the European Union .
The Seventh Framework Programme ( FP7 ) is a good opportunity for the European Union to develop its research policy , while also consolidating the European Research Area ( ERA ) .
Through this programme , Europe aims to satisfy the requirements of industry - and more generally , of European policies - for research and knowledge .
By adopting today 's report , Parliament shines a light on the results achieved by the research programme in these first four years .
Yet to achieve bigger and better results in the future , we need to simplify the administrative process , improve the participation of small and medium-sized enterprises , support innovation and adopt risk-sharing finance facilities .
The report also urges the EU and the Member States to adopt an ambitious research plan to consolidate the European defence industry .
I voted in favour of Mr Audy 's report because I consider investment in the research and innovation sector to be fundamental to competitiveness , growth and job creation in the EU .
I consider the mid-term review of the Seventh Framework Programme for research and development 2007-2013 to be particularly useful for the purpose of drawing useful conclusions based on an evaluation of the current situation .
I welcome the rapporteur 's proposal to simplify financing procedures and to adopt a performance-driven approach and the criteria of ' excellence ' and ' European added value ' in EU spending .
The research sector is a sector which can bring maximum added value to the Union .
Public budgets have been cut and , as such , private funding should be mobilised in order to finance the forthcoming Eighth Framework Programme for research .
I therefore approve of the rapporteur 's proposal to increase the participation of industrial groups and small and medium-sized enterprises .
Four years have passed since the introduction of the Seventh Framework Programme for research and technological development .
In the context of a changing global economic situation and at a time when Europe is slowly attempting to extricate itself from the economic crisis , it is becoming clear that the programme was put in place to solve legitimate and significant problems .
The global competition of major economic powers such as China , India and Brazil is forcing us to take special measures , aimed at gaining a technological advantage allowing us to implement the European Union 's intended strategy effectively .
The right investments in research and scientific development will translate into the long-term construction of a knowledge-based society , which is one of the most important components of economic power .
The report touches upon the key issue of insufficient cooperation and exchange of information between Member States , which results in the duplication of individual projects .
A further alarming matter is the unequal participation of the Member States , which results in greater imbalances in an area as important as research and technological development .
This is a complete contradiction of the goals of the Seventh Framework Programme .
As a result of the economic crisis , some Member States no longer have as many opportunities to provide support for the programme , and this is a challenge to the EU to identify accurately those who need support , and to grant support to them .
The programme 's implementation will last another two years , and the level of budgetary commitment has not exceeded 50 % ( of EUR 54 billion for the period 2007-2013 ) , which should make it easier to involve the competent bodies and enable the funds available to be used as appropriately as possible .
in writing . - I support the work done by the rapporteur in this report .
I share his concerns that the Commission communication was delivered so much later than promised .
The FP7 has delivered some excellent work and I am encouraged by the work done by the rapporteur to close the golden triangle .
The Seventh Framework Programme ( FP7 ) for research and technological development ( R & TD ) is the European Commission 's largest financial instrument for supporting and promoting research activity , and it has a budget allocation of EUR 50 billion for the period 2007-2013 .
This report stresses that the FP7 for R & TD should be linked to the ' Europe 2020 ' strategy and to the ' Innovation Union ' flagship initiative , and that it should focus , until its term expires , on the areas of climate change , energy policy , competitiveness and population ageing .
I am voting for this report because I understand that only by reinforcing European research , development and innovation policy will it be possible for it to increase its competitiveness and adopt an increasingly leading role at global level .
I also consider it important that the Seventh Framework Programme contributes to establishing the European Research Area , pursuant to Article 179 ( 1 ) of Title XIX of the Treaty on European Union .
Research and innovations are important for ensuring sustainable and inclusive growth in Lithuania .
According to data from the World Bank , Lithuania has great potential to become a dynamic , knowledge-based economy .
However , the study also states that in the research and development ( R & D ) sector , my country faces managerial , structural and regulatory problems .
We must overcome these obstacles if we want to make real progress .
This also poses problems for Europe .
In Europe , R & D expenditure is low compared to other global powers , due to a lack of private investment and favourable conditions for innovation .
I agree with the rapporteur that we really need better coordination of research projects and cofinancing within the Union .
Furthermore , research facilities and infrastructure in Central and Eastern Europe must be modernised and expanded .
This will encourage European competitiveness and help to overcome infrastructural disparities between the old and new Member States .
I also believe that research and technological development must become more accessible to ordinary Europeans .
According to data from a European Commission survey , only 10 % of Europeans feel they are well informed about science , while 65 % feel that governments should make more efforts to interest young people in scientific matters .
We should do the same .
I am voting for this resolution as I believe there is a need for a comprehensive economic agreement capable of strengthening already existing strong bilateral ties in terms of trade and investment .
However , I believe that the agreement should be balanced and encourage fair trade .
Despite the strong consensus on an ambitious agreement , I argue that it should not affect public services or the EU 's rights to legislate on the Fuel Quality Directive .
The agreement should also have ambitious sustainable development targets , with legally binding social and environmental parameters .
I voted in favour of this resolution on EU-Canada trade relations .
Canada is one of the EU 's oldest and closest partners , being the first industrialised country with which - in 1976 - the EU signed a Framework Agreement for commercial and economic cooperation .
However , the EU-Canada economic relationship has not yet reached its full potential and I feel that an EU-Canada free trade agreement can strongly contribute to developing and realising this by improving trade and investment flows while removing tariff peaks and unjustified non-tariff barriers and supporting closer cooperation , particularly in the fields of regulatory cooperation , labour mobility and recognition of qualifications .
I welcome an agreement with Canada going beyond the WTO commitments and being complementary to multilateral rules , provided that the negotiations produce a balanced , ambitious , high-quality agreement that goes well beyond tariff reductions , and other tools begin to be applied .
For instance , the reciprocity principle should be applied in the context of the legal remedies available in the event of commercial disputes , and there is a need to improve the protection of intellectual property rights , including trademarks , patents and geographical indications .
By voting in favour of this resolution on the current trade negotiations between the EU and Canada , I wish to reiterate the importance of international trade ( including with Canada ) for developing our economies .
As stated in the resolution , even though Europe must continue giving priority to the international trading system , that is , the Doha Development Round negotiations , the current negotiations with Canada can usefully complement this international approach with a bilateral approach , which is equally necessary .
Thus , by discussing and negotiating , we are managing to find solutions on issues related to trade and respect for certain principles , such as those concerning the environment .
However , as Vice-Chair of the working group on public services , I am concerned about the approach chosen for this sector .
Indeed , by adopting a ' negative list approach ' ( a list that excludes certain public services from the liberalisation process ) and not , on the contrary , ' a positive list approach ' ( exempting public services from liberalisation , except those featured in the list ) , we may well end up weakening public services .
This resolution therefore urges the European Commission to abandon this approach .
I voted in favour of this resolution .
Canada is one of the EU 's oldest and closest partners , being the first industrialised country with which - in 1976 - the EU signed a Framework Agreement for commercial and economic cooperation .
A number of bilateral agreements designed to facilitate stronger trade relations have been signed over the years and currently , the EU is Canada 's second most important trading partner and Canada 's second largest source of foreign direct investment .
I agree that that the EU-Canada economic relationship has not yet reached its full potential .
The free trade agreement planned could make a significant contribution towards advancing the EU-Canada economic partnership and would send a powerful pro-growth signal to investors and business within the EU and Canada .
Whereas a commercial agreement is currently under negotiation between the European Union and Canada , the European Parliament , through this resolution that we have just adopted , is expressing concern about the European Commission 's approach in relation to public services .
Indeed , the European Commission , responsible for negotiating this agreement , seems to want all services to be included , in principle .
By negotiating a ' negative ' list of services that would not be included in the free trade agreements , and if it were to go ahead , the Commission would be reversing the rationale that has prevailed hitherto .
Yet public services are not like other services : because they provide social and territorial cohesion as well as essential support to vulnerable populations , these services have features specific to the general interest they seek to attain .
Consequently , it is crucial to continue adopting an approach that protects these services , particularly by protecting them from international competition .
Relations with Canada have long been profitable for both parties and , in commercial terms , are of mutual interest and involve good cooperation .
Despite the fact that Canada is a developed country , where very few questions could be raised over the level of respect for social rights and the highest environmental standards , the Commission - before Parliament , even - has set out a basis for negotiations with the equivalent Canadian authorities which goes into detail on many issues that need to be modified in order for us to be satisfied .
I am voting in favour of this resolution , which relates to a chapter of the European commercial policy that should be taken as a model for negotiations with other countries - including India , China and Pakistan - which certainly do not guarantee fair competition , let alone respect for social rights and environmental standards , as Canada does .
When we embark on negotiations with these countries , we should remember how strict and exacting we have been with extremely enlightened places like Canada and adopt the same direct and open attitude in defence of our interests .
in writing . - I voted against the trade relationship between the EU and Canada as I feel any BIT could undermine the Commonwealth negotiation between UK and Canada .
While I see no reason why the EU and Canada cannot trade freely , prior legislation has demonstrated the EU ambition is predisposed to usurp rather than parallel extant trade relationships between the UK and third countries .
I voted in favour of the resolution on EU-Canada trade relations aimed at establishing a Comprehensive Economic and Trade Agreement .
Canada is a close trading partner of the European Union : over 10 years , Canadian investment in Europe almost doubled , reaching EUR 119.5 million in 2009 .
It is therefore necessary to establish an advanced legal framework so as to ensure a positive impact on growth .
I would like to highlight the issue of market access for agricultural products .
Rules of origin are different in Canada and the EU , and the Commission must make sure that the interests and priorities of European agriculture are properly taken into account .
In particular , efforts should be made to find a satisfactory solution to the problem of rules of origin so that products from other North American Free Trade Agreement members do not follow in the wake of Canadian products .
The multilateral trade system , based on rules and established through the World Trade Organisation ( WTO ) , remains the most suitable means of regulating and promoting open and fair trade .
However , given the historical and very successful economic relationship between the EU and Canada , I support an agreement that transcends the commitments made within the framework of the WTO and is in addition to the multilateral rules , so as to achieve the maximum potential of cooperation between these two powers .
I voted for the resolution on EU-Canada trade relations because it highlights the need to include social and environmental issues in the future Economic and Trade Agreement between the European Union and Canada .
As far as environmental protection is concerned , I think that it is important for the European Union to refuse to import oil extracted from oil sands .
As part of the ongoing negotiations on the trade agreement between the EU and Canada , the Commission must undertake to comply with the European Parliament 's demands .
In a free trade agreement , two things are vital : first , ensuring reciprocity in respect of social and environmental legislation ; second , adopting a consistent and protective approach to services of general interest .
European environmental and health standards should not be lowered just to satisfy our partner .
The European Commission must consider the consequences of its decision to include all services automatically and by default .
While this method allows certain public services to be excluded on a case-by-case basis and at the request of each Member State by establishing a ' negative ' list , it nevertheless runs the risk of potential omissions .
Parliament does not wish for this new model of negotiation to set a legal precedent .
Up to now , the Commission has negotiated free trade agreements by providing a ' positive ' list , listing services covered by the agreement one by one .
This method , which is commonly used in international trade , provides a better safeguard for certain sensitive sectors for the EU and should therefore be the sole method used by the Commission .
Canada and the EU share a set of values , making us not just trade partners , but also natural allies in the global geostrategic situation .
It is a fact that there is a single civilisation on both sides of the Atlantic which would gain a great deal from strengthening even further the ties between its peoples .
It would not be productive to expound at length on the historical ties between Canada and Europe , and on the contribution that its citizens made to liberate the European continent during the two world wars that devastated it .
Despite the obstacles to trade liberalisation that still remain and the Union 's reservations regarding current practices in Canada , I hope that the necessary bases can be established for a mutually beneficial trade partnership sooner rather than later .
A comprehensive economic and commercial agreement between Canada and the European Union could end up being the most ambitious and wide-ranging that we have yet concluded .
I hope that will be the case .
This motion for a resolution is on EU-Canada trade relations , whose negotiations are expected to be concluded by the end of 2011 .
The goal of the EU 's trade and investment policy is economic growth that is sustainable , generates wealth and creates jobs .
Let us recall that the conclusion of trade relationships with our strategic partners will enable the EU to have added value of 1 % of gross domestic product ( GDP ) by 2020 , which was EUR 120 billion in 2010 , benefiting consumers and businesses alike .
To this end , and without questioning the role played by the World Trade Organisation ( WTO ) , it is crucial to liberalise trade by concluding all negotiations under way within the framework of the Doha Development Agenda ( DDA ) , of which EU-Canada trade relations are part .
Although some issues remain unresolved , such as the negative impact on biodiversity of tar sands extraction and of some seal-derived products , I voted in favour not only because the public procurement problem has practically been resolved , but also because of the benefits to the Member States , and to prevent the negotiations from suffering any delays .
The first item in the preamble illustrates the vision guiding this report : it states that the multilateral trade system established through the World Trade Organisation ( WTO ) continues to represent the most suitable framework for regulating and promoting open and fair trade .
It continues by advocating the successful conclusion of the Doha Round .
This is a vision that is developed in the subsequent points of a resolution with which we naturally disagree .
We disagree , in fact , just like the millions of workers , farmers , small and medium-sized business owners , and many others across the world who have , for years , been pointing an accusing finger at the WTO , at its goals of deregulating trade and at the interests it serves : those of the multinationals ; of large companies and financial institutions , which rake in millions at the expense of sacrificing millions of jobs and labour and social rights , destroying small and medium-sized producers and degrading the environment .
The EU-Canada Free Trade Agreement , like the others , also covers services and worthy , but inconsistent concerns are being expressed relating to ' negative lists ' or others , which do not remove the threats also hanging over public services .
There are more than enough reasons to vote against .
The European Union continues to build its trade policy with consequences that affect the various Member States profoundly but differently .
The agreements that give concrete expression to this policy are essentially based on free trade , whose goals and effects are clearly demonstrated by the associated rhetoric : that of so-called ' offensive interests ' , as if we were talking about a war .
They are generally agreements that lack increasing democratic legitimacy as they are almost always negotiated in the greatest secrecy , behind the public 's backs , in an attempt to cover up their economic , social and environmental impact , and avoid informed debate and clarification .
With negotiations at a stage said to be fairly advanced and their conclusion envisaged for 2011 , its impact on sectors and countries has yet to be fully debated .
However , the content of this agreement is nothing new : the opening up of markets , and the liberalisation of services , including increasingly commercialised public services , which are at the mercy of the interests of multinationals , and cause trouble for the people .
The consequences are well-known : the domination of markets by a few , the destruction of weaker production systems , and increasing pretexts for attacks on rights , and on living and working conditions .
The EU commenced talks on the Comprehensive Economic and Trade Agreement with Canada in 2009 .
The potential agreement covers a broad range of topics : trade in goods and services , intellectual property rights , public procurement , regulatory cooperation , investment , temporary migration , competition policy and employment and environmental standards .
In my opinion , it is right for both sides to prioritise efforts to reach agreement over several fundamental points , such as the issues of public procurement , investment and public services .
I welcomed the document because the EU and Canada have a close relationship as far as trade and foreign direct investment are concerned .
The ongoing negotiations on a Comprehensive Economic and Trade Agreement ( CETA ) aim at a very advanced agreement , exceeding in its level of ambition any trade and economic agreement negotiated either by the EU or by Canada to date , that could reinforce the already strong bilateral trade and investment relationship even further .
I welcome an agreement with Canada going beyond the WTO commitments and being complementary to multilateral rules , provided that the negotiations produce a balanced , ambitious , high-quality agreement .
I feel that agriculture chapters will constitute an important issue for both parties in these negotiations .
I am concerned about possibly substantial concessions in the area of GMOs , milk and origin labelling .
The interests and the priorities in agriculture should therefore be fully taken into account and the agreement must be beneficial to EU and Canadian consumers and to the agricultural sectors on both sides as well , and ensure , within a balanced overall outcome , greater - but fair - competition among EU and Canadian suppliers providing agricultural goods .
I welcome the initial commitment from both parties not to maintain , introduce or reintroduce agricultural export subsidies on the agricultural goods traded , this being a positive step in the interests of ambitious and fair negotiations , as well as the agreement to cooperate in WTO agricultural negotiations .
The European Union and Canada have had good , solid trade relations for many years .
However , the potential for economic cooperation is far from exhausted and I welcome the negotiations in relation to the CETA .
Nonetheless , progress in WTO negotiations must be given priority over bilateral agreements .
This resolution covers a range of important themes .
I particularly support the reservations expressed by the European Parliament in relation to the possible negative impact on European agriculture .
The principle of mutuality must be preserved in order to ensure a solid , sustainable agreement for both sides .
In this context , I would like particularly to refer to the debate on origin labelling for slaughter cattle which needs to be resolved , as well as tariff-related and technical obstacles , such as protracted approval procedures for EU products .
Clearly , the aim of the CETA must be fair competition .
In view of the fact that the European Union is Canada 's second largest trade partner , and that Canada is a major partner for the EU in the field of foreign direct investment , I voted in favour of the motion for a resolution on EU-Canada trade relations .
At the same time , I would like to emphasise that Poland is Canada 's largest trading partner among the Central and Eastern European countries and , for a dozen or so years , has maintained a bilateral trade surplus which has grown year on year .
Today 's vote is a key step forward which bodes well for the future .
in writing . - I am delighted that my amendment , which ' takes note of the recent legal developments regarding the EU 's ban on seal products , in particular , Canada 's request to the WTO for the establishment of a formal dispute resolution panel , and expresses its strong hope that Canada will withdraw the WTO challenge , which runs counter to positive trade relations , prior to the need for ratification of the CETA agreement by the European Parliament ' , was carried .
Commercial relations between the European Union and Canada can go well beyond the commitments undertaken through the World Trade Organisation as long as they are based on a balanced agreement , a guarantee of proper reciprocal access to each other 's markets and improved protection for trademarks , patents and geographical indications .
Fresh investments are , in our view , needed in order to ensure respect for the environment and good working conditions .
Since the agricultural sector is of fundamental importance , we urge the Commission to negotiate an agreement that is beneficial for producers and consumers alike , and which ensures fair competition between providers of agricultural products from the European Union and Canada .
Lastly , we think that the Council should obtain Parliament 's consent before signing any further international commercial agreements , and that Parliament should be kept informed throughout all phases of the procedure in order to guarantee greater democratic control .
This is the only way that we can achieve higher growth in trade and investments between the European Union and Canada .
I voted for the resolution but against Amendment 10 which supports the ban on importing seal products imposed by the EU .
This ban is not justified , neither scientifically nor legally .
Indeed , the conclusions of the scientific opinion given by the European Food Safety Authority ( EFSA ) at the end of 2007 are based on data concerning the slaughter of animals in abattoirs and which are not reliable with regard to seal hunting .
The legal base is also questionable , as the European Parliament 's legal opinion , dated 1 April 2009 , shows : ' It seems virtually impossible to justify the ban on the sole basis of animal well-being , since the Treaty contains no legal basis on animal well-being ' .
The protection of the species , for its part , is not at stake , its population having even tripled in Greenland over 25 years .
Finally , an embargo on which the Commission gives assurances that there would be no impact on Inuit traditional hunting is unrealistic .
In this context , the request submitted by Canada to the World Trade Organisation ( WTO ) concerning the creation of a special dispute settlement body in relation to the European embargo is justified .
in writing . - Parliament has given a strong signal in its resolution on the EU-Canada trade negotiations that it will rigorously defend its legislation to ban seal products from the EU market .
EU citizens demanded we take action to keep the products of the cruel commercial hunt out of the EU .
Canada has no right to try and undermine the democratic will of European citizens by taking our clearly non-discriminatory seal ban law to the World Trade Organisation .
Closer trade ties between the EU and Canada can only be built on a basis of respect for the wishes of the European public and for European law .
The European Commission is about to conclude negotiations with Canada on a free trade agreement of unprecedented scope .
It has been negotiating since 2004 .
European citizens were never consulted or even informed .
The report welcomes this harmful agreement whose content has only been revealed through leaks .
This is unacceptable .
I shall vote against the report and I condemn this agreement , which gives the people of Europe a subordinate role , following the example of the North American Free Trade Agreement .
The historical relationship between Europe and Canada is long , and even predates the EU .
Moreover , we share the same values and principles , making us preferential allies in the global geostrategic situation .
There has been significant progress with trade relations , although there is still no comprehensive agreement .
I believe that we should continue to make every effort to reach an agreement that suits everyone , since it will be very important for both sides ' economic development .
in writing . - The potential agreement covers a wide range of issues : trade in goods and services , intellectual property rights , public procurement , regulatory cooperation , investment , temporary migration ( mode IV ) , competition policy and labour and environmental standards .
Both parties still need to find an agreement on several crucial chapters of the negotiations , among others , on access to government procurement , investment and public services .
There are two other issues that came up in the negotiations that are quite sensitive in the EP .
The first issue concerns the Canadian oil sands and the EU 's Fuel Quality Directive .
The Fuel Quality Directive has been highly debated in the Committee on the Environment .
As yet , the Canadian Government believes this directive discriminates between Canadian oil imports and oil imports from other countries .
I consider the agreement to be too early .
The second issue is the EU 's ban on seal products and it is highly important .
This agreement could reinforce the already strong bilateral trade and investment relationship between the EU and Canada ; however , it should be mutually beneficial and therefore , I have abstained from voting as yet .
A progressive agreement will encourage and accelerate active trade and investment relations between the EU and Canada .
The liberalisation of trade relations will bring mutual benefits for business actors and will create more favourable investment conditions .
To achieve a comprehensive , high-quality agreement that goes beyond the WTO commitments , neither party should express requirements that conflict with their internal policies or institutional arrangements .
Furthermore , in the event of commercial disputes , the reciprocity principle should be applied , the protection of intellectual property rights should be improved and there should be reciprocal access to the services and public procurement markets .
Particular attention should be paid to the agricultural sector and consumers .
We must maintain a firm stance on GMOs , milk and origin labelling .
We must ensure fair and greater competition among agricultural goods suppliers .
I feel that the Commission should begin negotiations with Canada on investment once Parliament has expressed its position on the future EU investment policy .
We must protect the parties ' most sensitive sectors , so that they are excluded from the scope of investment agreements .
The Commission must take a firm stance on the ban on seal products and , in this regard , Canada should withdraw its requirement for the WTO to establish a formal dispute resolution panel .
Such a requirement does not conform with the principles of positive trade relations .
I welcome this European Parliament resolution on EU-Canada trade relations .
There is a natural partnership between the EU and Canada founded on cultural similarities and a long shared history .
It is only natural , therefore , that the private sectors in both the EU and Canada have shown strong support for an ambitious and comprehensive economic agreement , and believe that advancing a closer EU-Canada economic partnership would send a powerful pro-growth signal to investors and business within the EU and Canada as well as internationally .
I therefore welcome an agreement with Canada that transcends the World Trade Organisation ( WTO ) commitments and is in addition to the multilateral rules , provided that the negotiations produce an ambitious , high-quality agreement , based on reciprocity and that goes beyond mere tariff reductions .
I would , however , warn of the need to consider the economic impact of this opening up , especially on the Member States whose economies are more vulnerable .
At the present time , the trade system of the World Trade Organisation ( WTO ) seems to be the best way to offer a reference framework for economic relations between states .
However , it does not prevent states or supranational organisations from increasing their economic relations beyond that common regulation .
Therefore , a particularly close economic relationship between the EU and Canada seems justified .
As stressed in the report , the EU is Canada 's second most important trade partner .
For its part , in 1976 , Canada became the first industrialised country with which the EU signed a framework agreement for commercial and economic cooperation , and it is the EU 's fourth largest source of foreign direct investment .
An agreement could lead to relations between the two areas reaching even greater levels of economic cooperation , creating even stronger links between these two areas , which are already profoundly linked by a common cultural approach .
in writing . - In favour .
Negotiations with Canada on a far-reaching Comprehensive Economic and Trade Agreement ( CETA ) are well advanced and could be concluded this autumn .
The CETA is by far the most ambitious bilateral FTA the EU has ever negotiated under the 2006 ' Global Europe ' trade strategy .
It includes far-reaching chapters on Services , Procurement , Investment Protection , Intellectual Property and Regulatory Cooperation .
Economic relations between the EU and Canada are of key significance for the development of dialogue between the two parties .
After the US , the EU is Canada 's biggest trade partner , whereas Canada is the EU 's 11th biggest trade partner .
The aim of the ongoing negotiations on a Comprehensive Economic and Trade Agreement ( CETA ) is the conclusion of a very wide-ranging agreement , with more ambitious goals than any of the economic and trade agreements negotiated to date by either the EU or Canada .
Bilateral trade and investment links are already strong , and this may result in them becoming even stronger .
According to the joint report by experts from the EU and Canada , the conclusion of a Comprehensive Economic and Trade Agreement is intended to provide tangible economic benefits , which will result from trade liberalisation and the elimination of tariff barriers .
Nevertheless , certain problems still remain regarding this agreement , which may have a negative impact on the EU 's agricultural sector .
In my opinion , more work needs to be done in terms of the differences between the sanitary and phytosanitary standards in force in the EU and in Canada .
Furthermore , more work needs to be done to ensure the compliance of environmental standards in Canada with those in force in the EU .
In connection with the above , I believe that it is necessary to carry out a detailed analysis and evaluation of the abovementioned standards .
in writing . - I welcome today 's resolution , which highlights progress in negotiations for an EU trade agreement with Canada .
Canada is an important potential trading partner for the EU , and both parties will profit from such an agreement .
However , there are some concerns which the Commission needs to take into account : the environmental impact of extracting oil from tar sands and the health of workers mining asbestos are just two issues which need to be looked at carefully .
I support calls for Canada to withdraw its WTO challenge on the EU 's ban on seal products and am pleased that amendments outlining this position were adopted by Parliament .
The Commission also needs to take a strong position to protect the ban .
Intellectual property rights must also be adhered to with the use of trademarks and patents .
I am confident that these problems will be dealt with and taken into account by the Commission and that an effective trade agreement will be agreed .
I am voting for this own-initiative report since it tackles the current issues in the interminable debate on the ratings industry : specifically , the lack of competition , oligopolistic structures , and the lack of accountability and transparency , primarily as regards rating sovereign debt .
I voted in favour of this resolution on credit rating agencies : future perspectives .
Credit rating agency ( CRA ) ratings fulfil several useful purposes : they aggregate information about the credit quality of issuers in a global environment .
Ratings allow issuers to assess global and domestic markets , reducing information costs and widening the potential pool of investors , and this provides markets with liquidity and helps to set prices .
The recent financial crisis has highlighted three problems in the industry : a lack of competition , over-reliance on external ratings in the regulatory framework and no liability for ratings on the part of CRAs .
I agree with the rapporteur 's opinion that credit ratings are not just pure opinions and that CRAs should be accountable for their ratings .
Therefore , their exposure to civil liability should be enhanced in order to provide a credible threat .
I voted in favour of Mr Klinz 's report on credit rating agencies .
Credit rating agencies are useful : they provide information about the quality of credit products , enabling debtors and investors to access global and domestic markets and ultimately help fix prices .
However , the crisis has demonstrated the dangers created by the current system : the lack of competition and a lack of accountability and transparency of agencies in particular .
This is an own-initiative report which calls on the European Commission to clearly identify the shortcomings of the current framework and to provide an impact study outlining the potential different alternatives for improving the system , including new legislation if necessary .
I urge the Commission to respond to our request as soon as possible .
I voted in favour of this important document .
Rating agencies assess not just private equity companies and their products , but also countries .
The conditions under which a country can expect to borrow on international markets depend on the rating it receives .
Negative ratings in the face of financial difficulties send a country into a kind of debt spiral , because a falling rating increases the cost of borrowing even more and makes the country 's financial situation even worse .
All market participants and their supervisors must know the criteria used to set ratings and be able to check these themselves .
The Commission and the G20 countries are asked to establish a new global approach to assessment , which would reduce the likelihood of errors , would regulate the activities of companies involved in ratings and would reduce the risk associated with financial assessment .
I welcome and have , on several occasions , repeated the proposal that Europe urgently needs to establish its own credit rating agency , which would produce objective and independent assessments .
I welcome the report 's call to establish our own independent rating agency , which , according to the proposals , would initially be called the European Credit Rating Foundation .
The possibilities for all EU Member States to borrow in international markets under the right conditions , as well as the stability of the whole global financial system and the effectiveness of crisis prevention , will depend on how successfully we can reform financial assessment .
Credit rating agencies ( CRAs ) assess countries , institutions and companies , assigning risk ratings regarding their ability to pay their debts on the agreed date .
Regulation ( EC ) No 1060 / 2009 on CRAs was adopted as a first reaction to the financial crisis .
This regulation dealt with the most pressing issues , subjecting CRAs to oversight and regulation .
However , it did not solve all the problems .
Indeed , the financial crisis has demonstrated that there are three key problems in how these agencies operate : lack of competition , over-reliance on external ratings and no accountability .
This report , which I voted for , calls on the European Commission to identify the failings and provide an impact assessment on the possible alternatives , including further legislative proposals .
It also calls on the European Commission to assess the costs and benefits of creating a fully independent European Credit Rating Foundation .
I supported the proposed report because I think that creating credit rating agencies will boost competition in this sector , which is a prerequisite for enhancing quality , reducing information costs and , last but not least , increasing the relevant agencies ' accountability .
This will also help reduce regulatory dependence .
I voted in favour of Mr Klinz 's draft report on credit rating agencies because I think the edited text contains many positive elements and good ideas .
In particular , I agree with the aspiration to improve the transparency , integrity , responsibility , independence and reliability of these agencies .
What is more , I support Mr Klinz 's idea to establish a European Credit Rating Foundation that would be independent of States and institutions , and I share his belief that the current oligopoly is a problem for the sector .
The recent financial crisis has drawn attention to three key problems in the area of rating agencies , which are the lack of economic competition , the excessive dependency of the regulatory framework on external rating assessments , and the fact that the rating agencies provide no guarantee for their ratings .
I am not sure whether the rapporteur 's proposal to establish a European Rating Agency is a sensible solution .
There is no guarantee that the European Rating Agency would acquire a good reputation and would become a genuine new player among rating agencies , that it would be credible , or that it would be able to convince the market of its absolute independence of any public body , whether the Member States , the European Commission or any other public entity .
The rapporteur 's proposal to establish a network of European rating agencies seems more sensible to me , since cooperation between rating agencies active at national level in making use of the available human and financial resources should encourage competition in this area by covering a broad range of activities and different markets , thereby making it possible to achieve the same level as the large rating agencies which have a global scale of operations .
in writing . - I voted against the potential adoption of EU harmonisation of credit rating agencies as the standards may vary , and necessarily so , between Member States .
Without one single common currency , and in view of the volatility of markets , particularly in the failing eurozone economies , the UK faces the possibility of being tangled in a mire of harmonised credit ratings which would have to encompass all economic circumstances across the Union and could expose UK business and industry to hazardous ventures supported by EU-wide credit ratings .
It is up to independent economies in independent Member States to determine their conditions and limitations concerning credit rating .
Given the consequences that credit ratings for sovereign debt can have for the market , budgetary balances and the general welfare of the people , it is imperative that these be based on trustworthy facts and figures .
In order to preserve the truth and fairness of such ratings , there is a need to increase the transparency underlying these decisions , as well as the accountability of these agencies .
I therefore support and welcome the establishment of priorities for the regulation of credit rating agencies proposed today , which I consider essential in order to overcome the problems in this industry .
in writing . - The situation with credit ratings agencies must be addressed in Europe .
These private , profit-orientated organisations have far too much power over sovereign governments and I fully support plans to address this anomaly at European level .
I voted against the report on credit rating agencies .
It is politically unacceptable and economically dangerous for these agencies , which have played such a negative role in the present crisis , to continue to have the right , granted by the EU itself , to rate not only companies , but also the economies of the Member States .
The European Parliament should be more decisive and radical in its decisions on action by credit rating agencies , especially after the damage they have caused to European economies and European citizens .
However , the report is spineless .
The regulations it proposes are cowardly and the lack of transparency surrounding credit rating agencies basically remains as before .
By no stretch of the imagination has the problem been resolved of ratings by self-seeking private firms , be they American now or European in the future , which alone foster the speculation mafia .
The report should promote a public , democratically-controlled agency which has nothing to do with private interests and which can play a particular role within the framework of solidarity between the States and their citizens .
I voted in favour of this report because it sets out the situation relating to credit rating agencies ( CRAs ) clearly and objectively .
I , too , believe that CRAs play a necessary and extremely useful role in distilling and simplifying the torrent of information about the financial markets , both in terms of the solvency and reliability of debt issuers as well as in terms of individual financial instruments .
However , as Mr Klinz rightly points out , this business model risks drawing attention away from protecting investors and towards protecting debt issuers , unless suitable corrective measures are taken .
I do not think that competition can be improved , since the proliferation of agencies could undermine the credibility of ratings .
However , I think that greater responsibility could translate into greater objectivity and more thorough work , which would protect not just the affairs of the few but help reduce information imbalances , which amounts to safeguarding the functioning of the markets and also the general interest .
in writing . - ( FR ) I voted in favour of Mr Klinz 's report .
It contains some interesting proposals for pursuing the necessary framework for credit rating agencies .
The current situation in the euro area reminds us on an almost daily basis of the impact of decisions taken by these agencies and the reliance of the global financial regulatory system on these agencies .
I particularly welcome the request made to the European Commission to look at the feasibility of introducing an independent European Credit Rating Foundation .
This is a concrete proposal which would enable us to address the over-reliance of the global financial regulatory system on some non-public credit ratings .
in writing . - I support this report on the future of credit rating agencies ( CRAs ) .
The recent financial crisis has highlighted that there are major problems with this business , such as over-reliance on external ratings in the regulatory framework and no liability for ratings by CRAs .
Indeed , CRAs played a significant role in the build-up to the financial crisis through the assignment of faulty ratings to structured finance instruments .
This report , in advance of the legislative proposal the Commission is preparing for the autumn , addresses these issues , calling for : a review of whether and how Member States use ratings for regulatory purposes in order to reduce the general over-reliance on them of the financial regulatory system ; a detailed impact assessment and viability study on the costs , benefits and potential governance structure of a fully independent European Credit Rating Foundation ; the exploration of establishing a truly independent European Credit Rating Agency ; the establishment of a European Rating Index which incorporates all ratings of registered CRAs that are available on the market .
One after the other , credit rating agencies are downgrading the credit ratings of those European countries affected most by the crisis or placing them on ' negative alert ' .
I am talking about Portugal , Ireland , Greece and Spain .
Although the agencies may not have triggered the global financial crisis , such actions on their part have , nonetheless , exacerbated it .
In fact , they encourage speculation , jeopardising the chances of success of the already draconian recovery plans imposed on their people .
That is why the creation of a European credit rating agency is urgent , adopting the legal status of an independent foundation .
There must also be an end to the conflicts of interest inherent in credit rating agencies , which are currently able to issue ratings whilst acting as consultants .
This is a change that should go hand in hand with the Commission 's assessment of the need for greater disclosure of information for all products in the field of financial instruments .
Ever since the economic and financial crisis began , there has been talk of nothing but credit rating agencies ( CRAs ) .
However , what are our thoughts on their now key role ?
The European Parliament has addressed this issue .
Although CRA ratings fulfil several useful purposes ( for example , they aggregate information about the credit quality of issuers , which is particularly helpful in our global environment ) , developments in the regulatory framework have turned these ' information intermediaries ' into de facto ' regulatory licensors ' , a mistake that we must not make !
The financial crisis has highlighted that there are three key problems in the industry : lack of competition , over-reliance on external ratings in the regulatory framework and no liability for ratings by CRAs .
The role played by the credit rating agencies ( CRAs ) is undoubtedly important for the current market economy .
These agencies started out as information middlemen , facilitating access to the market for debt issuers and investors , enabling reduced information costs and , therefore , greater liquidity and transparency .
However , as is the case in many other areas of this sector , the crisis has demonstrated three key problems : lack of competition , over-reliance on external ratings in the regulatory framework and no liability for CRA ratings .
There is an urgent need to review the role of these agencies for regulating the global financial market and find effective solutions for their lack of competition .
It is also crucial to assess the conflicts of interest in this business model .
Credit rating agencies ( CRAs ) provide ratings for three different sectors - the public sector , companies and structured finance instruments - and played a significant role in the path that led to the financial crisis , through the assignment of faulty ratings to structured finance instruments , which had to be downgraded on average three to four notches during the crisis .
Regulation ( EC ) No 1060 / 2009 was the first reaction to the financial crisis and already deals with the most pressing issues , subjecting CRAs to oversight and regulation .
However , I hope that greater transparency in the actions of CRAs will be obligatory .
The absence of regulatory certainty in this sector is putting the proper functioning of EU financial markets at risk and therefore requires the Commission , before tabling further amendments to Regulation ( EC ) No 1060 / 2009 , to identify properly the gaps in the new framework and provide an impact assessment on the range of alternatives available to fill such gaps , including the possibility of further legislative proposals .
The credit rating industry has several problems , some of the most important of which include the lack of competition , oligopolistic structures and the lack of accountability and transparency .
The situation over the last few years has thoroughly demonstrated how little credibility credit rating agencies ( CRAs ) have .
Nonetheless , they continue to have free rein , and their actions are extremely damaging , especially for countries with weaker economies .
As entities that are dependent on the financial system and very much stakeholders in the ratings they issue , they make a living , above all , from disproportionately stimulating credit and capitalist financial speculation .
These agencies are a clear expression of the financialisation of the economy - that do not translate or correspond to actual increases in productive activity - and they constitute a central part of neoliberalism 's development strategy , which is always seeking levels of profit that real production cannot ensure , because of the well-known trend towards decreasing profits .
While this report does make some criticisms of how these agencies operate , the truth is that it never gets to the bottom of the issue , or proposes public control of the financial sector , so as not to threaten the interests of large companies and financial institutions .
This is a key issue .
We therefore call for effective regulation of the financial sector , and putting a stop to the liberalisation of capital movements , to tax havens , to derivatives , and to CRAs and their operations .
We know - as it has indeed been demonstrated over the last few years - that credit rating agencies ( CRAs ) are not credible , but their actions , nonetheless , remain very damaging , especially to countries with weaker economies , and they make a living , above all , from disproportionately stimulating credit and capitalist financial speculation .
They are , above all , the result of the financialisation of the economy - that do not translate or correspond to actual increases in productive activity - and they constitute a central part of neoliberalism 's development strategy , which is always seeking levels of profit that real production cannot ensure .
While this report makes some criticisms of how these agencies operate , the truth is that it never gets to the bottom of the issue , or proposes public control of the financial sector , so as not to threaten the interests of large companies and financial institutions .
We therefore call for effective regulation of the financial sector , and putting a stop to the liberalisation of capital movements , to tax havens , to derivatives , and to CRAs and their operations .
We need a different fiscal policy that contributes to economic growth , social justice and balanced public accounts , so that it may contribute to the end of the tax benefits available in tax havens , to the taxation of profits made on the stock exchange , and to the introduction of an additional tax on the profits of large companies and financial institutions .
This report refers to extremely important issues regarding the rating sector , including the lack of competition , the oligopolistic structure and a lack of accountability and transparency , especially in the rating of government debt .
In my opinion , it is therefore essential to take steps to create a European Credit Rating Agency , which could work towards a new model of credit rating and create the conditions for developing genuine competitiveness .
It would be a good thing if credit rating agencies were to be more accountable in future .
The truth is that the agencies gave the highest possible rating to many complex financial instruments , toxic instruments , as we were later to learn .
The report recommends that there should be more and better risk analysis by market players so that they do not have to rely too much on the credit rating agencies .
Almost the entire market for credit ratings , which are sometimes made compulsory for regulatory purposes , is controlled by three large US agencies .
Opening up this industry to competition , or creating a European public agency , will not change the perversity of the system .
It is now madder than ever .
No one knows which market or which agency directs the reactions of the other ; whether one country 's poor rating triggers panic over sovereign debt , or whether cynical speculation leads to a poor rating ; whether a good rating has an impact on certain assets being held onto or whether , because they are good and one wants to hold onto them , the assets are rated favourably .
Monitoring the activity of agencies more closely offers only a minimum service and obviously does not go far enough .
Despite the repeated criticisms they have received in Europe and the US , the reputation of agencies has not really suffered .
There is no doubt that holding them legally and even financially accountable for the consequences of their mistakes and their irresponsible evaluations would have an impact .
Yet again , nothing will be resolved without fundamentally changing the system instead of trying to patch it up to guarantee its survival .
By approving Mr Klinz 's report appealing for effective regulation of rating agencies , Parliament is taking another step towards greater transparency in the financial markets .
It is important to overcome the current problems that characterise the sector : the lack of competition , the regulatory over-dependence on ratings , and the low reliability of notes .
In this vein , Parliament 's request for the Commission to consider creating an independent European agency that could also be responsible for sovereign debt ratings is significant .
Since the irresponsible behaviour of credit rating agencies ( CRAs ) has often been the initial cause of speculation that primarily harms European taxpayers , it is hugely important to review their role in sovereign debt ratings as part of the ongoing reform process , which will be completed in the autumn .
I welcomed this document because the credit rating industry has various problems , the most serious of which are oligopolistic structures and the lack of competition , accountability and transparency .
For the dominant credit rating agencies ( CRAs ) in particular , the payment model is a problem , while the regulatory system 's key problem is over-reliance on external credit ratings .
As you know , CRAs rate three different sectors - the public sector , companies and structured finance instruments .
There is an inherent conflict of interest if market participants devise internal credit risk assessments for their own regulatory capital requirements .
I see the need to increase supervisors ' responsibilities , capacity , powers and resources for monitoring , assessing and overseeing the adequacy of the internal models and for imposing prudential measures .
I believe that credit ratings must serve the purpose of increasing information to the market in a manner that provides investors with a consistent assessment of credit risk across sectors and countries , and consider it important to enable users to better scrutinise CRAs .
In this respect , it is necessary to highlight the central role of increased transparency in their activities .
I firmly believe that we must support the establishment of new CRAs while avoiding any distortions of competition .
The resolution voted on today sets out a series of measures to reduce the current dependency on a very few ratings sources .
As well as an increase in competition , these measures include greater and judicious use of internal credit ratings , particularly by large financial institutions that are capable of performing their own risk assessments .
We were certainly somewhat divided on this subject during the initial phases , but in our final positions , we were substantially in agreement .
Consensus was also reached on the issue of transparency , since I support the idea to oblige all registered rating agencies to conduct an annual review to assess their past credit rating performances , with this information then being passed on to the supervisor .
We Swedish Social Democrats today supported the call for the Commission to carry out a more detailed investigation of the conditions for establishing a European Credit Rating Foundation or a public European credit rating agency .
We can see that a politically created credit rating body could be a way of putting pressure on the large private agencies .
At the same time , we can see the potential problems .
It would therefore be beneficial to get a better picture of both the advantages and disadvantages of such a body with the aid of a detailed study .
A better knowledge base is a prerequisite for further discussion of this matter .
in writing . - I voted for this report .
The recent financial crisis has highlighted that there are three key problems in the credit rating agencies industry : lack of competition , over-reliance on external ratings in the regulatory framework and no liability for ratings by CRAs .
The report suggests ways of dealing with each of these problems .
The recent financial crisis has highlighted the three main problems involving credit rating agencies : lack of competition , due to the scarce importance of rating agencies in global capital markets , as well as the inability to compete , particularly in terms of regulatory standards ; over-reliance on external ratings in the regulatory framework for formulating standards , laws and regulations ( for example , their increasingly frequent use in determining capital requirements ) as well as Central Bank reliance on external credit ratings ; and , lastly , the absence of liability for credit rating agencies in relation to the ratings they provide , in which regard the report also proposes to foster the establishment of a European network of credit rating agencies .
We agree , in this vein , with the importance of more widespread information for investors and that market participants should only be authorised to invest in derivative financial instruments if they can prove to have an understanding and ability to assess the credit risk that the product carries .
Lastly , we support the idea of establishing a fully-independent , non-public European Credit Rating Foundation ( ECRF ) .
This hypocritical text claims that the main problem with credit rating agencies is that they hamper competition .
Its solution to the ' over-reliance ' of banks on these agencies is that the banks assess the risks themselves .
Banks responsible for measuring austerity !
If they are unable to do so , they are asked to apply the least favourable rating to offer themselves the greatest protection . The problem is not protecting the interests of banks but protecting the general interest .
Once again , the people are last on the EU 's list of priorities .
Credit rating agencies ( CRAs ) fulfil several useful purposes : they aggregate information on the credit quality of issuers , enabling issuers to access global and domestic markets , reducing information costs and widening the potential pool of investors , thus providing markets with liquidity .
However , the recent financial crisis has highlighted that there are three key problems in the industry : lack of competition , over-reliance on external ratings in the regulatory framework and no liability for ratings by CRAs .
We must pay attention to the potential measures to be taken .
These should undergo the necessary impact assessments and scrutiny , and should not be a shot from the hip , which could be counterproductive , increasing the barriers to entry into the markets and the risk of more conservative ratings , with subsequent effects on the real economy and lending .
We must view this industry from a global perspective , as it is a true worldwide industry with an underlying global capital market .
We must therefore stay up-to-date with developments in the United States .
in writing . - This own-initiative report raises the main current issues concerning the credit rating industry , amongst which , the most important are the lack of competition , oligopolistic structures and the lack of accountability and transparency , notably regarding the rating of the sovereign debt .
I consider it to be very timely .
It is necessary to do our best not to repeat the situation which happened with Greece .
I voted in favour .
Credit rating agencies are supposed to provide information about the quality of credit .
Hitherto , however , these agencies have earned themselves a dishonourable reputation .
Thus , for example , their delayed reaction to the financial crisis of the 1930s was roundly criticised .
The experts in the credit rating agencies even failed to spot the rotten financial structures in the US property market as a risk .
Likewise , when state debts began to rise , they only reacted when investors started to express their worries , responding with such harshness that the financial problems of individual countries were exacerbated .
There is something terribly wrong with the system as a whole if the Greek irregularities and the Goldman-Sachs swap to conceal debt were known in the market for many years , if it was common for Athens to revise its budget data as soon as a new government came to power and the state was still given a good credit rating , only provoking a sudden , sharp response when the financial and economic crisis happened , causing bankruptcies , penalising states whose banks backed precarious loans , while , at the same time , betting a lot of money on countries going bankrupt .
This proposal can only be the first step in the right direction , which is why I have voted in favour of it .
I believe that the activities of credit rating agencies are generally extremely dubious .
This is not just because they do not identify risks in good time , as in the case of the US real estate market , but also because they can make a bad situation worse after a crisis occurs .
We cannot allow private US rating agencies to decide arbitrarily on the creditworthiness of European states .
This report is a step in the direction of more stringent controls on credit rating agencies , which is why I have voted in favour of it .
I welcome this resolution on the future perspectives of credit rating agencies .
The credit rating industry often experiences problems relating to oligopolistic structures and a lack of competition , accountability and transparency .
Consequently , the Commission should consider the possibility of establishing a completely new , independent European Credit Rating Foundation ( ECRF ) , which would have the right to participate in decisions on sovereign debt ratings and credit rating agencies .
The management , staff and governance structure of the new ECRF would be fully independent and autonomous .
I welcome the proposal that CRAs ' exposure to civil liability in the event of gross negligence or misconduct be defined on a consistent basis across the EU .
Furthermore , there is a need to increase supervisors ' responsibilities , capacity , powers and resources for monitoring , assessing and overseeing the adequacy of the internal models , for imposing prudential measures and conducting investigations and inspections .
It is very important to create a level playing field for credit rating agencies by stimulating competition , transparency , market opening and stability .
The work done by credit rating agencies ( CRAs ) is important since it ensures reliability and stability .
Hence , we need to establish rules and standards governing their ratings and their impartiality .
I voted in favour of the report by Mr Klinz because I think it is essential for the European Union to have adequate rules to manage the impact of ratings on the overall financial and economic system .
Notwithstanding the legal vacuum in this area and the possibility for these agencies to affect Member States ' economies - even to the extent of plunging them into crises - this report does appear to be the first step towards new rules for rating agencies given the Commission 's recent adoption of the new regulation on CRAs .
I voted in favour of Parliament 's resolution on credit rating agencies ( CRAs ) because I agree that it is essential to reduce the unfair competition caused by the CRAs ' common practice of assessing market participants while simultaneously obtaining orders from them .
I believe the Commission should carefully assess the potential use of alternative instruments to measure credit risk .
It is vital that the European Securities and Markets Authority ( ESMA ) exercises its powers effectively and has the right to conduct unannounced investigations and on-site inspections .
It is also vital that , when exercising its supervisory powers , the ESMA gives the persons subject to proceedings the opportunity of a hearing in order to respect their right to defence .
I also agree with the call for the Commission to carry out a detailed impact study on costs , benefits and the potential governance structure of a totally independent European Credit Rating Foundation , which would be competent in the three areas of ratings .
Although this report has some positive aspects , it was not capable of proposing the creation of a public , independent European Credit Rating Foundation .
On the contrary , the ambiguity of the way it is written allows for the public financing of a new private agency .
The report also fails to mention the withdrawal of sovereign debt from the agencies ' ratings , which is the main measure that could be taken in this area to combat speculation against the euro .
Finally , the report should have suggested that the Commission examine the possibility of prior European Securities and Markets Authority ( ESMA ) approval of all ' structured financial products ' .
I am voting against for these reasons .
Through this measure , we are at last able to express our desire to improve the work of rating agencies by enhancing their transparency , integrity , responsibility , independence and reliability .
While recognising the role of agencies in supplying information and stimulating market liquidity , it is now quite clear that financial operators have placed too much faith in their judgments and that their actions contributed to causing the financial crisis .
There is too much dependence on external credit rating agencies and an oligopoly exists in the sector .
I am therefore in favour of establishing an independent European Credit Rating Foundation with responsibility for ratings in the public sector , for companies and for structured finance instruments .
The recent financial crisis has demonstrated the need to regulate credit rating agencies ( CRAs ) .
Indeed , recent events have opened up the possibility of identifying the failures of their action and of re-examining their status as certifiers of the subjects of their analysis : companies , the public sector , and structured finance instruments .
As such , it has become clear that they play an important role in reducing the asymmetries in information that could be detected between investors .
On the other hand , however , it has been noted that there is too much confidence in the ratings assigned by CRAs , which surely contributed significantly to exacerbating the financial crisis .
There is , therefore , an urgent need for a new regulatory model that will reduce dependence on CRA ratings .
The solution involves measures such as limiting the dependence of the European Central Bank ( ECB ) on data provided by outside agencies , reinforcing the competences of regulators and supervisors , launching the debate on creating a European Credit Rating Foundation , increasing the range of information available to investors - thereby decreasing the CRAs ' power - and also , for example , strengthening mechanisms for civil accountability .
I should like to offer my congratulations on the excellent work carried out by Mr Klinz .
I call on the rating agencies to shed further light on how they determine their sovereign ratings , while also asking the sector to explain their methodologies and why their ratings diverge from the forecasts of the main international financial institutions .
Another controversial issue is the structure to be put forward to counterbalance the three largest rating agencies at European level , which are felt to have a disproportionate influence on our market .
Hence , I call on the Commission to carefully assess the opportunity for a completely independent credit rating foundation , which should be provided with seed funds to cover a maximum of five years .
Lastly , it is essential to look at the ways to make rating agencies subject to civil liability for their ratings .
I would therefore ask the Commission to identify the ways in which rating agencies could be held liable under the civil law of the Member States .
in writing . - In favour .
CRA ratings fulfil several useful purposes .
They aggregate information about the credit quality of issuers in a global environment with asymmetric information between debt issuers and investors , allowing issuers to access global and domestic markets , reducing information costs and widening the potential pool of investors , thus providing liquidity to markets and helping find prices .
However , developments in the regulatory framework have made these ' information intermediaries ' de facto ' regulatory licensors ' .
The recent financial crisis has highlighted that there are three key problems in the industry : lack of competition , over-reliance on external ratings in the regulatory framework and no liability for ratings by CRAs .
The main objective of the resolution adopted today is to remove the dependence on external credit ratings from the whole system , as far and as soon as is feasibly possible .
The role of external ratings as hard triggers is particularly significant when downgrading from investment grade to sub investment grade .
In a competitive and well-functioning market , the reputation of an agency is enough to ensure the quality of its ratings .
However , since credit rating agencies currently operate in an oligopoly , they benefit from an intrinsically ' guaranteed ' market .
I voted in favour of the Klinz report because I consider that the measures that it proposes to address the problems that exist in the credit rating service sector are a move in the right direction .
These services have a massive impact and the results of their activities may be catastrophic for the states and organisations which they rate , as we saw very clearly in the recent financial crisis .
Clear operating rules need to be laid down for these services , the rating procedures they use need to be disclosed and they need to take responsibility .
The states and all manner of services and organisations which they rate cannot be left at the mercy of their decisions .
The three principal rating agencies rate 95 % of economic activities ; we are therefore talking about a monopoly , with all the adverse repercussions that can have .
We are calling for transparency , restrictions on illegal activities , assumption of responsibility , evaluation of these agencies by independent bodies that will guarantee their impartiality and strict application of the rules .
I support the Klinz report in order to advance the process of reforming the rating agencies .
While the first legislative initiative made these agencies subject to regulation and supervision and the second clarified the supervisory powers of the European Securities and Markets Authority ( ESMA ) , this resolution advocates decreasing regulatory dependence on external ratings , structuring the industry in a competition framework and improving its business models in line with the criteria of the Financial Stability Forum .
The final text includes my amendments .
With these amendments , I intended to strengthen the capacity of the supervisory authorities , promote a level playing field globally , increase competition by avoiding rating shopping and establish standard procedures for disseminating information .
On the subject of sovereign debt , I advocated that the rating agencies should avoid pro-cyclicality in their work and take into account the forecasts of the main international financial institutions .
I also called for proposals from the Commission to reform the payment models and to impose accountability for misconduct .
Finally , I very much welcome the fact that the report considers the establishment of an independent European rating agency and the possibility of a European foundation .
in writing . - I support this report which recognises that credit rating agencies lack accountability , competition and transparency , notably with regard to sovereign debt .
More needs to be done at an EU and global level to ensure that reckless practices do not endanger the financial security of the EU .
Credit rating agencies ( CRAs ) are information middlemen that promote liquidity and transparency in the market by reducing asymmetries in information in the capital markets and facilitating access to the global market , and by reducing the cost of information and making use of the potential of creditors and investors .
However , these agencies present certain problems , in particular , concerning their lack of competition , their oligopolistic structures , the excessive trust placed in them , and their lack of transparency and accountability .
Such issues are becoming more important at the present time , not least as regards Member States that , because of their economic and financial difficulties , are seeing the ratings of various national institutions fluctuating inconsistently and cyclically .
While the importance of CRAs cannot be denied , it would be advisable to limit their role in the future .
I therefore voted for the proposal tabled by Parliament to call on the Commission to carry out an impact study , and an analysis of the costs , benefits and governance structure of a European Credit Rating Foundation competent in the various areas of ratings : the public sector , companies and finance instruments .
in writing . - This report will introduce tougher oversight of credit rating agencies by the new European Supervisory Authority on Securities and Markets ( ESMA ) this summer , which will prove an important tool in ensuring that the previous laissez-faire attitude to lending will not be able to continue in the wake of the financial crisis .
Credit rating agencies were earning fees , from financial institutions , for awarding ratings on their products , and from the resulting business of selling those products .
This conflict meant agencies were keen to give high ratings to complex financial instruments , which led to investor complacency when buying these products .
Agencies were also advising companies on ways to present their higher-risk products as low risk , and this misleading practice meant that these products turned out to be more toxic than their rating would suggest and led to huge losses for investors , including pension holders across Wales .
The financial and economic crisis has thrown a critical light on credit rating agencies and , in particular , their active role in the continuing crisis , the core problems identified being a lack of competition , excessive dependency on external credit ratings and a lack of answerability in the sector .
For this reason , the rapporteur recommends examining the idea of setting up a genuinely independent European credit rating agency , stating that the new European Credit Rating Foundation must be self-sustaining .
Because of the far-reaching consequences of ratings , intensive interaction with this sector is unavoidable .
This is why I have voted in favour of the report .
The financial crisis of recent years has highlighted the three main problems in the sector : lack of competition , over-reliance on external ratings in the regulatory framework , and no liability for credit rating agencies in relation to the ratings they issue .
I voted in favour of the report by Mr Klinz because I think establishing a completely independent , non-public European Credit Rating Foundation is a sensible and attractive idea .
I am voting for this report as I believe it is essential that we confront failures to comply with international social legislation both inside and outside Europe ; these constitute forms of social and environmental dumping that are damaging to European companies and workers .
It is to be hoped that this report can reinforce the firm nucleus of the work parameters incorporated in International Labour Organisation ( ILO ) legislation .
I voted in favour of this resolution on the external dimension of social policy , promoting labour and social standards and European corporate social responsibility .
It should be stressed that the external dimension of social policy includes EU activities and initiatives aimed at promoting labour and social standards in non-member countries .
This includes opportunities for men and women to obtain decent and productive work in conditions of freedom , equality , security and dignity .
International labour standards should , above all , ensure the development of people as human beings .
People are not goods whose price can be negotiated .
Work is a part of our everyday lives and is critical for the dignity , welfare and development of a person .
The EU has a good reputation in terms of international dialogue on social issues .
In this regard , it is considered a sensitive and trusted partner .
This must be used to achieve more ambitious goals set by the EU .
One of them is to build a coherent , integrated and professional EU approach to the external dimension of social policy .
Coordination within the European Parliament is key , as is coordination with the European Commission and the newly established External Action Service .
The external dimension of social policy includes European Union activities and initiatives aimed at promoting labour and social standards in third countries .
The protection of economic and social rights is an obligation for all Member States arising from the UN 's Universal Declaration of Human Rights .
This is why the attitude of all European Union Member States has to reflect clearly the principles of the European social model when social issues and cooperation among the Member States are at stake .
I would like to emphasise that the European social model offers equal opportunities in education , training and the labour market , as well as equal access to social services as major pillars of economic success .
This is why I encourage Member States to support the freedom of association and collective bargaining , the elimination of forced and compulsory labour , the elimination of discrimination in respect of employment and occupation and the abolition of child labour .
I voted for this motion for a resolution which supports the dignity , welfare and development of every person as values which ought to be the main objectives of economic development .
in writing . - The report on the external dimension of social policy relates to a priority for the EU social policies .
It calls for the strengthening of the core labour standards embedded in the ILO conventions , including freedom of association and collective bargaining , elimination of forced and compulsory labour , elimination of discrimination in respect of employment and occupation , and the abolition of child labour .
I voted in favour of this report because it also calls for a change in governance , globally and in the EU , in order to better implement workers ' rights and working conditions .
I supported the report by our fellow Member , Mr Falbr , because I believe that the Union should promote the highest labour and social standards in third countries to maintain its credibility in international trade and to build strong ties with the main trade partners .
The rapporteur recommends balanced relationships with NGOs and international organisations to facilitate the ratification of conventions .
To be in a position to negotiate with the Union , third countries must comply with internationally established labour standards .
The International Labour Organisation 's latest reading of the matter is that 115 million children are engaged in hazardous work - one of the worst forms of child labour - that puts the child 's life and health at risk .
With the World Day Against Child Labour on 12 June approaching , I voted in favour of this important and timely report which invites stakeholders of the Free Trade Agreement to commit , in line with the ILO 's Declaration on Fundamental Principles and Rights at Work , to the elimination of all kinds of forced labour and the ending of child labour .
Child labour and the organised violation of human rights must not be ignored when trade agreements are under discussion and the EU must take a strong position in promoting social policy and labour and social standards in trade negotiations .
The external dimension of social policy includes EU activities and initiatives aimed at promoting labour and social standards in non-member countries .
The EU has set itself the objective of not only becoming a pole of excellence on corporate social responsibility ( CSR ) but also of promoting CSR in its external policies .
Failure to comply with basic international social standards constitutes a form of social and environmental dumping detrimental to European enterprises and workers .
I agree that it is necessary to enhance the role of the relevant international institutions such as the International Labour Organisation ( ILO ) , the World Trade Organisation ( WTO ) , the Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development ( OECD ) and the United Nations , and to seek their cooperation in the development , implementation and promotion of basic international social standards .
Our globalised world , in which countries are interlinked by economic , social , cultural and political relationships , is an undeniable reality .
However , as regards trade relations between the European Union and third countries , there remain profound differences in terms of social protection systems , as well as of working conditions .
The European Union , as a trade partner and important negotiating partner at global level , should help promote higher labour and social standards in third countries .
I therefore voted for this report , which underlines the crucial role that the EU can play regarding human rights , especially through the right to a decent job .
Having a homogenous formula for a social clause that could be inserted in all bilateral trade agreements is what is proposed in the report that we have just adopted on the external dimension of social policy and the promotion of social standards .
This initiative is actually a step in the right direction .
Observing the fact that free trade agreements still generally contain few references to social standards , the report mentions a number of avenues , including the social clause and compliance with International Labour Organisation ( ILO ) conventions - whether or not they have been ratified already by all Member States . - and enhancing cooperation between third countries and Member States .
Developing the concept of corporate social responsibility is the other interesting aspect of the report because , although it is currently a useful concept , it is still based on voluntary participation and therefore has room for improvement .
As well as extending the concept to several areas and incorporating this CSA dimension into our trade polices , why not one day make it binding ?
Over and above political signalling , this would be a real step forward in achieving our social policy objectives .
The external dimension of social policy includes the European Union 's initiatives to promote labour and social standards in non-Member States .
By setting labour standards , the European Union fosters the possibility for citizens to obtain work in conditions of freedom , equality , safety and dignity .
Considering the present globalisation of the world economy , international labour standards are the foundation on which a country 's social and economic development should be built .
China , India and other emerging economies are becoming increasingly important players in terms of foreign investments .
This phenomenon is nevertheless associated with the risk that these countries - and , in particular , their companies - will export labour standards below those of the European Union .
I therefore believe that the European Union should be watchful of countries that wish to conclude trade agreements with us .
Europe 's small and medium-sized enterprises lead the way in translating social standards into reality .
I take the view that it is vital to have a clear and unambiguous definition of corporate social responsibility that will do away with the current assortment of interpretations , while also establishing ways to check that these responsibilities are met .
I decided to vote in favour of Mr Falbr 's report which , on the one hand , captures the strategic importance of corporate social responsibility as a motivational tool to stimulate business growth and , on the other , underlines that this issue can only be tackled on a voluntary basis .
I also completely agreed with Mr Falbr 's critical approach , whereby he disapproves of the hypocritical behaviour of the European Union simultaneously promoting a social model that fosters social rights while also entering into commercial agreements with countries that do not respect or provide protection for workers .
I voted in favour of this report because there are still cases where the conventions and agreements of the International Labour Organisation are not properly implemented or only partially implemented and the principles of corporate social responsibility are violated .
International labour standards should , above all , ensure workers ' rights , because work is a part of our daily lives and is critical for the dignity , welfare and development of a person .
As well as social standards , corporate social responsibility should contribute to sustainable growth , but companies should not avoid dialogue with employees and they must respect and promote decent employment relations , encourage employee participation through consultation and information and through collective bargaining , develop vocational skills and lifelong learning , comply with work safety standards , promote equality of men and women , create a proper environment for social partners to anticipate and manage changes that have taken place in the labour market , including restructuring , improve the quality of work , and integrate and protect vulnerable groups of workers , such as young people , the elderly , disabled people and migrants .
The European Union should therefore continue to use sanctions and incentives in bilateral and regional agreements in order to ensure the implementation of the social provisions of EU agreements .
Furthermore , it is very important for the governments themselves not to retreat from their responsibility to maintain the European social model because then , there is the threat of the privatisation of employment law and social security systems and services .
The external dimension of social policy includes EU activities and initiatives aimed at promoting labour and social standards in third countries .
Although both the Lisbon strategy and the EU 2020 strategy attach greater emphasis than ever before to social policy , the issues of competitiveness and economic factors continue to take priority to the detriment of social issues .
Core labour standards are embedded in the eight ILO conventions which focus on the freedom of association and collective bargaining , the elimination of forced and compulsory labour , the elimination of discrimination in respect of employment and occupation and the abolition of child labour .
In order for the EU to negotiate with third countries , they must comply with all the abovementioned requirements .
This is a mandatory condition for negotiations with third countries .
Trade policy cannot ignore failure to respect workers ' rights and , therefore , the development of society may continue only after these shortcomings have been removed .
The EU has a good reputation in terms of international dialogue on social issues .
In this regard , it is considered a sensitive and trusted partner .
This must be used to achieve more ambitious goals set by the EU .
The report focuses on a topic that is enormously important in today 's world . This is the question of workers ' rights .
So-called social dumping represents a major threat for workers as it undermines their rights in a fundamental way .
International companies are the main players when it comes to applying social standards .
It is therefore absolutely essential to define the social responsibility of companies clearly and unambiguously so that we can limit the number of differing interpretations and establish minimum obligations in this area , as well as a method for monitoring their fulfilment .
Many firms come into regions only for the temporary financial advantage , mostly because of cheap labour .
Companies generally refuse to establish long-term links in a region , and therefore to participate in shared social responsibility in the region .
The report calls for the strengthening of basic employment standards , which are enshrined in the conventions of the International Labour Organisation , including freedom of association and collective bargaining , the elimination of forced and compulsory labour , the elimination of discrimination in the workplace and the abolition of child labour .
It demands changes in the global administration system and in the EU , with the aim of better protection of workers ' rights and employment conditions .
The rapporteurs have managed to defend a clear social dimension in the submitted report , and I have therefore voted in favour of the report .
in writing . - I voted against the application of an external dimension of social policy , promoting labour and social standards and European corporate social responsibility .
This is because , in my opinion , the EU should refrain from imposing social prerogatives on third countries , however correct or beneficial they may deem them to be .
Whilst I accept the importance of fostering humane methods of treating a workforce , social policy in the EU has already wreaked havoc on a number of UK institutions and should not be extended .
A degree of flexibility and freedom is needed when dealing with social policy , as one-size-fits-all policy making can be counterproductive when applied at domestic level .
For this reason , the EU should not be seeking to acquire competence over social policy at all .
I welcome EU activities and initiatives aimed at promoting labour and social standards in third countries , which constitute a guarantee that the growth of the global economy will benefit everyone in the current globalised context .
I therefore support the conditions based on social values and human dignity imposed on third countries in order to negotiate with the EU .
It is through this type of Union that we will successfully use foreign policy to improve the situation in the world .
The International Labour Organisation ( ILO ) plays a key role in the international system , as it contributes to building a consensus on labour standards .
A significant part of this important acquis is recognised by all EU Member States .
However , there remain differences in terms of labour legislation between developed and developing countries .
In my opinion , it is imperative for the EU that these standards with those of third countries be reconciled , particularly with key trade partners , so as to preserve a basic level of equality in international trade .
This report shares this belief , setting out some strategies for these countries to respect the same principles as the EU in labour terms .
The establishment of fair standards for working conditions is a premise essential to durable and sustainable development , and will also contribute to achieving the Millennium Development Goals .
I therefore believe that this report is a fairly valid contribution to the development of the system of international trade , which is based on labour relations that vary so much between countries / trade blocs .
I would argue that the promotion of this policy of responsibility for working conditions demonstrates a Europe that is attentive and thorough , and that conforms to defending universal values in which it believes .
One of the fundamental objectives of the European Union is to link human and social development to economic development .
If these two factors are in balance , then this means , on the one hand , that people can do their work with adequate remuneration that is in line with human dignity and professional quality , while , on the other hand , it allows business owners to develop their businesses by following market principles , though tempered by the human environment in which this must take place .
This perspective - which some people also call the social market economy - is actually a new paradigm that goes beyond welfare economics and returns instead to the centrality of the human being .
Such a paradigm shift necessarily involves consistent support for social policy , including fostering the relevant standards and related corporate responsibility .
This approach and vision cannot , and must not , have an impact merely within the EU , but must also be applied to external action wherever possible , particularly during the negotiation of agreements .
Respect for International Labour Organisation standards , the principles laid down in the European Social Charter and social dialogue are just some of the areas that can be discussed on these occasions .
I believe that the report we have adopted offers sound backing for these objectives .
in writing . - The external dimension of social policy includes activities and initiatives of the EU aimed at promoting labour and social standards in non-member countries .
The failure today inside and outside the EU to comply with basic international social standards constitutes a form of social and environmental dumping detrimental to both European enterprises and EU and non-EU workers and citizens .
Given the globalisation of industry and services , international labour standards are the basis for guaranteeing that the growth of the global economy can benefit all .
This report demands a change in global governance and in the EU in order to better implement worker 's rights and working conditions , calling for the strengthening of the core labour standards which are embedded in the eight ILO conventions that focus on the freedom of association and collective bargaining , the elimination of forced and compulsory labour , the elimination of discrimination in respect of employment and occupation and the abolition of child labour .
The external dimension of social policy is aimed at promoting labour and social standards in third countries and at combating social dumping , often the result of globalisation or international trade .
The Union can no longer tolerate dumping in terms of welfare , health and the environment without reacting to it , as it is responsible for far too many transfers of production outside Europe .
The ridiculously low labour costs and despicable working conditions should no longer be seen by the Commission as ' natural competitive advantages ' .
On this point , I insist that the Commission changes its doctrine .
I voted in favour of the Falbr report because , with the role of the International Labour Organisation ( ILO ) having recently been downgraded , I think we need to remember the importance of respecting the social rights of workers in the world .
The European Union should play a leading role on the world stage to force other countries to respect international standards in labour law and thus limit the frantic quest for social dumping .
It is important for all European players to be involved in the implementation of this policy , be it governments involved in concluding international agreements , or European companies expanding their business into third countries .
The external dimension of the social policy is aimed at promoting core social standards in third countries in order to meet the Millennium Development Goals set by the United Nations and to ensure that workers are protected through compliance with international labour standards .
The EU is far from being outdone and that is why it should be able to benefit from its credibility and its ' good reputation ' in this regard , with a view to establishing social alliances with its main trading partners and promoting these at the World Trade Organisation ( WTO ) and International Labour Organisation ( ILO ) .
Before we let these third countries sit at the same negotiating table as the EU , we must demand that they subscribe to the same core international labour standards .
The overseas dimension of European policy is not limited to establishing agreements or overseas aid .
It is more than that .
In particular , it involves bringing European values to third countries , not just in terms of democratisation and greater respect for fundamental rights , but also of promoting active policies to protect the environment , and the rights of women and children , and of labour standards that respect personal dignity and enable personal development .
The same can be said for promoting social responsibility standards for companies in third countries .
This report by Mr Falbr concerns the external dimension of social policy , promoting labour and social standards and European corporate social responsibility .
The European Union has been a bastion of the defence of workers ' social rights , respect for which is a sine qua non for negotiations with third countries .
Despite the eight International Labour Organisation ( ILO ) conventions , according to the ILO itself , more than 50 % of workers do not enjoy social rights , in particular , immigrants , women and children .
It is in the EU 's interests to promote personal dignity and respect for social rights in all the Member States , creating , for that purpose , a mechanism for finding out who is not offering these rights to their workers and penalising them .
I welcome this report and am voting for it .
Whilst arguing for the importance of values in a globalising world increasingly dominated by economics , it advocates personal dignity , does not accept the exploitation of individuals , promotes welfare and personal integrated development , and calls on the EU to comply with ILO standards .
This is yet another enunciation of just concerns and criticisms that , unfortunately , does not get to the bottom of the issues and , for this very reason , ends up being largely inconsequential .
The 2010 World Social Security Report of the International Labour Organisation ( ILO ) mentions that more than 50 % of workers lack social protection .
It is in this context that the European Union is implementing a trade policy based on the zealous championing of free trade , which is achieved through the negotiation and conclusion of innumerable bilateral and regional agreements .
Far from encouraging ' corporate social responsibility ' , which is , in practice , non-existent , these agreements only protect the profits of large companies and financial institutions , and do not give the proper attention to labour rights , to the importance of collective bargaining and workers ' freedom of association , to the effective elimination of discrimination in respect of employment , to the elimination of forced labour , to insecure and poorly paid work , or to child labour .
This is just an example of an aspect that the report could and should have taken much further .
It was important to make the European Commission accountable , and demand it provide consistency on policy and action , and a series of effective actions promoting social and labour standards .
This report contains some positive aspects : the denouncing of multinationals ' constant disrespect for workers ' rights and decent work , and the need to horizontally integrate social policy in all European Union external policy , including so-called corporate social responsibility ( CSR ) .
However , the positive aspects are diluted by the failure to demand the implementation of alternative policies that effectively oblige companies to realise their CSR .
We therefore regret that the call for point 31 - ' Stresses that no directive regulating CSR and enforcing respect for it should be adopted at EU level ' - to be removed has been rejected .
Parliament should go further than ' requesting ' or ' encouraging ' the Commission to adopt a position and demand the creation of a legislative framework on CSR , with minimum standards that promote respect for the core labour standards advocated by the International Labour Organisation ( ILO ) in multinational companies and in the European Union itself , and include decent jobs and social clauses both in any bilateral trade agreements that the European Union negotiates and within the World Trade Organisation ( WTO ) itself .
For all these reasons , we voted against the report .
The external dimension of social policy is one of the key priorities of the Group of the Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats in the European Parliament .
It is essential to strengthen employment standards , such as freedom of association , collective bargaining , the elimination of forced and compulsory labour , discrimination in employment and occupations and the abolition of child labour .
The objective and the endeavour of international employment standards should therefore be to direct economic development particularly towards improving human life and dignity , and not just to establish the conditions and rights of workers .
Globalisation is , in fact , only serving to pit the workers of all countries against each other in unfair competition , whether through relocations , the immigration of job-seekers or the infamous General Agreement on Trade in Services Mode 4 .
The problem is that the European Union produces lots of fine talk on the subject but never puts it into practice .
When have we ever taken practical and specific action as a consequence of coming across situations of intolerable exploitation ?
When have such situations ever prevented the signing of trade agreements with a country ?
Never .
Because while you pretend to be concerned about foreign workers , European workers are being excluded from the picture .
As the rapporteur - who subscribes to this - points out , ' labour standards should not be used for protectionist trade purposes ' according to the international bodies !
So then , what principles , what values , what considerations could ever challenge the absolute power of the market ?
You talk a lot about the social responsibility of companies who , after all , are only playing by the rules that you have put in place .
When will the issue of the very heavy social responsibility of the EU 's political deciders finally be addressed here ?
The economic and financial crisis which is presently raging in Europe , but also in the rest of the world , is combined with a serious social crisis .
In this difficult context , the European Union and its businesses have a substantial social responsibility in the relations they maintain with third countries .
For this reason , I was keen to stress , through my vote , the need for the European Union to ensure that social standards and workers ' rights are adhered to when signing agreements with these countries .
The European Union , through the values it enshrines , must ensure that the standards governing its labour law are promoted and disseminated all over the world .
Europe has a duty to be a model .
That is why I also voted in favour of provisions which emphasise corporate social responsibility .
I welcomed this document because , at the turn of the century , the EU changed its strategy for the external dimension of social policy from a hard to a soft approach , i.e. from focusing on linking social standards with trade agreements to focusing rather on international cooperation and dialogue .
The EU uses different types of instruments to implement social policy in non-member countries .
These are hard , soft and financial instruments .
The use of these instruments is proof that the EU expects certain behaviour in its relations with its trading partners .
Nevertheless , the stumbling block is the implementation of these instruments and their enforcement in partner countries .
It is therefore crucial for the EU to focus more thoroughly on their implementation and enforcement , especially the International Labour Organisation ( ILO ) conventions and the principles of corporate social responsibility .
This is often hindered by the country 's legal order ; however , weak political will and internal economic pressure are also at play .
The fact that workers do not know their rights is another important factor .
in writing . - According to the report , the EU has a unique combination of economic dynamism with a social model .
It creates equal opportunities in education , training and the labour market and equal access to social services .
The report stresses the fact that there is a need for implementation of decent work programmes that reflect national needs and priorities regarding employment and social policy , and are based on agreement between employers , workers and governments .
This aspect is very important in the actual context .
These are several of the reasons why I endorse this report .
People matter most , and that is why it is so important to promote employment and social standards .
People living in rural areas and , in particular , women and young people , are a good example .
The overwhelming majority of farms are owned by men .
I believe that women should be supported to ensure that this imbalance is corrected .
In my opinion , it is also important to support young farmers who take over farms from their parents .
As far as young people are concerned , the quality of education in rural areas should be improved , and young people should be guaranteed access to non-rural opportunities for learning and personal development .
The next key issue is corporate social responsibility .
This means that businesses take action on a day-to-day basis to protect society and the environment , on their own initiative and irrespective of any legal regulations .
Businesses are no longer only geared towards profit .
They are starting to be characterised by an ever-greater awareness of social and environmental protection issues .
I voted in favour of this report as I believe that businesses have a social responsibility - towards their employees and customers , the environment and society at large .
A new term has been added to the German dictionary : Corporate Social Responsibility ( CSR ) .
This is - and should remain - a voluntary matter .
In our globalised markets , CSR entails much more than making a donation to the local football club .
Businesses that operate in a globally responsible way help shape foreign policy and development policy .
They are Europe 's ambassadors to the world , flying the flag for Europe 's social standards worldwide .
We should support CSR , not regulate it .
In this case , Europe 's role should be that of a moderator , not a regulator .
This principle must be applied if the European Commission is to get serious and take up the topic of CSR once again : we do not need excessive regulation .
We have underlined this position with this report .
I believe that Mr Falbr has drafted a good report , and so I would like to explain why I decided to vote in favour of its adoption .
The promotion of high labour standards , social standards and corporate social responsibility represents an extremely large challenge for the external dimension of social policy .
One of the problems which the rapporteur highlights is the inefficiency of the administrative bodies responsible for employment policy .
Ongoing and constructive cooperation with third countries , involving both the European Union as a whole and the individual Member States , may serve as a source of good practices in terms of establishing the appropriate administrative capabilities .
I believe that cooperation at regional and local levels and with businesses also yields good results .
An excellent example of partnership , support and exchange of experience which has yielded positive results is the cooperation between Polish regions and the countries in the Eastern Partnership over the last few years .
I voted in favour of the resolution on the external dimension of the European Union 's social policy .
The European Union is seen around the world as an attractive and sought-after partner , and this owes much to the unique way in which it combines economic dynamism with a social model .
The latter should be promoted by the EU in its relations with other countries and should involve consistent action between the two dimensions , internal and external .
The current text insists on the need to promote corporate social responsibility in particular .
The latter requires trading companies to take into consideration the social and environmental dimensions .
The resolution highlights that this promotion should not be binding , but rather should be the result of interaction between the stakeholders on a voluntary basis .
Finally it is also aimed at incorporating within international negotiations the rights of workers , which the International Labour Organisation is tasked with defending , as well as promoting a global economic governance that takes these parameters into account .
in writing . - I welcome this report .
Core labour standards are embedded in the eight ILO conventions that focus on the freedom of association and collective bargaining , the elimination of forced and compulsory labour , the elimination of discrimination in respect of employment and occupation , and the abolition of child labour .
It is clear not only from these conventions but also from the report of the World Commission on the Social Dimension of Globalisation that it is necessary to change the narrow focus on markets into a wider interest in people , i.e. focus on the protection of workers ' rights and the rule of labour law .
In order for the EU to negotiate with non-member countries , the latter must respect all the abovementioned .
This is a condition without which negotiations with non-member countries are impossible .
Trade policy cannot ignore any failure in respecting workers ' rights , and the development of society may therefore only continue after these drawbacks are removed .
By setting labour standards , the EU supports opportunities for men and women to obtain decent and productive work in conditions of freedom , equality , security and dignity .
Given the current globalisation , international labour standards are the basis which guarantees that the growth of the global economy will benefit all .
The aim and much of the content of Mr Falbr 's report is , in my view , very positive .
I also consider the focus on employment and decent working conditions to be a key element of sustainable development , and not just in EU countries .
Like the rapporteur , I regret that there is no single definition of a ' social clause ' which would be usable not in bilateral trade agreements , but in the creation of decent employment conditions for workers .
The social models of some European countries could also serve as a good example to developing countries .
I also share the opinion on the joint fight to eliminate child labour .
Despite the above , I abstained from the vote because it is impossible to implement social demands in bilateral trade agreements in the absence of a clear definition of respect for human rights .
This criterion must not be used as an argument against the signing of agreements .
' That the spirit of revolutionary change which has long been disturbing the nations of the world should have passed beyond the sphere of politics and made its influence felt in the related sphere of practical economics is not surprising ' .
These are the words of the beloved Pope John Paul II who , in his encyclical entitled Centesimus Annus , reprised the subjects tackled by his predecessor Leo XIII in the encyclical Rerum Novarum .
His purpose in doing so was to analyse and contribute to the social ' question ' which - today as in 1991 - can only be resolved by referring to Christian doctrine and , hence , by recognising the absolutely indiscriminate dignity of the human being and the worker .
I voted in favour of the report by Mr Falbr since it focuses precisely on the importance of safeguarding human rights and the fact that the European social model is an important starting point , including in terms of the Union 's external relations .
Social responsibility must work to this end and the European Union - working through Parliament - must restore and reinforce these principles in its every action , above all in dealing with non-Member States whose citizens are denied fundamental rights .
As Vice-Chair of the Committee on Women 's Rights and Gender Equality , I feel compelled to underline how important it is that we all cooperate , including outside the EU , to eliminate gender discrimination and gender violence so as to restore the social dignity of women and revive their active contribution to the local and supranational economy alike .
The globalisation of the economy and the relocation of European companies have led to concerns regarding the external dimension of social policy .
This includes EU activities and initiatives aimed at promoting labour and social standards in third countries .
Core labour standards are embedded in the eight International Labour Organisation ( ILO ) conventions that focus on the freedom of association and collective bargaining , the elimination of forced and compulsory labour , the elimination of discrimination in respect of employment and occupation , and the abolition of child labour .
In order for third countries to negotiate with the EU , they must respect all the ideas outlined above .
This is a condition without which negotiations with third countries are impossible .
Trade policy cannot ignore any failure in respecting workers ' rights and the development of society may continue only after such obstacles have been removed .
It is essential to use international labour standards to ensure economic development remains very focused on improving human life and personal dignity , and not on determining conditions and rights of workers .
in writing . - The external dimension of social policy is a key priority for our group and for me .
We have recently adopted a resolution concerning the future convention on domestic workers to be adopted in June 2011 .
This report calls more generally for the strengthening of the core labour standards which are embedded in ILO conventions , including freedom of association and collective bargaining , elimination of forced and compulsory labour , elimination of discrimination in respect of employment and occupation and the abolition of child labour .
The S & D Group demands a change in global governance and in the EU in order to better implement workers ' rights and working conditions .
The failure today inside and outside the EU to comply with basic international social standards constitutes a form of social and environmental dumping detrimental to European enterprises and workers .
I voted in favour .
I support the principles set down in the report .
However , I would point out that these are lofty aims that will be difficult , if not impossible , to achieve in reality .
We already have countless trade agreements that make no demands in terms of adherence to social standards .
As long as this obvious discrepancy exists , the effectiveness and rationale of this report will necessarily be limited .
The report calls on the Member States to implement core labour law standards for businesses in their own countries .
Should not this also extend to businesses outside of Europe ?
It also seems to me that the report claims to combat the negative effects of globalisation , although , in the final analysis , this cannot be achieved with the measures discussed here .
For that reason , I have abstained from voting .
In this report , the European Union has set itself very ambitious targets based on well-conceived principles .
The Member States are being called on to implement core labour law standards for businesses in their own countries .
Unfortunately , this call does not seem to extend to businesses outside of Europe at present .
Although I am in favour of the principles behind the report , I do not believe its conclusions are absolutely correct , which is why I abstained from voting .
The European Union 's external social policy , targeted at countries not wishing to join the EU , should , first and foremost , be coherent , pragmatic and uniform .
Both internal and external social policy should promote labour standards and also social standards , which are among the EU 's most important objectives .
In connection with the above , all Member States concluding agreements with third countries should ensure that their position aligns with the European social model .
We should demand that countries not wishing to join the EU respect the right of association and that they take steps to prevent discrimination on the grounds of gender or age .
The elimination of child labour and citizens ' right to improve their professional qualifications are very significant issues .
As far as development cooperation is concerned , the European Union has enough funds to create sufficient structures in the field of vocational education and training .
It is absolutely crucial for the European Commission to make adjustments for the current situation and realities of life in the country in question when negotiating partnership agreements .
The European Parliament has gained new competences since the entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon , and it should cooperate actively with European and international trade unions in order to improve the social situation .
I voted in favour of the report on the external dimension of social policy , promoting labour and social standards and European corporate social responsibility .
Our objective is to promote labour and social standards and European corporate social responsibility outside the EU .
This is a legitimate objective ; however , I have certain reservations as to whether we shall be able to achieve this objective .
The common social standards that we cite are at risk and the intention to promote different social and labour standards within the EU itself is now becoming clear .
The standards that apply in my country , in Greece , where unemployment rates among 25-year-olds are 36.1 % and in Spain , where this rate is 43 % , are very different from the standards that apply in the strong European economies .
This report reminds us that , if the EU wishes to become a leader in the world in terms of social policy , it needs to safeguard cohesion between the social policies applied in its Member States .
I voted for this report on the external dimension of social policy , promoting labour and social standards and European corporate social responsibility .
Although the Lisbon strategy and the Europe 2020 strategy place unprecedented emphasis on social policy , competitiveness issues and economic factors continue to take priority over social issues .
It is essential to defend our labour standards , which are embedded in the eight International Labour Organisation ( ILO ) conventions that focus on the freedom of association and collective bargaining , the elimination of forced and compulsory labour , the elimination of discrimination in respect of employment and occupation , and the abolition of child labour .
There is a need to focus on the protection of workers ' rights and the rule of labour law .
In order for third countries to negotiate with the EU , they must respect all the ideas outlined above .
This should be a condition for negotiations with third countries .
Trade policy cannot ignore any failure in respecting workers ' rights , and the development of society may continue only after such obstacles have been removed .
The external dimension of the European Union 's social policy aims to promote social standards in non-member countries , but the issues of competitiveness and economic factors continue to take priority over social and labour issues .
There are currently eight International Labour Organisation ( ILO ) conventions that have been ratified by all EU Member States .
These should lead to the creation of a bedrock of international rules shared by all Member States .
In general , we still need to focus on people as human beings , which can be achieved by protecting the rights of workers and the right to work .
The ILO plays an essential role on the international scene by drawing up , promoting and translating these standards into reality .
Businesses must also contribute to sustainable development in order to foster good conditions for workers , but the difference between developed and developing countries still lies in their systems of social protection .
I am voting in favour of the proposal under discussion in light of the above and also in order that there may be greater promotion of labour and social standards in EU Member States and non-Member States alike , as well as respect for fundamental international labour standards .
Core labour standards embedded in the eight ILO conventions focus on the freedom of association and collective bargaining , the elimination of forced and compulsory labour , the elimination of discrimination in respect of employment and occupation , as well as the abolition of child labour .
Consequently , greater attention must be focused on protecting workers ' rights and labour legislation .
A significant improvement needs to be made to the legal and social position of women to prevent discrimination and utilise the potential contribution from women to economic and social development .
I call on the Commission and Member States to enforce the right not to be discriminated against , which means the right to work and equal treatment , irrespective of gender , ethnic origin , age and disability , as a key principle in the fight against poverty .
I call on the Commission and Member States to cooperate with partner countries with the aim of placing greater emphasis on combating child labour with a view to creating instead decent jobs for adults and allowing children to receive a suitable education .
The freedom of association for trade unions and the right to bargain collectively must be implemented without exception in order to improve and protect decent working conditions .
in writing . - Promoting labour standards through the EU 's negotiations with third party countries benefits both the Member States and the third party countries .
By promoting higher safety standards and better pay , the EU is helping improve workers ' lives .
By insisting on better pay , the EU is also ensuring that there is a market in third party countries for EU exports .
If we allow imports into Europe from countries that do not ensure fair wages , we are effectively pricing European companies out of the market .
It is harder for EU companies to compete with third party countries who do not observe the same safety standards and who can pay employees much lower salaries .
However , it is important to note the dangers involved in ' soft law ' approaches to labour standards .
As well as the fact that such rules are not binding and that there is no sanction if they are breached , it also risks reducing traditional supervisory systems in favour of informal monitoring procedures .
Therefore , the EU must be vigilant and ensure that standards are adhered to and , if not , then action must be taken .
In an increasingly globalised world , it is essential that the EU make use of its international influence to ensure that workers ' rights are protected in a model that respects personal dignity .
A series of issues emerges in this context , such as choosing the appropriate instrument for the EU to exert its influence .
Furthermore , it should not be forgotten how powerful the EU can be when we are talking about relations with a country that either wants to accede to the Union or is a beneficiary of EU aid programmes .
Finally , in a context in which a significant part of the economy depends on multinational companies , there is also a need for organisations to be socially responsible .
in writing . - In favour .
The external dimension of social policy includes activities and initiatives of the EU aimed at promoting labour and social standards in non-Member States .
Although the Lisbon strategy gave - and the EU 2020 gives - to social policy an emphasis that is greater than ever before , the issues of competitiveness and economic factors continue to take priority over social issues .
Core labour standards are embedded in the eight ILO conventions that focus on the freedom of association and collective bargaining , the elimination of forced and compulsory labour , the elimination of discrimination in respect of employment and occupation and the abolition of child labour .
It is clear not only from these conventions but also from the report of the World Commission on the Social Dimension of Globalisation that it is necessary to change the narrow focus on markets into a wider interest in people , i.e. focus on the protection of workers ' rights and the rule of labour law .
In order for the EU to negotiate with non-Member States , they must respect all the abovementioned issues .
This is a condition without which negotiations with non-Member States are impossible .
Trade policy cannot ignore any failure to respect workers ' rights and therefore , the development of society may continue only after these drawbacks are removed .
A business may say that it is socially responsible when it commits to a robust structure that is capable of taking account not only of economic outcomes , but also of the social and environmental results of its actions .
These days , we ask not merely how businesses achieve their economic results , but also who they hire and how staff are treated .
A responsible business is an active and aware participant in the social reality in which it operates , and makes its relationships with all the parties involved in its activities the main source of its prosperity .
Through the report adopted today , the European Union has committed itself to taking a world-leading role on social policy by promoting its objectives on a global scale , thereby underlining the importance of the role attributed to Parliament by the Treaty of Lisbon .
I am in favour of this own-initiative report since it deals with promoting corporate social responsibility as a voluntary motivational tool designed to stimulate business growth .
European businesses are the engine of the European Union 's economy and that is why there must be a greater European commitment to protecting businesses in the EU , which often find themselves having to compete with unscrupulous partners .
In addition , I am in favour of the creation of socially responsible enterprises , whose core principles are the social protection of workers , the protection of consumers and observance of transparency laws .
I voted in favour of this resolution because it emphasises the pivotal role that the European Union wants and should play with respect to third countries , especially with the EU 's trading partners .
Failure to comply with basic international social standards constitutes a form of social and environmental dumping to the detriment of European companies and workers .
This is one of the points I was keen to stress in the opinion of the Committee on International Trade on this issue , for which I was rapporteur .
However the EU cannot do everything on its own : it must cooperate more with the relevant international organisations ( ILO , WTO , OECD ) , in particular , for combating the phenomenon of free zones , as these go against any social legislation .
Moreover , while corporate social responsibility is currently well-established in Europe , European companies , their subsidiaries and their subcontractors play a vital role in promoting and disseminating social and labour standards around the world because of their weight in international trade .
The Commission must encourage them in this regard , particularly by seeking and promoting best practices .
I voted in favour of Mr Falbr 's report because I consider that the promotion of corporate social responsibility in Europe needs to be increased , in a bid to respond directly to the need to defend common values and to increase solidarity and cohesion between Europeans .
Corporate social responsibility must be the main aspect of the European social model , in a bid to boost innovation and competitiveness and contribute to employability and job creation , at a time when unemployment rates are increasing drastically and young Europeans , our sustainable force , are looking for alternatives outside the borders of Europe .
I voted in favour of the Falbr report , which seeks to promote labour and social standards when the EU negotiates with third countries .
The report takes as its basis a number of ILO conventions and , on the basis of these , it proposes that the EU should protect workers ' rights and the rule of labour law when the EU enters into trade agreements with third countries , for example .
The report proposes , among other things , that minimum requirements for corporate social responsibility be laid down by means of a legal framework , that the term be better defined and that fulfilment of the requirements be better monitored .
At the same time , the report rejects the use in trade agreements of the ' MODE4 process ' , which allows international companies to import their own labour force , thereby circumventing the host country 's social and working conditions .
Quite apart from the fact that this puts the imported labour force in a worse position than that of the host country , it also contributes to social dumping .
The EU currently has the power to enter into trade agreements with third countries on behalf of all of the Member States of the EU .
I am opposed to this .
However , as long as this remains the case , it will also be necessary to lay down requirements specifying what these trade agreements are to contain .
in writing . - I supported this report , which precedes the Commission communication on CSR .
I also welcome the work done by my colleague , Richard Howitt , at committee stage to produce a report that promotes the positive work that corporate social responsibility can do at European level .
Europe is a basic player in globalised procedures and bears an important share of responsibility for producing results that contribute to viable forms of development .
The European Union is at the vanguard in promoting social policies at global level and calls on developing countries to respect WTO contracts .
The Falbr report also mentions the importance of corporate social responsibility and compliance with it by companies in the EU , given that their assumption of corporate social responsibility makes a decisive contribution in promoting social prosperity and environmental protection and in combating poverty in countries in which they are active .
That is why I voted for the report .
in writing . - The EU 2020 strategy demonstrates that social policy is a fundamental priority for Europe .
However , more needs to be done to make improvements in this area and it is for this reason that I supported this report .
The report calls for the elimination of forced labour as well as the abolition of child labour , and also highlights the need for more focus on the protection of workers ' rights .
Non-member countries must adhere to basic principles such as these if the EU is to work and trade with them .
Member States must also cooperate with partner countries to ensure the protection of vulnerable groups and to fight gender discrimination as well as discrimination on grounds of ethnicity , religion , age and disability .
I hope that the Commission will come forward with some concrete proposals which will bring about improved labour and social standards , as well as proposals to promote corporate social responsibility in its external polices .
The rapporteur complains that people are still not the focus for social policy and that the human factor is still required to take a back seat to the competitiveness factor .
As the report explains , the EU enjoys a good worldwide reputation in terms of the ideal link between economic dynamism and a social model , which also gives rise to a certain responsibility .
The EU should no longer be allowed to operate a double-standard , for which reason I am in complete agreement with the rapporteur .
I am voting for this report because vocational education and training should be accessible , available and possible at all times of life , regardless of people 's status on the labour market or of their income .
I voted in favour of this resolution on European cooperation in vocational education and training to support the Europe 2020 strategy .
The possibility and ability to learn and work in an international context is a prerequisite for a successful working life in a globalised economy .
There is a growing need for mobile , flexible employees with international experience .
Especially where young people are concerned , action needs to be taken immediately : youth unemployment is one of Europe 's most pressing challenges .
Member States must adopt targeted political strategies to combat poverty , taking into account specific national circumstances and needs .
I agree with the provision laid down in the resolution that the aims set out in the Europe 2020 strategy , namely , to reduce the school drop-out rate to below 10 % and ensure that 40 % of young people are educated to university level , must be tackled by means of specific , creative and effective measures .
Given that demographic changes are fuelling the need for training and adding to the necessity to participate in lifelong learning , workers must be provided with a means of determining and planning their own training needs .
Furthermore , in order to enable people at different times of life and specific groups to have access to vocational education and training , financing opportunities should be broadened , simplified and made more readily available under the Lifelong Learning Programme and by implementing Erasmus for Young Entrepreneurs .
We must ensure that Europe 's workers are able to adapt to the requirements of the economy .
This despicable report maps the EU 's strategic aim to come out on top in the competition for the monopolies with other imperialist centres , by promoting the integration of education into the quantifiable targets of the reactionary EU 2020 strategy which need to be ' transformed ' into national targets .
Within the framework of this global plan , particular attention is given to technical and vocational education , which is allocated the role of serving the needs of the cheapest possible , disenfranchised workforce worthy of the ' labour market ' and ' competitiveness ' .
That is why education and training courses must meet both current and future market needs .
Subjugation to the choices and plans of the capitalist undertaking must be strengthened , while ' employability ' and entry to the labour market via apprenticeship , mobility in sectors of the economy and so-called accessibility between levels of education and training must be facilitated .
Pronouncements about ' equal opportunities ' and ' free choice ' and satisfaction of the needs of young people conceal adaptation to the needs of the capitalist economy , which means a policy of class barriers in education adapted to the mediaeval labour practices of the ' memoranda ' and of EU 2020 .
The economic crisis has turned the European Union labour market completely upside down .
There is no large business area which has been left unscathed by the damaging consequences of this crisis , with the effects reaching the level of the citizen in the form of job insecurity , unemployment and poor conditions or opportunities for finding new employment .
Vocational education and training are proving , in this context , to be a new opportunity , a new way of enabling European citizens ' lives to return to normal .
I am alarmed by the high youth unemployment rate .
I believe that with the right education and ongoing training , many young people in Europe will manage to find themselves a well-paid job , appropriate to their vocational training or retraining .
I congratulate the rapporteur for this dossier .
I conclude , along with Nadja Hirsch , that if we want to fulfil these wishes , vocational education and training need to be clearly results-orientated .
There must be one objective for 2020 : every young person must have a job .
The data in the report by Mrs Hirsch is alarming : the youth unemployment rate is now 21 % , twice the average rate of unemployment at EU level .
The motion contains useful ideas and should surely be seen in a positive light , yet I am convinced that we need to provide adequate financial resources in order to properly tackle the challenges posed by the Copenhagen Process and the EU 2020 strategy , for instance through the Structural Funds and , in particular , through the European Social Fund .
With regret , I must also say that there is no comprehensive and all-inclusive approach shared by all Member States .
Without a coordinated initiative that brings together the sectors of vocational training , professional qualifications , lifelong learning and apprenticeship to the labour market , I do not see how we can manage to ensure that we will achieve the goals of the EU 2020 strategy entitled ' An Agenda for new skills and jobs ' .
I voted in favour of the report by Mrs Hirsch aimed at making comparisons between and within education systems .
I am convinced that education should be more tailored to the needs of the labour market and should encourage creativity , innovation and entrepreneurship .
Therefore , this report seeks to facilitate the mobility of teachers and students , and to simplify the recognition procedures for foreign professional qualifications , which is essential .
The possibility and ability to learn and work in an international context is a prerequisite for a successful working life in a globalised economy .
There is a growing need for mobile , flexible employees with international experience .
The Europe 2020 strategy lists the key factors for smart growth ( fostering knowledge , innovation and education , and promoting the digital society ) , sustainable growth ( more resource-efficient production going hand in hand with enhanced competitiveness ) , and inclusive growth ( increasing the employment rate , training , and eradicating poverty ) .
What is needed , as far as vocational education and training are concerned , is to take practical steps at EU level and in the Member States .
Action needs to be taken immediately , especially where the level of youth unemployment is concerned .
It is not just that the unemployment rate is higher among young workers than among their adult counterparts : young people are also to be found more frequently in temporary jobs with lower pay and less social security cover .
I agree that in order to fully realise the EU 2020 flagship initiative ' An Agenda for new skills and jobs ' , the EU institutions should embark on a more pragmatic , comprehensive and wide-ranging initiative supported by all Member States which should focus on connecting the areas of vocational education , professional qualifications , lifelong learning , apprenticeships and the labour market .
The EU is experiencing a severe economic , financial and social crisis .
The consequences of this crisis have been primarily felt in the field of employment .
There are currently 22.82 million unemployed people in the European Union .
Young people under the age of 25 continue to be the worst hit , with unemployment at 21.3 % in this age range .
On the one hand , it is estimated that , by 2020 , almost 15.6 million new jobs will be created for highly qualified people , but , on the other hand , 12 million jobs for people with few or no qualifications will be lost .
The Europe 2020 strategy aims to respond to these new prospects for the professional world .
This report stresses the need to develop European-level cooperation in the field of vocational education and training to increase transparency and for ease of comparison between the various education systems .
This report also stresses the importance of promoting the transposition and implementation of European legislation to facilitate the mobility of teaching staff and students , as well as to simplify procedures for recognising foreign vocational qualifications .
I therefore voted for this report .
While youth unemployment is currently 21 % in the European Union , and close to 25 % in my country , this has become a major challenge for Europe at a time when young Europeans deprived of employment are threatened with social exclusion and poverty .
The EU only has marginal responsibility on these issues .
However , it seems that it can offer , if not solutions , at least interesting food for thought : it appears obvious to me that training and education should be at the heart of the political priorities of today and of tomorrow .
The report calls on Member States to exchange good practices regarding their vocational education system and training systems combined with work experience , which should be extended in many Member States , particularly in France .
These recommendations are going in the right direction to improve education and training in connection with the labour market and to reduce unemployment and social exclusion , but they will not be enough if Member States and the Commission do not make sufficient efforts at a time when youth unemployment is becoming the major political challenge in many Member States , particularly in my country , France .
In today 's globalised economy , the possibility and ability to learn and work in an international context is a prerequisite for a successful working life for European citizens .
In spite of the severe effects that the economic crisis is having on the European labour market , industrial and technological change increases the need for workers with high and intermediate skill levels .
As far as vocational education and training are concerned , the key factors listed in the Europe 2020 strategy for smart , sustainable and inclusive growth need to be translated into practical steps at European Union level .
To attain these goals , it is essential for education and vocational training to be treated as a long-term common political priority , which can only be realised with the participation and commitment of all stakeholders , the EU institutions and those involved at local and regional level .
At this point , I would emphasise that action needs to be taken quickly , especially where young people are concerned : the rise in youth unemployment is , in fact , one of Europe 's most pressing challenges .
The aims set out in the Europe 2020 strategy - namely , to reduce the school drop-out rate to below 10 % and ensure that 40 % of young people are educated to university level - must be tackled with efficient and practical measures .
In the age of a Europe without borders , education is a fundamental step in planning the professional lives of citizens , particularly at international level .
Young people should be able to take advantage of the opportunities to acquire knowledge and experience provided by membership of their country in the European Union .
The ever greater demand for mobile workers who have received a broad education is a further factor in favour of this lifestyle .
In view of the above , unemployment among young people remains a worrying problem .
The implementation of projects aimed at combating this hazardous phenomenon is an urgent issue .
Every investment made in education helps to ensure a better future for young people .
The use of European funds to launch concrete programmes in the field of vocational education and development is therefore particularly important .
I thus agree with the need to develop instruments supporting ' lifelong learning ' or , in other words , the regular improvement of qualifications .
Creative and effective educational programmes should make it possible to accomplish one of the overriding objectives of the Europe 2020 strategy , namely , to ensure that at least 40 % of people complete higher education .
I do not intend to support Mrs Hirsch 's own-initiative report , not so much because of its statements of principle , which are commendable in terms of emphasising the importance of bringing the labour market and the world of formal training closer together , but because , once again , we are lacking a practical , proactive approach to the issue that transcends sterile considerations and offers concrete solutions to resolve a social emergency that cannot be resolved through rhetoric .
I voted in favour of this report because I agree that demographic changes and increasing longevity mean that working lives will be more varied , and retraining and participation in lifelong learning have already become a necessity .
Consequently , the report draws attention to the need to modernise both initial and continuing vocational education and training , proposes concluding basic education with a career aptitude assessment and stresses the importance of initial training for teachers .
It also emphasises the importance , at local and regional level , of fostering effective cooperation between schools , training agencies , research centres and firms , in order to overcome the inward-looking nature of education systems and the mismatch between knowledge and skills and the needs of the labour market .
I agree that in order to modernise training and education , we must strengthen the link between potential employers and schools , and therefore the inclusion of social partners in curriculum development would be another step towards greater employment in Europe .
The Europe 2020 strategy states that the key factors for smart growth are not only fostering knowledge , innovation , and education , and promoting the digital society , but also sustainable and inclusive growth .
The key to achieving these , in this case , is vocational education and training , for which all Member States must adopt the same standards .
In spite of the severe impact which the economic crisis is having on the European labour market , it can be assumed that employment growth in Europe will recover , at least gradually , over the next 10 years .
The projections suggest that the demand for skills will continue to rise .
Industrial and technological change increases the demand for workers with high and intermediate skill levels , with low-skilled labour being squeezed out .
There is ever-increasing emphasis on a clear , results-orientated learning approach .
Reforms have already been implemented in vocational education systems in some Member States .
As regards the comparability of vocational education and training systems in Member States , the priorities must be to break down barriers , increase transparency and facilitate comparison within and between the different systems .
I voted in favour of this report because , as it clearly points out , young people are the real resource of the future .
Hence , we have a duty to ensure that they all have access to vocational education and training .
The economic crisis that has struck Europe and elsewhere over the last few years has affected young people the most .
Unemployment among that age group has sharply increased , and those who do find a job have to settle for fixed-term contracts and for being underpaid .
We need to work effectively and quickly in order to give some dignity back to these young people , who want to work and , above all , become part of a world in which they are unlikely to be accepted with open arms .
These objectives can also be found in the Europe 2020 strategy where it establishes the obligation to focus on smart , sustainable and inclusive growth .
Generally speaking , Mrs Hirsch 's report is a good starting point for what must become one of the priority policies of Parliament and the entire European Union .
in writing . - I voted against the measure for Cooperation in vocational education and training to support the Europe 2020 strategy as I am fearful of any organisation that divides opinion having access and influence over minds .
There is a large enough percentage of the EU population who consider themselves Eurosceptic for it to be deemed inappropriate that Brussels be at the helm of education and training .
Such activity could be deemed propaganda .
Vocational education and training measures are absolutely essential for turning the European economy into a knowledge economy , in line with the Europe 2020 strategy objectives .
This is why I fully support the recommendations made by this report , which highlight the importance of investment in vocational education and training for the European economy 's future competitiveness .
We need effective measures , complementing each other at national and European level , in order to achieve our objectives .
There has been an alarming rise in the youth unemployment rate in the EU .
This report sends out a clear message : vocational education and training are key factors in tackling youth unemployment .
Clear strategies are needed to facilitate their inclusion in the labour market , which will encourage the correlation between education programmes and the demands of the labour market , so that it can take up the graduates .
The required approach must put the emphasis on specific skills so as to facilitate integration into the labour market .
Furthermore , due to the constant technological changes , employers have ever-increasing expectations with regard to employees ' qualifications .
This is why ongoing training plays a key role in constantly adapting vocational qualifications to the demands of the economy .
This can help people avoid being excluded from the labour market at some time during their career .
The report as a whole is driven by the philosophy of linking vocational education and training to the needs of the market and of businesses within the EU 2020 strategy , a strategy which further erodes the social fabric and workers ' rights .
Although there are some positive references to general principles of ' humanising work ' and promoting creativity and the need for accessible pathways from informal to formal learning , they are all stale dead letter which simply embellish a report which , in the final analysis , promotes neoliberalism in every procedure and at every stage of education and training , even at the highest level .
For example , it calls on the Member States to support doctoral and post-doctoral programmes that will underpin competitiveness and to facilitate ' labour mobility ' , commonly known as job insecurity .
Finally , one of the most important disadvantages of the report is that it calls for the Member States to ensure ' mutual recognition of certificates and diplomas among the Member States ' , thereby putting pressure on them to recognise diplomas from various Greek or foreign colleges as ' equivalent ' to a degree from a State university .
That is why I voted against the report .
There is currently a tragic situation in a number of Member States as regards unemployment rates , especially amongst young people , for whom the current rate of unemployment is double the general EU rate of unemployment .
This is , therefore , one of Europe 's most pressing problems .
It is essential that the Member States adopt political strategies aimed at combating this problem that are based on the objectives set by the Europe 2020 strategy of reducing school drop-out rates to below 10 % per year , and of enabling at least 40 % of young people to complete higher education .
These must be tackled with concrete , creative and effective measures .
Unfortunately , I would say that the Europe 2020 strategy 's ambitions are not visibly in harmony with the reality of budget restrictions , which have substantially cut funding for the main EU programmes in the area of education .
I welcome the measures adopted by the Commission aimed at facilitating accessibility , transparency and comparability for the purposes of the recognition process within and among education systems .
It is also important that the Member States start reforming their systems , and gear vocational education and training towards the true needs of the labour market .
In an effort to encourage European cooperation to support the Europe 2020 strategy , I would like to give my full backing to three points highlighted in this report .
Firstly , I strongly support the need to improve dialogue between the labour market and the educational system by increasing the number of traineeships available in businesses , in order to enable students to become actively involved in the business world and also to strengthen links between businesses and educational institutions with regard to vocational training .
I also think it is a good idea to integrate educational systems more at international level , firstly , to ensure that people 's qualifications are fully recognised , and secondly , to promote cross-border mobility projects .
Finally , I fully agree with Parliament 's suggestion to the Commission to make the necessary adjustments to the European Social Fund , Erasmus and the Lifelong Learning Programme in order to ensure that funding can be allocated to specific education and training projects , and to projects to tackle youth unemployment and gender discrimination , with more women being encouraged to take part in those projects .
in writing . - I support this report , which calls on the Member States to ensure that people , at different times of life , have access to vocational education and training which is tailored to their needs that will facilitate and improve their participation in the labour market and in society more generally .
Vocational education and training should be accessible , available and affordable at all times of life , regardless of the people 's status on the labour market or of their income .
In particular , in order to achieve a better social integration and greater social cohesion , this report urges Member States to create training opportunities specific to groups such as unemployed youth , ethnic minorities , vulnerable women and people with disabilities .
The report also points out that financing opportunities should be widened , simplified , and made more readily available , using the funding currently provided under the European Social Fund , the Lifelong Learning Programme as a whole , and Erasmus for Young Entrepreneurs .
The fight against youth unemployment is one of the most urgent challenges for Europe .
That is why the Member States must urgently adopt targeted strategies that take national specificities and needs into account .
Learning methods should be more flexible and accessible on a lifelong basis .
We need to expand the possibilities of acquiring experience abroad for all .
Apprenticeships should also be better recognised .
Education and vocational training should be treated as a long-term common political priority to enable European workers to adapt to the requirements of a changing economy .
At a time when youth unemployment in Europe is twice that of the working population , the proposals in the Hirsch report are a useful contribution to the policy pursued by the governments of the 27 Member States to combat unemployment .
Faced with the challenges that are an ageing population and the globalisation of our economy , we need to encourage the development of lifelong training programmes , particularly through the exchange of good practices between Member States , and improve young Europeans ' early training by encouraging partnerships between universities , research centres and companies .
According to future estimates relating to employability and required diplomas , there are allegedly 15.6 million new jobs within the EU for graduates and 3.7 million for those with a secondary education qualification ( source : Cedefop ) .
On the other hand , 12 million jobs are going to be cut for those with a lower level of qualification !
Faced with this inevitable catastrophe , the 2020 strategy had to aim at increasing the attractiveness of vocational education and training .
The report calls for adopting an approach focused on results in terms of apprenticeships , improving the recognition of formal and informal apprenticeships , and setting up assistance centres and schemes for those apprentices who struggle the most .
In the context of a post-crisis Europe that is recovering and growing , vocational education and training are of crucial importance .
It is essential to give young Europeans the tools necessary for them to be able to compete in a globalised world and for them to be able to enter the labour market using their knowledge and skills .
We cannot forget that youth unemployment figures are overwhelming throughout Europe .
However , we should be aware that more training often does not correspond to more opportunities in the labour market .
Cases of young graduates , with additional training and postgraduate training , but without a job and without prospects of finding one , are multiplying in the EU .
Training must be geared towards the needs of the market and prepare young workers .
In my opinion , this paradigm shift will be vital in stopping the growth of unemployment amongst younger people and in guaranteeing them a future with more possibilities .
This report by Mrs Hirsch tackles the problem of European cooperation on vocational education and training to support the Europe 2020 strategy .
The goals of the Europe 2020 strategy - smart , sustainable and inclusive growth - must be given immediate consideration .
Although the current economic and financial situation does not seem favourable , we must be able to turn less favourable situations into opportunities .
In an increasingly globalised world , we cannot confine ourselves to a given territory , but must cultivate mobility , flexibility and international experience .
It is important that early training be of a high quality and that young people be able to choose to work in other countries .
I voted for the report because I agree with its proposals .
Of these , I should like to stress the need for new and diversified lifelong learning , which is crucial for better-quality work , particularly in the context of jobs , as well as the need to pay particular attention to young people , to women and to the disabled , as set out in the Europe 2020 strategy .
This is yet another tedious repetition of the European Commission 's standard rhetoric on issues of lifelong learning and promotion of mobility at EU level , which are considered the best guarantee of improving workers ' ' employability ' and ' adaptability ' .
Vocational training is viewed here as a means of promoting ' entrepreneurship ' and of responding to the need to ' create an environment where enterprises can succeed , develop and grow ' , adding that ' to grow , they need a reduced tax burden and predictability so they can plan and make investments ' .
It also believes that vocational training and lifelong learning must be geared more closely ' to the needs of the labour market and allow for entry into and mobility within it ' .
The report 's ideological framework suddenly becomes clear : the problem of employment is a problem for the individual and not an eminently social one , with the individual - and not society - having to solve it , whether by increasing their ' employability ' or by becoming an ' entrepreneur ' ; a tax system that is profit-friendly and , therefore , imposed mainly on workers and consumers ; and education and training totally at the beck and call of capital .
As for the rest , it does not examine the causes in depth , or seek solutions .
This report repeats the European Commission 's standard rhetoric on issues of lifelong learning and promotion of mobility at EU level , which are considered to be the best guarantee against unemployment , and the need for workers to improve their ' employability ' and ' adaptability ' , so as to organise the supply of education and training .
However , the report fundamentally emphasises the role of vocational training in promoting entrepreneurship and the need to ' create an environment where enterprises can succeed , develop and grow ' , adding that ' to grow , they need a reduced tax burden and predictability so they can plan and make investments ' .
It also believes that vocational training and lifelong learning must be geared more closely ' to the needs of the labour market and allow for entry into and mobility within it ' .
In other words , what the report does is put education and training fully at the beck and call of European capitalism .
Moreover , it fails to mention the social reasons that lead to early school drop-out , to a lack of access to higher education opportunities and to youth unemployment , just so as to mask the responsibility of the neoliberal policies promoted by large companies and financial institutions .
We therefore consider this report unacceptable .
It does not examine the causes in depth , or seek solutions .
I firmly believe that professional education and training should be available and affordable on a lifelong basis , regardless of a person 's position on the labour market or their income .
Access to professional education should respond to the particular needs of individuals , and thus make it easier for them to find a job .
It is necessary to create opportunities for specific groups in EU Member States , such as unemployed young people , ethnic minorities , vulnerable women , people with disabilities and others , in order to achieve better social integration and better social cohesion .
Last but not least , extended , simplified and more accessible funding options would undoubtedly assist the successful implementation of the above aims .
With this report , we are adding another element to the European strategy on youth policy .
It is right to support the internationalisation of studies together with job flexibility among young workers in an increasingly competitive labour market .
Europe 's young people must be given the opportunity to compete with their contemporaries from the four corners of the globe .
Youth unemployment figures cannot leave us indifferent .
We should welcome this report , which emphasises the importance of the Europe 2020 strategy objectives : to combat youth unemployment through efficient and effective measures such as , for example , reducing the school drop-out rate to below 10 % and ensuring that at least 40 % of young people are educated to university level .
However , this should not be a finishing line but a starting point : future priorities should be to establish links between universities and businesses and to bring back compulsory traineeships / apprenticeships funded by public or private bodies .
We do not have much time to play with and we must act now .
Otherwise , the legacy we leave to future generations will be a very heavy one .
I welcome the adoption of this report which puts the challenges of vocational education and training back at the heart of the concerns of the European Union and its Member States .
At a time of budget austerity , which is a direct consequence of the global crisis that has hit the European labour market hard , we need to consider our strategies for growth and employment , especially for young people , without losing sight of national differences and needs .
Young people are the first victims of unemployment and are very prone to dropping out of school .
This is why it is imperative to modernise curricula and training so that they are more closely tailored to the needs of our companies .
These efforts should also be applied to the area of lifelong training and in promoting mobility .
Achieving these objectives will only be possible if all stakeholders ( European institutions , Member States , local and regional players ) join forces .
I welcomed this document because Europe needs to take action immediately , especially where young people are concerned : rising youth unemployment is one of Europe 's most pressing challenges .
It is not just that the unemployment rate is higher among young workers than among their adult counterparts : young people are also to be found more frequently in insecure temporary jobs with lower pay and less social security cover .
Member States must adopt targeted political strategies to combat poverty , taking into account specific national circumstances and needs .
The aims set out in the Europe 2020 strategy , namely , to reduce the school drop-out rate to below 10 % and ensure that 40 % of young people are educated to university level , must be tackled by means of specific , creative and effective measures .
Vocational education and training have to be treated as a long-term common political priority , which can be translated into reality only with the participation and commitment of all stakeholders : as well as the EU institutions and the Member States , those involved at local and regional level must use their influence to make this happen .
We must ensure that Europe 's workers are able to adapt to the requirements of the economy .
Policy makers must enable people to improve and broaden their skills .
Instead of being viewed solely as a means of helping people to get better jobs , upskilling must give them the opportunity to shape the jobs of the future and , hence , contribute actively to an innovative economy .
in writing . - I would like to welcome this report which draws attention to the necessity of broadening the system of vocational training in the EU since equal access to quality lifelong learning means better chances in the labour market and thereby contributes to fulfilment of the goals of the EU 's 2020 strategy .
Special emphasis must be put on preventing youth unemployment , for which it is necessary to harmonise training supply with labour-market demand , provide middle-term national and regional forecasts on expected labour demand and enable national education systems to be more effective in guaranteeing the attainment of those skills that are actively sought on the labour market .
According to Cedefop , we can expect a 12 million decline in jobs available for low skilled or unskilled labour , which presages an increasing risk of poverty for the most vulnerable .
In many cases , even those who finish school are unable to enter the labour market and therefore are more likely to engage themselves in casual work or work in the black economy .
Consequently , they are unable to start a life on their own and often become an unbearable burden on households , creating a vicious circle of unsatisfactory education and joblessness .
The motion for a resolution draws particular attention to the education of young people and highlights the need for practical training .
Ensuring access to suitable education and appropriate courses is absolutely essential in order to make sure that people finishing school , university or vocational training have no trouble in finding employment in their chosen field .
Let us emphasise that these should be jobs with good conditions and decent pay .
According to forecasts , economic problems will not change the fact that employment levels are rising in the EU , and should not give rise to a reduction in funding for the EU 's key programmes in the field of vocational education and training , such as the ' Lifelong Learning ' programme , for example .
These funds should , in fact , be increased , so that everyone , regardless of their age , gender or location , has access to the same opportunities in terms of vocational education and careers .
As shadow rapporteur for the Hirsch report on European cooperation in vocational education and training , I would like to explain why I voted in favour of adopting this report .
In the current situation , when ageing societies , on the one hand , and an alarmingly high rate of unemployment among young people , on the other , mean that Europe is faced with very serious challenges , vocational education and training have a fundamental role to play .
When endeavouring to secure future support for vocational education and training , we should therefore , at the same time , attach the greatest importance to monitoring the effectiveness of training and to an approach focused on achieving the goal of increasing employment levels and social integration .
It is my belief that vocational education and training must be closely linked with the labour market , a characteristic feature of which is constant adaptation to economic , demographic and social changes .
In my opinion , ensuring that the ESF is managed more flexibly and that this fund complements other European employment instruments and domestic measures is an extremely important issue .
Finally , I would like to congratulate the rapporteur on a successful and comprehensive report , and to thank her for her excellent cooperation .
The objectives of the EU 2020 strategy include , in particular , reducing school drop-out rates to below 10 % and ensuring that at least 40 % of young generations obtain a qualification .
These objectives pursue the European ambition , laid out for the first time in the Lisbon strategy , to make the Union the world 's most competitive knowledge-based economy .
That is why the Copenhagen process which , since 2002 , has been laying the foundations of greater cooperation in terms of the Member States ' policies with regard to vocational education and training , is particularly important .
I voted for this resolution because it sets ambitious objectives to improve the European programmes for education and training .
in writing . - ( FR ) I voted in favour of Mrs Hirsch 's report .
In order to face the economic challenges of the 21st century and , in particular , the growing competition of our trading partners , European systems for vocational education and training have an obligation to be more effective , more attractive and more reactive , in order to better prepare our fellow citizens to the jobs that need filling .
We must therefore work towards tailoring these systems to the needs of the world of work .
I think there is also a need to facilitate access to high quality work experience in Europe and , therefore , to preserve and strengthen the existing programmes aimed at increasing apprentices ' mobility .
Setting up a real ' Erasmus for apprentices ' , that is the commitment I undertook during the 2009 European election campaign : this is about the young and the not so young , while putting a foot in the world of work and gaining work experience , having the opportunity to travel within Europe and having direct contact with the economic realities of our Internal Market .
Finally , we should also simplify and improve the system for recognising vocational qualifications in Europe , in order to revive the Internal Market and provide our fellow citizens with the keys to enhanced professional mobility .
in writing . - I voted for this report .
The Europe 2020 strategy lists the key factors for smart growth ( fostering knowledge , innovation and education , and promoting the digital society ) , sustainable growth ( more resource-efficient production going hand in hand with enhanced competitiveness ) , and inclusive growth ( increasing the employment rate , training , and eradicating poverty ) .
What is needed , as far as vocational education and training are concerned , is to take practical steps at EU level and in the Member States to breathe life into the strategy .
Education is undoubtedly a complex , long-term process , the quality and , in particular , the results of which consequently influence the future careers of young people .
This should not be forgotten .
In this context , I would like to say that demand for professional competence in a whole range of areas and activities will grow with the development of modern new technologies and the establishment of higher quality and safety standards , thus creating a requirement for the more goal-oriented training of young people .
I am talking , however , about high-quality education built on the concept of modern teaching elements , about education made attractive in a specific way and showing the need for a given field of education , with a view to other options for boosting qualifications .
The education process should result in professionally trained young people who have a clear idea of growth prospects and , first and foremost , who exploit their acquired knowledge , expertise and ability in the activity for which they have been trained and have acquired a qualification , the area of activity they have mastered and in respect of which they have shown an inclination .
The report on European cooperation in vocational education and training to support the Europe 2020 strategy satisfactorily identifies the objectives that we set ourselves a while ago with that very same strategy .
Ongoing dialogue between the world of vocational training and education and the labour market is more necessary than ever today .
The main challenge is precisely to ensure that the labour market meets the needs of new workers on an increasingly regular basis .
The proper implementation of the Europe 2020 strategy is essential in order for Europe to get back to sustained and sustainable economic growth .
Young people are a crucial element of the success of the Europe 2020 strategy .
However , as is well-known , they are currently the ones suffering most from the crisis , not least with unemployment reaching extremely high levels : unemployment rates amongst young people are double those for all the other unemployed .
In order to achieve this , there is a need for significant investment in the area of vocational education and training .
In a globalised world , quality education and vocational training are the vital keys that every young person should have when entering the labour market .
The world economy requires skills , flexibility , availability and knowledge of languages .
Faced with these requirements , it is our duty as politicians to put in place strategies that ensure the following : • Learning centred on a specific outcome ; • Teaching entrepreneurship ; • Providing bridges for unqualified people who wish to find a job , in particular , through tailored education ; • Simplifying the procedures for recognising foreign qualifications in order to encourage workers to be mobile ; • Establishing a European framework that offers quality work placements throughout the EU ; • Lifelong learning so as to enable workers to adapt to market conditions and company needs . • Promoting creativity as well as information and communication technologies . • Supporting female employment by helping to reconcile work and family life .
in writing . - Vocational education and training should be accessible , available and affordable at all times of life , regardless of people 's status on the labour market or of their income .
It is necessary to create training opportunities for specific groups , such as unemployed youth , ethnic minorities , vulnerable women , people with disabilities , etc . , in order to achieve better social integration and greater social cohesion .
Financing opportunities should be widened , simplified and made more readily available using the funding currently provided under the European Social Fund and the Lifelong Learning Programme .
In my opinion , this initiative is very important and timely .
I voted in favour .
The world of work has undergone some major changes .
While , in the past , a good education was a guarantee of a good job , these days , a higher education diploma or degree will not protect young people in particular from unemployment .
In particular , it is becoming increasingly difficult to get a start in one 's career .
On the other hand , businesses are constantly complaining about the shortage of specialist staff , using this supposed shortage as an excuse to use cheap labour .
The complete flexibility and mobility demanded , as well as the ' bucket ' prices being imposed on the labour market in the form of new working models like ' Mac-jobs ' , make it impossible for many people to establish a family and to achieve a reasonable work-life balance .
Within the framework of the Europe 2020 strategy , it may make sense to support the mutual recognition of education and training .
However , the success of the strategy depends on taking steps to deal with these problematic developments .
In this sense , the report 's call for rapid action in relation to youth unemployment is to be welcomed , although there is a lack of concrete detail .
I have therefore abstained from voting .
There are major challenges ahead in Europe 's labour market .
The younger generation is faced with the problem that good education alone is no guarantee of finding a good job .
Worse still , it no longer even offers protection against unemployment .
On the other hand , large businesses are complaining of a shortage of specialist staff , often a welcome excuse for employing people at low wage rates .
This renders it impossible to establish a family or to find a reasonable work-life balance .
The mutual recognition of education and training is the first step in the right direction .
The report 's call for action in the area of youth unemployment is also correct .
However , simply calling for action is too vague .
For that reason , I have abstained from voting .
I voted in favour of this resolution because cooperation at European Union level in the field of vocational training is a very important factor for achieving the Europe 2020 goals and reducing the level of youth unemployment .
I agree with the proposal that , in forming a vocational education and training system , every Member State should devote particular attention to low-skilled workers , migrants , people with disabilities and other socially vulnerable groups .
Training programmes should be oriented to their needs and level of ability .
Furthermore , we must promote closer cooperation among the Member States ' various education systems in order to guarantee the integration of young people and encourage lifelong learning and formal / informal training .
To ensure that vocational training matches labour market needs , I feel that it is advisable to incorporate information about changes in the labour market into national education strategies and programmes .
The Commission should play major role here , by providing information about the skills and needs of individual regions and changes in the EU labour market .
Furthermore , it is very important to create a favourable business environment for companies that cooperate in developing and implementing vocational training programmes .
I voted in favour of the report on European cooperation in vocational education and training because this issue occupies an important place in the Europe 2020 strategy with the aim of ensuring economic development .
Cooperating in order to improve vocational education and training means reducing the youth unemployment rate , equipping workers with cognitive tools and providing greater and simplified funding opportunities .
The current socio-economic context requires the ability to work in international set-ups ; we therefore need to increase the opportunities for learning , given also the role of businesses , which increasingly need skilled staff with practical training experience whom they can put to work immediately and effectively .
This own-initiative report , in which the competent drafting committee incorporated numerous proposals by the Committee on Culture and Education , aims to galvanise the EU and the Member States into achieving the objectives of the EU 2020 strategy , especially in the employment and training sector .
Account is taken of specific challenges such as : the demand for ever-increasing qualifications by the labour market , which puts low-skilled jobs at risk , the spiralling increase in youth unemployment , which is over 30 % in certain EU Member States , including Greece , and the failure on the part of the Member States to take adequate measures to achieve the targets set in the EU 2020 strategy ( for example , to reduce the percentage of early school leavers to 10 % and to increase the percentage of young people with a university education to 40 % ) .
Alongside social protection for citizens with fewer skills or a low level of education , we urgently need investment in new skills , especially those required for jobs in strategic sectors as far as growth is concerned .
This is a key point for Greece .
European cooperation on vocational education and training to support the Europe 2020 strategy is essential .
The possibility of learning and working in an international context is an important prerequisite for a successful working life in a globalised economy .
There is a growing need for mobile , flexible employees with international experience .
I agree with the rapporteur when she says that there is a need to breathe life into the Europe 2020 strategy .
This process should start immediately with practical measures being adopted at EU level and in the Member States in the field of vocational education and training .
All of these factors are reasons why I am voting in favour of this report .
Indeed , we are obliged to put Europe 's workers in a position to adapt to the requirements of the economy .
As political decision makers , we must enable people to develop and broaden their skills .
Personal skill development , in addition to helping people find better jobs , must also provide them with the opportunity to shape the jobs of the future and , hence , contribute actively to an innovative economy .
In an increasingly globalised world , it is important for young people to be able to expand their education and training through mobility .
The labour market increasingly requires mobile , flexible people with international experience .
Despite the economic crisis , it is estimated that the European labour market will see steady growth over the next 10 years .
That is why the EU has implemented the Europe 2020 strategy , which aims to focus greater attention on vocational education and training .
More and more effort must be made to break down barriers , increase transparency and make for ease of comparison within and between education systems .
The education sector should pay closer attention to labour market needs , call for a method of assessing the results of learning and improve the quality of its own standards so as to become more professional .
Lastly , creativity , innovation and entrepreneurship should be encouraged , so that Europe 's young people and workers can broaden their knowledge and thus adapt to the needs of the economy .
In order to achieve these objectives and to ensure that vocational education and training continue to be a key political priority for everyone in the long term , I voted in favour of the proposal in question .
The Europe 2020 strategy lists the key factors for smart , sustainable and inclusive growth ( increasing the employment rate , training , and eradicating poverty ) . What is needed , as far as vocational education and training are concerned , is to take practical steps at EU level and in Member States for putting the strategy into practice .
Europe 's workers must be able to adapt to the economy 's requirements .
Political decision makers must enable people to upgrade and broaden their skills .
I call on Member States to monitor actions to facilitate the transition from school to working life by developing integrated careers guidance and advice programmes , to create better training opportunities for trainers and lay the foundations for a facilitative learning partnership , particularly at regional and local level .
As far as vocational education and training are concerned , Member States need to take into consideration the individual needs of low-skilled workers , migrant learners , people belonging to ethnic minorities , women , the unemployed and people with disabilities .
I call on Member States to support innovative activities , as well as doctoral and post-doctoral programmes , which will underpin competitiveness and sustainable economic growth .
in writing . - One of the most pressing challenges in the current economic climate is that of youth unemployment .
Not only is the unemployment rate higher among young workers than among the rest of the population , but young workers are often to be found in insecure temporary jobs with lower pay and weaker legal protection .
It is vitally important we address this .
The forecast by the European Centre for the Development of Vocational Training ( Cedefop ) of growth of 80 million new jobs by 2020 is welcome .
It is worth noting that there will be a shift towards industrial and technological development and a corresponding shift away from low-skilled labour .
These new jobs will require workers with high and intermediate level skills .
Action needs to be taken quickly to ensure that adequately skilled workers are available to fill these positions .
With that in mind we must ensure that our approach to learning is focused on results .
We must provide young people with access to lifelong learning and to courses with practical training elements to enable them to take up these jobs and to grow and progress in their careers .
I believe these changes to vocational education will benefit the economies of all Member States .
On the one hand , Europe is experiencing increased unemployment among young people and the insecure and temporary nature of the jobs young people normally do .
On the other , however , it is also clear that companies lack qualified professionals whose training is geared towards the duties they should be performing .
It is therefore important to seek to bring job supply in line with demand using measures such as , for example , independent advice on vocational training , making funds available for supporting vocational training , and competition between establishments providing said training .
Ultimately , the aim is for people to be able to find a better job , but also , as the explanatory statement says , for them to have ' the opportunity to shape the jobs of the future ' .
Today , we voted during the plenary session of the European Parliament in Strasbourg on the report on European cooperation in vocational education and training to support the Europe 2020 strategy .
In spite of the severe effects that the economic crisis is having on the European labour market , it can be assumed that employment growth in Europe will recover , at least gradually , over the next 10 years .
As far as vocational education and training are concerned , the key factors listed in the Europe 2020 strategy for smart , sustainable and inclusive growth need to be translated into practical steps at European Union level and in the Member States .
If the goals indicated in the Europe 2020 strategy are to be attained , vocational education and training have to be treated as a key priority of the European Union institutions and those involved at local and regional level .
Mrs Hirsch 's report embraces the Commission measures aimed at breaking down barriers , increasing transparency , and making for ease of comparison for the purposes of recognition within and between education systems , emphasising that it is important to ensure that education is geared more closely to the needs of the labour market , helping to boost creativity and innovation .
The EU and the Member States should increase their efforts to encourage youth employment and reduce their unemployment rate , in particular , through improving the match between the training systems and the needs of the labour market .
With the loss of 12 million low-skilled jobs in Europe by 2020 , and the need for longer working lives to preserve our social model in the face of the demographic challenge , it is also crucial , at the same time , to step up the efforts for improving lifelong training of workers in the course of their career .
In this respect , the idea of putting in place incentive mechanisms intended for employers so that they encourage their employees to participate in training programmes , suggested by Mrs Hirsch in this report , sounds interesting .
In addition , in order to combat unemployment among low-skilled people , as well as to promote the employment of senior citizens , it is imperative to encourage the recognition of national qualifications between the Member States , and to encourage certification by validating skills acquired through informal apprenticeship .
in writing . - In favour .
The possibility and ability to learn and work in an international context is a prerequisite for a successful working life in a globalised economy .
There is a growing need for mobile , flexible employees with international experience .
The Europe 2020 strategy lists the key factors for smart growth ( fostering knowledge , innovation and education , and promoting the digital society ) , sustainable growth ( more resource-efficient production going hand in hand with enhanced competitiveness ) , and inclusive growth ( increasing the employment rate , training , and eradicating poverty ) . What is needed , as far as vocational education and training are concerned , is to take practical steps at EU level and in the Member States to breathe life into the strategy .
In spite of the severe effects that the economic crisis is having on the European labour market , it can be assumed that employment growth in Europe will recover , at least gradually , over the next ten years .
According to Cedefop 's current Europe-wide skill supply and demand forecast , the number of new jobs up to 2020 is estimated at 80 million .
The possibility and ability to learn and work in an international context is a prerequisite for a successful working life in an ever more globalised economy .
Industry is increasingly calling for education and training offerings to be related directly to practical requirements and oriented towards solutions .
What matters is that those who have completed a vocational education or training course should bring their newly acquired abilities and skills to the working environment .
The resolution adopted today is a first step towards ensuring that Europe 's workers are put in a position to adapt to the requirements of the economy .
People must be given the means to upgrade and broaden their skills .
Instead of being viewed solely as a means of helping people to get better jobs , upskilling must give them the opportunity to shape the jobs of the future and , hence , contribute actively to an innovative economy .
Education , vocational training and also the universal idea of ' lifelong learning ' are the building blocks for the future of European integration , which is coming up against ever-new challenges in respect of support for the Europe 2020 strategy .
We must face up to the fact that the level of unemployment among young people is increasing at an alarming rate .
Problems associated with vocational education and training are becoming a priority for us .
People at the start of their professional careers may find that unemployment has a negative effect on their further activity in the labour market .
Vocational education and training make it possible to move around freely within the labour market , according to the changing economic situation and the demands of a particular economic sector .
It is worth highlighting the usefulness and merits of existing cross-border educational programmes , for example , the Leonardo Da Vinci programme , which deserve our support .
They make it possible for individuals to acquire the qualities which are characteristic of a mobile workforce .
Mobility eliminates the difficulties which arise as a result of the natural diversity of the individual labour markets , and provides young workers with access to the enormous European labour market , full of new challenges and opportunities to make use of the experience they have gained .
The Member States are faced with the task of facilitating supervision and assistance in respect of the establishment of cooperation and the exchange of information between schools , training institutions , research centres and businesses .
Young workers bring new reserves of knowledge , skills and experience to the EU labour market .
in writing . - I support this report .
However , I believe the scale of the cuts to the lifelong learning programme and the People programme is unacceptably severe .
The fight against youth unemployment must be a priority for all European governments .
We need to provide European young people with a full , attractive and competitive offer in terms of training and education , one that enables them to find a job more easily .
In particular , I believe that vocational education and lifelong learning should thus be more in tune with the needs of the labour market .
Furthermore , higher education should be combined with vocational training by giving priority , for instance , to a mix of training and work .
Consequently , I voted in favour of the Hirsch report .
Youth unemployment in Europe is at 21 % and currently affects more than 5.5 million young Europeans , who are at risk of social exclusion because of a lack of opportunities and are forced to accept insecure jobs .
Training and education are the major challenges the European Union is currently facing , enshrined in the Europe 2020 strategy .
The goals have been set of reducing the school drop-out rate to below 10 % and enabling 40 % of young people to complete higher education by 2020 .
These are fairly ambitious targets , but they are necessary for economic growth and for making the Member States more competitive , thereby creating jobs .
I voted for this report , since I think it is essential to have a long-term , EU-level strategy that also enables structural unemployment and youth unemployment to be tackled .
To this end , I think it is important to continue supporting small and medium-sized enterprises , since they create 50 % of jobs , and to invest in continuous , lifelong learning .
Finally , I should like to mention the need to recognise vocational qualifications , thereby facilitating the increased mobility of professionals and students .
Combating youth unemployment is one of the most important challenges facing the EU .
In order to address this problem , we need to invest more in the education and training of young people so that they are equipped for future challenges on the labour market , which is becoming more and more demanding .
The report also quite rightly states that the European Social Fund could contribute more towards the education of the financially weak .
Especially important , as I personally have stated on several occasions , is the proposal to facilitate labour mobility within the framework of the Internal Market .
European cooperation to draft a single policy is needed in this sector .
For all these reasons , I supported this particular report .
The mismatch between young people 's qualifications and the needs of the labour market is one of the reasons why Lithuania has such a terribly high rate of youth unemployment ( 34 % ) .
In 2010 , 52 % of all unemployed young people ( 50 000 ) who registered with the Lithuanian Labour Exchange did not have any vocational training .
The inability of my country 's young people to find suitable work has caused a huge wave of youth emigration - in the last few years , 50 % of Lithuanian emigrants were aged 20-34 .
The need for a mobile and flexible workforce is growing and therefore , we must help Europe 's workforce to adapt to the needs of the economy , giving them the opportunity to improve their skills and enhance their knowledge .
It is important for vocational training to be accessible to all people .
I am pleased that the rapporteur understands this .
ESF funding could be invaluable , helping to provide training for neglected groups in Lithuanian society .
The time has also come for the EU to use effective and creative measures to implement the aims set out in the Europe 2020 strategy , such as reducing the school drop-out rate to under 10 % and ensuring that 40 % of young people are educated to university level .
in writing . - Both young and old people alike should have access to vocational education and training .
For example , both the Lifelong Learning and People schemes provide invaluable opportunities to those who want to learn new skills and find new jobs .
Current unemployment levels , particularly among young people , are worrying and more needs to be done to ensure that young people are able to gain vital skills and qualifications .
I strongly believe that the ESF has a valuable role to play in training and educating people .
It is important that those on lower incomes receive financial support to help them attend training courses , which would , in turn , give them more opportunity to fully integrate themselves in the labour market .
The Europe 2020 strategy should provide for smart , sustainable and inclusive growth .
A results-based approach is also essential in relation to learning .
' Lifelong learning ' is an absolute priority for our citizens , which is why access to vocational education and training must be a priority for us .
I am voting for this report .
It assesses the financing instrument for development cooperation ( DCI ) , but I note the importance of the mechanism that should succeed it this year .
I agree with the rapporteur 's criticisms of the fact that the scrutiny work carried out by Parliament was not acknowledged by the representatives of the Member States or the DCI Committee .
I voted in favour of this Regulation ( EC ) No 1905 / 2006 establishing a financing instrument for development cooperation : lessons learned and perspectives for the future .
2011 is a strategic moment to draw lessons from four years of operation of Regulation ( EC ) No 1905 / 2006 establishing a financing instrument for development cooperation ( DCI ) .
Further simplification and adaptation to new challenges , such as climate change , as well as determining the external dimension of the EU 's internal policies , are important aspects that must be taken into consideration .
I agree with the provision set out in the resolution that the future instrument for supplying EU development aid must be adequately equipped in financial terms .
The EU has committed itself to the collective target of spending 0.7 % of its Gross National Income ( GNI ) on Official Development Assistance ( ODA ) by 2015 .
The current level of European aid will have to increase significantly to achieve this aim .
Coordination and division of labour must be the guiding principles of programming under the new development instrument .
The idea of European strategy documents should be pursued as a matter of high priority , and the European Parliament must be actively involved in this process .
Parliament must have the opportunity to defend the specificity of the EU 's development policy in the post-2013 development cooperation instrument by scrutinising strategic programming decisions on an equal footing with the Council .
The Development Cooperation Instrument ( DCI ) is one of the European Union 's extremely altruistic projects , intended to provide assistance to developing countries without any conditions or ulterior interests .
The lack of any utilitarian aspect to the EU 's involvement must force its institutions to target these funds much better and focus on eradicating poverty and complying with the Millennium Development Goals ( MDG ) .
I must stress the need for greater transparency for all funds earmarked for this purpose and , more importantly , for increasing the assessments of the impact which the DCI has among the population in those countries .
This is because these funds must be backed up by effective social policies implemented in developing countries .
These funds must be , in the medium and long term , the ' rod ' which the relevant peoples will use to learn to ' fish ' and successfully become self-sufficient .
We must not forget that 2010 was the European Year for Combating Poverty and Social Exclusion .
This is precisely why the Development Cooperation Instrument must continue this fight in developing countries as well , by making a significant contribution to guaranteeing a decent living for as many citizens as possible .
in writing . - The purpose of this report on the establishment of a financial instrument for development cooperation is to set at an early stage a Parliament position on this topic .
This position should be based on the lessons drawn from its scrutiny of the implementation of our development cooperation .
I appreciated the method followed by the rapporteur in evaluating the outcome and modalities of the EU cooperation for development .
The rapporteur clearly states that , in spite of the constructiveness of the dialogue with the Commission , the Commission itself did not change its behaviour in development matters as Parliament recommended .
Parliament 's position was only sporadically reflected in the draft implementing measures submitted by the Commission to the DCI management committee .
This is partially understandable .
The main partner of the rapporteur was DG RELEX , whose main mandate is the promotion of EU interests in the rest of the world .
But development cooperation is the one policy area of external action ( besides humanitarian aid ) which is not designed to serve EU interests , but to defend the interests of the most vulnerable populations of this planet .
Since the position expressed in this report fully reflects this global inspiration , I was glad to vote in favour of it .
I supported Mr Mitchell 's report because I believe we have to increase the participation of parliaments in developing countries when drawing up strategy papers for these countries , for the poverty eradication strategy for instance .
Moreover , European development aid must be adequately funded .
The European Union has pledged to devote 0.7 % of its Gross National Income ( GNI ) to Official Development Assistance ( ODA ) by 2015 , which will mean increasing the current amount of European aid .
The Millennium Development Goals deadline falls within the duration of the first financing instrument for development cooperation .
Therefore , the ongoing cooperation with local authorities must be expanded and their role in combating poverty and hunger , improving water and health services , and encouraging local economic development must be developed .
Security of food supply , the challenges of the agricultural sector and feed production , and the cost of living crisis must be addressed when the financing instruments and broad policy for cooperation and collaboration for development are being created .
I welcome what is said on that subject in the report .
I agree that the Commission should conduct a comprehensive analysis of the general budgetary support , containing details of the support being given to particular sectors , to particular projects , and to local governments .
That information would help in the future when efforts are being made to allocate resources and funding more efficiently , and consequently would allow any problems in the distribution system to be identified .
A more consistent policy would result from this .
The overarching objective of development cooperation is the eradication of poverty in partner countries , including pursuit of the Millennium Development Goals ( MDGs ) .
To achieve these objectives , the EU needs a specific financing instrument for development cooperation .
The Commission has committed itself to presenting a legislative proposal for the financing instruments for external action later this year , and to reconsidering the overall structure of the external financing instruments when debating the next Multiannual Financial Framework ( MFF ) .
I voted in favour of this document , which establishes Parliament 's position with regard to a new financing instrument for EU development cooperation .
I agree that the future instrument for supplying EU development aid must be adequately equipped in financial terms , given the commitments made by the EU in this field to spend 0.7 % of its Gross National Income ( GNI ) on Official Development Assistance by 2015 .
I voted against the motion for a European Parliament resolution on establishing a financing instrument for development cooperation with developing countries , areas and regions because of the wish expressed by the motion in respect of the management of illegal immigration .
In particular , it maintains that development funds for migration should not be used for strengthening border management and combating illegal immigration .
This position is incompatible with our political approach in which strengthening borders and combating illegal immigration are key priorities , and therefore we would argue that additional resources should be invested in this direction .
I therefore decided to vote against the motion .
The issue of development cooperation is one of the cardinal principles underpinning my work .
I believe that the excellent report by Mr Mitchell successfully highlights the areas in which Europe could and should do better .
The experience of the financing instrument for development cooperation ( DCI ) has been fundamental in understanding how the European Union should proceed in the context of the next Multiannual Financial Framework .
If we want to make financing instruments effective , then we need to set up financing that is independent of other measures , recalculate quotas , and review how instruments are implemented .
This review must be based on a Neighbourhood Policy that is sensitive to the range of needs of poorer countries and no longer just to the interests of Europe .
I firmly believe that EU development policy must be the result of work by both Parliament and the Council , and that Article 290 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union should also apply to this issue .
These principles have been clearly stated in the report in question , and I therefore voted in favour .
I welcome the adoption of Mr Mitchell 's report which is aimed at establishing Parliament 's position in relation to the new financing instrument designed to regulate the European Union 's development cooperation , based on the lessons learned from implementing the Development Cooperation Instrument ( DCI ) ( the financing instrument for development cooperation ) .
In this respect , I should like to point out that high levels of poverty remain in the developing countries , territories and regions and that we need to increase the funds devoted to the causes of poverty , in particular , malnutrition , health problems , education , access to drinking water , instead of moving towards systems for regulating immigration which come under other financial schemes .
Development aid must enable the populations concerned to remain in their geographical area .
Regulating immigration must be done through another financial instrument and must lead to increased resources for FRONTEX .
That was the logic behind my voting for this report .
To begin with , I should like to welcome the efforts that have been made by the European Union to eradicate poverty in developing countries .
International cooperation aimed at promoting these countries ' self-sufficiency and independence is the right path towards achieving social and political peace at international level , which will not only fundamentally affect the beneficiary populations , but will also lead to the resolution of Europe 's immigration problems .
I therefore support increased European funding for this cause , as well as the creation of a financial instrument focused exclusively on it .
In the context of the debate on the next Multiannual Financial Framework ( MFF ) post-2013 , it is particularly important to redefine and reinforce the positions Parliament has adopted on a new financing instrument for EU development cooperation ( DCI ) , given the lessons learned from implementing the DCI during the period 2007-2013 .
To begin with , I consider it essential that this new instrument continue to prioritise achieving the Millennium Development Goals ( MDGs ) .
In order to achieve this aim - specifically , the eradication of poverty - it is essential that any future instrument be provided with realistic and adequate financial resources .
The Commission should ensure that EU aid is consistent with development goals and targets set at international level .
I would also reiterate the importance of how thoroughly eligibility criteria for countries benefiting from funding from this future instrument are applied .
I would like to stress that the new DCI should provide a basis for targeted and more flexible aid in situations of fragility .
I believe it should help to ensure proper linkage of relief , rehabilitation and development operations .
In conclusion , I would congratulate Mr Mitchell on the report he has tabled and I support the suggestions it includes .
In recent decades , numerous aid programmes have been carried out in developing countries by a variety of public and private organisations .
As the report shows , the low levels of success achieved to date , lack of coordination with regard to shared objectives ( World Health Organisation ) , and lack of clear indications as to how such objectives should be achieved make it necessary , in my view as well , to introduce a new financing instrument for development cooperation .
However , this instrument must be intelligently designed , and must be such that it improves the current situation without leading to further waste of resources .
If this project is to be truly effective , action must be taken on two fronts .
Firstly , given that the primary objective is the elimination of poverty , genuinely new funds must be allocated to the cause : funds must not be taken away from projects that are already ongoing .
Secondly , I believe that the European Union needs to commit itself more wholeheartedly to this project .
Coordinating and sharing tasks need to be the guiding principles for orienting planning in respect of the new development instrument .
The purpose of this report is to establish Parliament 's preliminary position with regard to a new financing instrument for EU development cooperation ( DCI ) , based on the previous regulation .
I believe Parliament 's involvement at the early stages of the redesign of this instrument will be of great value to it , so I am supporting this initiative .
I believe the values that characterise European Parliament action , not least the promotion of democracy and the defence of human rights , can contribute positively to constructing a tool that is more compact , effective and comprehensive .
In my opinion , the way the report analyses this issue is quite interesting : it proposes new approaches that will now have to be debated over the coming months , specifically as regards the need for aid to developing countries that is more differentiated , dividing them into groups .
It also demonstrates the need for reliable and consistent retrospective analysis work in this area , proposing a new approach to development aid based on greater differentiation , on the involvement of civil society , and on strict eligibility criteria .
Now that the financing instrument for development cooperation ( DCI ) has been in place for four years , it is time to assess how it has been operating , in order to improve future financial instruments for this area .
It is now evident that there is a need for Parliament to maintain democratic scrutiny of this financial instrument and future ones ; it is even clearer how important it is becoming for developing countries ' national parliaments to be involved in drafting strategic national documents linked to aid received from the Union .
I hope that aid levels will not decrease , but rather will increase wherever possible , and that ways for it to effectively benefit the most deprived populations will be studied .
Throughout this process , the crucial role that should be attributed to civil society in developing countries cannot be stressed enough .
The situations in developing countries should not all be approached in the same way , but rather in a more differentiated way , bearing in mind that traditional financial aid can become less important in many cases , for example , in the case of the so-called emerging countries .

This report , drafted by Mr Mitchell , concerns Regulation ( EC ) No 1905 / 2006 establishing a financing instrument for development cooperation : lessons learned and perspectives for the future .
Regulation ( EC ) No 1905 / 2006 has been in force for four years and it is time to analyse it and learn from any potential errors and / or shortcomings that may exist , since the Commission is aiming to submit proposals before the summer relating to the Multiannual Financial Framework ( MFF ) for the post-2013 period .
I support the rapporteur 's proposals - not least , achievement of the Millennium Development Goals ( MDGs ) , the eradication of poverty , the channelling of 20 % of resources into health and primary education , particular attention to climate issues , a new approach to aid in developing countries that demands respect for human rights , and the more efficient and effective use of scarce resources - so I voted in favour .
The report evaluates the financing instrument for development cooperation ( DCI ) , four years after the regulation that implemented it came into force .
The evaluation carried out is relevant from several points of view .
Opportune and critical analyses are made of DCI and the EU 's development cooperation policy , which we consider fair and necessary .


The report states that the purpose of development policy should not be to defend the EU 's interests , but rather those of the most vulnerable populations on the planet ; it draws attention to the excessive focus on investments to be made by the private sector , as well as the constraints imposed on the public sector ; it warns of the need for funds not to be diverted from already underfinanced sectors , giving the example of support for local authorities ; it criticises any attempt to cut the funding of the DCI and the European Development Fund ; and it stresses once again that not enough progress has been made with the Millennium Development Goals ( MDG ) and that there is a need to increase Official Development Assistance ( ODA ) .
Nevertheless , we believe the report could and should have gone further on each of these points , especially in advocating consistency between the goals stated in the area of development cooperation policy and the EU 's various sectoral policies .
The report evaluates the financing instrument for development cooperation ( DCI ) , four years after the regulation that implemented it came into force .
The evaluation carried out is relevant from several points of view .
Opportune and critical analyses are made of DCI and the EU 's development cooperation policy , which we consider fair and necessary .
For example , the report states that the purpose of development policy should not be to defend the EU 's interests , but rather those of the most vulnerable populations on the planet .
It draws attention to the excessive focus on investments to be made by the private sector , as well as the constraints imposed on the public sector , and warns of the need for funds not to be diverted from already underfinanced sectors , giving the example of support for local authorities .
It also criticises any attempt to cut the funding of the DCI and the European Development Fund , and stresses once again that not enough progress has been made with the Millennium Development Goals ( MDG ) and that there is a need to increase Official Development Assistance ( ODA ) .
Nevertheless , we believe the report could and should have gone further , on each of these points , especially in advocating consistency between the goals stated in the area of development cooperation policy and the EU 's various sectoral policies .
The report examines the effectiveness of the Development Cooperation Instrument ( DCI ) in relation to the debate on the Multiannual Financial Framework .
A reassessment of the overall structure of external funding instruments appears to be appropriate .
Important aspects that should be considered include possible further simplification , adaptation to new challenges such as climate change , and also the right place for the external dimension of the EU 's internal policies .
In my opinion , it is equally important to establish the procedures and structures which will protect development as an independent area of policy with its own specific objectives .
I welcome Mr Mitchell 's report .
The purpose of the report is to establish the European Parliament 's position with regard to future financing for development cooperation prior to publication of the post-2013 Multiannual Financial Framework .
In future , sufficient funds must always be available for EU development cooperation .
The policy of development aid is neither an altruistic obligation , nor a means for former colonial powers of easing their consciences , where there has been colonisation .
It is , in its own right , one of the branches of foreign policy ; however , it should also be an important part in a strategy for reversing migratory flows that enables populations to remain in or return to their country of origin and live life there with dignity and increasing prosperity .
Since these two areas fall within the sovereignty of states , most of the institutional and financial requirements of the Mitchell report are not acceptable .
I welcomed the report because 2011 is a strategic moment to draw lessons from four years of operation of Regulation ( EC ) No 1905 / 2006 establishing a financing instrument for development cooperation ( DCI ) .
The purpose of this report is to establish at an early stage Parliament 's position with regard to a new financing instrument for EU development cooperation , based on the lessons drawn from our scrutiny of the implementation of the DCI .
I agreed that a differentiated approach to the diverse group of developing countries is needed , and that traditional financial aid may become less relevant for emerging countries .
I believe that aid for emerging countries , while promoting sustainable economic growth , should still focus on reinforcing the partner country 's fiscal policy and promoting mobilisation of domestic revenue which should lead to the reduction of poverty and aid dependence .
We must refrain from using budget support in countries where transparency in public spending cannot be assured .
Budget support must always be accompanied by actions to develop the receiving country 's parliamentary control and audit capacities and to increase transparency and public access to information , and civil society should be involved in monitoring budget support .
I believe that the Mitchell report , which is an extremely good report , touches on many key issues , and I therefore decided to vote in favour of it .
I believe that what matters most when considering the future shape of financing instruments for development is to remember that the overriding aim of development policy should be to reduce dependence on aid gradually , and for the country in question ultimately to achieve total independence .
In connection with this , financing instruments should be designed in such a way as to ensure long-term economic growth in developing countries .
Achievement of this goal is closely linked to how predictable development aid is , since it is only on the basis of such aid , at the same time as mobilising domestic revenues , that partner countries can construct an adequate and effective development strategy .
In my opinion , a further crucial issue is that of increasing the European Parliament 's control and influence over the European Development Fund .
I believe that the lack of democratic control over this fund is detrimental to the transparency of development policy .
I voted in favour of adopting this report .
Funding for development cooperation requires well-thought-out regulations , and the report provides a synthesis of what our priorities should be when adopting them .
The goals pursued by the European Union when establishing this instrument are to ensure special EU assistance for developing countries .
In view of our current struggle to cope with the financial crisis , the problems of poorer countries are becoming ever more evident .
The financing instrument for development cooperation is aimed at helping poorer partner countries in the field of trade and regional integration , the natural environment and the management of natural resources , infrastructure , water and energy , rural development , agriculture and food security , human development and social cohesion .
Furthermore , we want to support the development of government systems , democracy , human rights and also economic and institutional reforms , and to prevent conflicts and weakening of the state .
All the abovementioned goals are of the utmost importance in terms of strengthening security in poorer regions .
Helping other countries to construct stable democratic societies in countries governed by the rule of law , where human rights are observed and freedom of speech is guaranteed , with a solid judicial system , territorial defence and armed forces , is a commendable plan .
I hope that we will succeed in putting it into effect on a wider scale , making even more efficient use of funds .
in writing . - The future instrument for supplying EU development aid must be adequately equipped in financial terms .
The EU has committed itself to the collective target of spending 0.7 % of its GNI on ODA by 2015 .
To reach this aim , the current level of European aid will have to significantly increase .
Given the added value of Commission aid , and the Commission 's new role in coordinating the Union 's and the Member States ' development policy ( Article 210 TFEU ) , the share of ODA channelled through the EU budget should remain at least stable .
The annual figures for the new development cooperation instrument in the next MFF period should significantly increase in real terms .
It is time to assess how the financing instrument for development cooperation ( DCI ) has been used , now that it has been in place for four years .
That is the only way we will be able to improve it to make it more effective in the future .
It is important that Parliament have something to say as regards its scrutiny of this and future financial instruments .
Despite the economic crisis we are experiencing , it is important to maintain these instruments for aiding developing countries so that they may be able , in the near future , to increase their levels of wealth , with the inherent improvement in the living conditions of the populations in these so-called emerging countries .
The upcoming instrument for funding development cooperation will have to have sufficient amounts at its disposal at the end of the Millennium Development Goals ( MDGs ) .
Donor countries should respect their commitment to set aside 0.7 % of their GDP to Official Development Assistance ( ODA ) by 2015 .
As I have already said , nothing justifies a reduction in aid .
Official Development Assistance currently represents more than USD 120 billion .
We can do more and better .
However , doing more and doing better is not just a case of increasing resources .
The inclusion of the European Development Fund ( EDF ) in the budget would be significant progress as long as it does not lead to a reduction in total funding amounts at EU level .
I am also in favour of ' more ' budgetary aid , whether general or sector-specific , and fewer projects whenever the macro-economic and governance criteria allow .
Firstly , it would make it possible to mobilise financial resources quickly in order to rebuild or consolidate the State .
Secondly , it is the only kind of aid for which we can be sure that it will be absorbed in an optimal way .
Finally , I believe that we need to ensure that this aid is more effective .
in writing . - EU principles of rendering assistance to developing countries which are not covered by the Cotonou Agreement or by the European Neighbourhood and Partnership Instrument are very important .
In terms of this financial instrument , it is possible to render financial aid to ACP countries ( African , Caribbean and Pacific Group of States ) in restructuring the manufacturing of sugar , and financial support for five programmes is envisioned : food security ; environment and sustainable development of natural resources , including energy ; migration and asylum granting ; investment in human resources ; the role of local authorities and non-governmental organisations in development processes .
I voted in favour .
The fostering of prosperity in so-called developing countries is a necessary measure , particularly in order to prevent a tidal wave of migrants flooding into Europe .
At present , this is being managed through a variety of programmes .
However , the aim of this report is to increase financial aid .
This is something I cannot support .
In view of the present financial difficulties within the EU , we cannot provide this aid at the moment .
Furthermore , it is the Member States and not the EU that should determine how development aid is to be used .
The idea of giving developing countries a helping hand and ( also ) offering them financial support is something to be warmly welcomed .
Humanitarian principles and the desire for global balance provide plausible grounds for this .
The European Union already provides help within the framework of a variety of programmes .
Nonetheless , this report plans to establish more instruments , thereby expanding development aid .
However , in accordance with the principle of subsidiarity , development aid payments should be a matter for the individual states .
Development cooperation is the only external action policy which defends the most marginalised and vulnerable groups of society .
The Commission must make every effort to ensure that appropriate and sufficient aid is allocated to the development of the domestic private sector and small- and medium-sized enterprises in low income countries .
Particular attention must be paid to migration .
It is important to ensure that money earmarked to combat illegal immigration is used as it was specifically intended .
Attention should also be drawn to the fact that , when establishing a new financing instrument for developing countries alone , there must be a thorough analysis of the general objectives , the priority areas and expected results , as well as the allocation of funds .
2011 is a strategic moment to draw lessons from the four years of operation of Regulation ( EC ) No 1905 / 2006 establishing a financing instrument for development cooperation ( DCI ) .
The Commission has announced that it will present its proposals for the Multiannual Financial Framework ( MFF ) for the post-2013 period before the summer recess and the legislative proposals for the financing instruments for external action later this year .
The purpose of this report - which I am voting for - is to establish at an early stage Parliament 's position with regard to a new financing instrument for EU development cooperation , based on the lessons drawn from our scrutiny of the implementation of the DCI over the last four years .
I would stress the need for the following broad areas to be promoted : adequate funding within the available resources ; the effect of poverty eradication and Official Development Assistance ( ODA ) criteria ; geographic and thematic programmes ; procedures for programming EU aid , with better coordination and division of labour ; and bridging the democracy gap , with Parliament being called on to take part in the decision-making process .
Regulation ( EC ) No 1905 / 2006 establishing a financing instrument for development cooperation has been in operation for four years now .
The Commission will soon present its proposals for the post-2013 Multiannual Financial Framework ( MFF ) and the legislative proposals for the financing instruments for external action later this year .
The purpose of this report is to establish at an early stage Parliament 's position with regard to a new financing instrument .
The report presents the lessons learned , with a particular focus on the experience gained by the European Parliament during its democratic scrutiny of the implementation of the Development Cooperation Instrument ( DCI ) .
Part of the report is dedicated to perspectives for the future and finally , the report looks at geographic and thematic programmes , insisting on strict eligibility criteria for budget support , emphasising the important role that civil society plays in development and the application of the delegated acts procedure for those decisions which fulfil the criteria of Article 290 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union ( TFEU ) .
I voted in favour of this motion so that the European Parliament has the possibility to exercise scrutiny over strategic programming decisions on an equal footing with the Council .
As four years have passed since Regulation ( EC ) No 1905 / 2006 came into force , and as the Commission has already announced the tabling of proposals relating to the Multiannual Financial Framework for the post-2013 period , there is a need for a brief analysis of the results achieved since then and of future means of development .
The most important thing to stress is that this is ' the one policy area of external action [ ... ] which has not been designed to serve EU interests , but to defend the interests of the most marginalised and vulnerable populations of this planet ' .
As such , Parliament should take on a more important role , not just because of the various ways that this confers democratic legitimacy , but also because of what it can offer in material and procedural terms .
It should also be stressed that the objective should be the eradication of poverty , by reference to the concept of ' basic social services ' , so as to seek to reduce the situation of extreme vulnerability of the most deprived populations .
in writing . - In favour .
2011 is a strategic moment to draw lessons from the four years Regulation ( EC ) No 1905 / 2006 establishing a financing instrument for development cooperation ( DCI ) has been in operation .
The Commission has announced that it will present its proposals for the post-2013 Multiannual Financial Framework ( MFF ) before the summer recess and the legislative proposals for the financing instruments for external action later this year .
The purpose of this report is to establish at an early stage Parliament 's position with regard to a new financing instrument for EU development cooperation , based on the lessons drawn from our scrutiny of the implementation of the DCI .
The purpose of the report adopted today is to establish Parliament 's position with regard to a new financing instrument for European Union development cooperation , based on the lessons drawn from our scrutiny of the implementation of the Development Cooperation Instrument ( DCI ) .
Contrary to Parliament , Member States did not seem to focus on checking the compliance of Commission proposals with the legal provisions of the DCI .
It should be clarified , therefore , that development cooperation is the only EU external action policy which has not been designed to serve European Union interests , but to defend the interests of the most marginalised and vulnerable populations on this planet through poverty alleviation and sustainable human , social and economic development - in short , the right to a decent life for all .
Parliament clearly recognises the importance of these activities and therefore calls for an instrument which would enable the European Union to finance such actions from sources other than the DCI .
I voted in favour of Mr Mitchell 's report because it defines essential and correct directions for the future adoption and operation of the financing instrument for development cooperation by learning useful lessons from the use currently being made of this development cooperation tool .
EU funds for development cooperation are a real mechanism for combating poverty and promoting democratisation and development in developing countries .
Under the Treaty of Lisbon , the EU has enhanced powers of international representation and is being called on to respond to challenges such as climate change , combating poverty and transferring the rule of law and democratic values to developing countries .
I agree with the rapporteur that the democratic accountability of all EU development policy and the active role which Parliament must have in the procedure for approving funds for development aid , based on Article 290 of the Treaty of Lisbon , need to be enhanced .
in writing . - I support this report , which draws on the instrument 's performance , scrutiny and promoting better use of development money in the future .
I voted in favour of the Mitchell report because we need to learn the lessons of the last four years of using Regulation ( EC ) No 1905 / 2006 establishing a financing instrument for development cooperation ( DCI ) .
On this occasion , the objectives and scope for this development aid must be very clearly defined .
Migration is an area where we need to give priority to the coherence of policies promoting development .
Thus , development aid should finance projects aimed at tackling the deep-rooted causes of migration ( fighting against poverty ) , but it should not be used to improve border control or combat illegal immigration .
I voted in favour of the text presented by Mr Mitchell .
In view also of the lessons learned from the implementation of the development cooperation instrument ahead of the introduction of the new post-2013 instrument , I believe that Parliament should have the possibility to defend the specificity of the EU 's development policy by scrutinising strategic programming decisions on an equal footing with the Council .
Furthermore , it is particularly important for decisions on the general objectives , the priority areas and the allocation of funds to be taken using the delegated acts procedure , pursuant to Article 290 TFEU .
I am voting for this report because the amendments introduced by the Group of the Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats in the European Parliament ( S & D ) were included in the compromise text .
These include key points such as general guidelines , the potential for improvement at Commission level and the potential for improvement at Parliament level .
I voted in favour of this resolution on guaranteeing independent impact assessments .
I agree with the rapporteur that impact assessments ( IAs ) are a key instrument in the legislative process , and one which European legislators should make greater use of in future .
IAs show legislators the possible consequences of their policy options and help them make a decision .
IAs can thus make a significant contribution to better law making .
However , they can in no way be a substitute for political debate and the legislator 's democratic and legitimate decision-making process .
It should be pointed out that IAs merely contribute to the preparation of the specific content of a political decision .
It is important for IAs to be completely independent and transparent and , moreover , the consequences for small and medium-sized enterprises should be taken into account .
Parliament already has the power to issue its own IAs and submit Commission IAs to thorough scrutiny .
Hitherto , however , this procedure has rarely been applied .
I agree with the position set out in the resolution that the European Parliament should make greater use of the powers it has been given in this field .
I am convinced that impact assessments would help those who prepare political decisions .
This is why I supported Mrs Niebler 's report on the necessary changes to impact assessments , particularly regarding the introduction of an independent mechanism .
Members of the Impact Assessment Committee ( IAC ) would be controlled by the European Parliament and the Council .
As a result , they would no longer be under the President of the Commission 's instructions .
I voted in favour of this report .
Impact assessments ( IAs ) are a key instrument in the legislative process .
They show legislators the possible consequences of their policy options and help them make a decision , and legislators should make greater use of them in future .
IAs can make a significant contribution to better law making .
I agree that it is necessary to involve external experts from all policy areas as well as all stakeholder groups affected in the impact assessment process in order to guarantee independence and objectivity .
Impact assessments ( IAs ) are an instrument central to the legislative process .
Rigour requires the gathering of concrete facts for political decision making , and a guarantee that all the relevant strategic options will be examined when any specific problem is being solved .
Impact studies should be applied to all legislative proposals , they should have a clear methodology , and they should be undertaken with full independence and transparency .
IAs should also assess the option of inaction , as well as the specific consequences for small and medium-sized enterprises .
Despite the improvements in this area , IAs by the European Commission and European Parliament could improve even further .
This report , which I voted for , calls for closer involvement of Parliament 's committees and a detailed explanation when the Commission refrains from issuing an IA .
Finally , it challenges Parliament 's committees to increase the use of IAs so as to improve the quality of its law making .
I voted in favour of the motion for a resolution on guaranteeing independent impact assessments .
In the first place , the motion underlines the need , when carrying out impact assessments , to bear in mind the impact of new regulation on small and medium-sized enterprises and to reduce the regulatory burden on them .
This emphasis on the needs of SMEs was key to my decision to vote in favour .
In the second place , the motion highlights another very important factor , which is the specific nature of national economies .
In order to safeguard their interests , the Commission should consult with individual Member States and the officials and representatives of the various national assessment bodies , in order to ensure that specific individual needs are not subordinate to Community interests .
Finally , the motion calls for greater transparency and efficiency in the European Union 's administration processes , urging the Commission to be accountable to Parliament for its work .
In view of the points described above , I felt compelled to vote in favour .
I voted in favour of this report because I agree that it is very important to continuously improve the quality of EU law making , and this report sets out concrete proposals for improving the law making process both within the European Parliament and the Commission .
For some time , the Commission has already been carrying out impact assessments of legislation before submitting legislative proposals to the European Parliament and the Council , but the report states that these impact assessment procedures still need to be greatly improved .
For example , we should strengthen the independence of the Impact Assessment Board , which is currently under the authority of the President of the Commission .
The report also calls on the European Parliament itself and its committees to carry out impact assessments of draft legislation more often and to scrutinise more closely the impact assessments carried out by the Commission , which frequently serve to justify a legislative proposal rather than to permit an objective consideration of the facts .
Such preliminary impact assessments of proposed EU legislation were further enhanced by the Treaty of Lisbon , which added provisions on the mandatory assessment of the social and environmental impact of any proposed legislation .
Assertive and successful legislation requires not just good political debate and a joint effort leading to cooperation and consensus , but also a trustworthy technical basis that guides the legislative entities by assessing the context and consequences of the policies in question .
For this very reason , I welcome the initiatives demonstrated by the European institutions to guarantee the quality and reliability of impact studies , which will involve guaranteeing their independence and transparency .
in writing . - Having worked on this area at Committee level before , I am obliged to stress the point that impact assessments must be free from outside interference and that this independence must be protected at all levels .
in writing . - I voted against the Niebler report on impact assessments .
UKIP supports the concept of impact assessments but only if they are truly independent , have real teeth ( such that the Commission has to take note of them ) and are conducted at the national level to avoid producing a bland one-size-fits-all which will not enable national governments to assess the impact on their countries with sufficient accuracy .
Unfortunately , the Niebler report fails to meet these criteria .
One of the priority goals of European Union policy should be to introduce a transparent , clear , effective and high-quality regulatory environment .
We have criticised the failings in transposition and implementation of the EU legislation in force numerous times , which result , to a large extent , from the fact that legislative texts have not been drafted properly .
It is therefore the responsibility of Europe 's legislative bodies to face up to this problem .
Impact assessments ( IAs ) present a systematic assessment of the probable effects of legislation in health , fundamental rights , social , economic , environmental , etc. terms , thereby contributing to cutting red tape and ensuring the consistency of EU policy .
I am voting for this initiative , which acknowledges that IAs have a key role in aiding the decision-making process .
They must be characterised by total independence and transparency , must follow a clear methodology , and must proceed to a substantiated and objective analysis of the potential effects , which is always accompanied by a cost-benefit analysis .
This will contribute to reaching well thought-out and fully informed decisions , which should lead to better-quality legislation , to more correct transposition , application and oversight , and to a faster legislative process .
Impact assessments are tools that are especially useful for improving the quality of legislative activities ( political proposals , for example ) .
However , these impact assessments need to be adapted : new adaptations are indeed necessary , in particular , through creating an independent mechanism , for the impact assessments proposed by the European Commission are often inconsistent from a qualitative point of view and generally only serve to justify a legislative proposal rather than allow for an objective examination of the facts .
I am delighted that the report voted today stipulates that impact assessments be carried out totally independently ; that impact assessments take a larger range of criteria into account ( socio-economic , environmental , etc . ) ; and also that the highest transparency be guaranteed , especially where experts are involved .
This is a matter that crops up in this Chamber time and time again , but it is nevertheless a highly important one !
Impact assessments ( IAs ) are a key instrument for the legislative process in that they take into account the potential consequences of applying given legislation , and so help reach a decision for that very reason .
Independence and transparency are values that should be preserved and encouraged in any democracy in that they guarantee the public objective assessments , proportional decisions and legal procedure .
I therefore agree , in general , with Parliament 's proposals in this report .
This report , drafted by Mrs Niebler , concerns the problem of ' guaranteeing independent impact assessments ' .
Impact assessments ( IAs ) are crucial in order for the decisions we make to be the right ones .
Without replacing the process of democratically deciding legislative authority , they nevertheless constitute the backbone of that same process .
I am voting for this report because I share the rapporteur 's view that IAs are crucial in order for us to carry out our work as law makers .
The more we know about a given sector , the better our decision making with regard to it will be .
Moreover , and despite the creation of the Impact Assessment Board ( IAB ) , created by the European Commission , and the positive results already achieved , I also believe it is crucial to create an autonomous IA structure for the European Parliament .
Impact assessments ( IAs ) can constitute important support for the legislative process .
To be so , they must study the economic , social , environmental and public health consequences of the intended political choices , along with their impact on the public 's fundamental rights , throughout the political cycle .
The assessment should not just be undertaken ex ante , but also ex post .
However , the current IA process has numerous failings , as the report acknowledges .
They often simply seek to convey supposed technical legitimacy and justification on measures that are the result of political choices and evaluations , which are conveniently hidden .
There remain numerous questions regarding the methodology to be used in each case .
On what or whom will the impact be measured ?
What is the scope of the assessment ?
What alternatives are to be analysed ?
These decisions , too , normally depend on political choices and evaluations .
That is why it is very important to ensure that impact studies are independent .
In practice , however , this is difficult , given the multiple variables and interests involved .
Transparency , openness , consultation , and public participation and scrutiny in connection with the studies and their results are of decisive importance in guaranteeing , as much as possible , this independence and the quality of the study .
Impact assessments ( IAs ) can be of significant help from the standpoint of better law making if the economic , social , environmental and public health consequences of the intended political choices are studied throughout the political cycle , along with their impact on the public 's fundamental rights .
However , in the issues that emerge in impact studies , we have the criteria used in those IAs .
We know that there are a number of criteria and not just cost-benefit , and even there we need to know who is being hit by costs and who is enjoying benefits .
That is why it is very important to ensure that impact studies are independent but this is , in practice , a very difficult task , given the multiple variables and interests involved .
The methodologies of some assessments and specialists will be more independent than others .
In truth , however , IAs often serve more to justify the decisions they are intending to take rather than to really tackle all the implications of the legislation they are intending to adopt .
Impact assessments are a central instrument of the legislative process , which European law makers must use to the full in future .
Although they are in no way a substitute for political discussion or the democratic and legitimate decision-making process followed by law makers , and serve only to prepare the ground for political decisions , they draw the attention of law makers to the potential effects of their policies from the perspective of specialised content and help them to take decisions .
In this way , they can make a considerable contribution to better law making .
The Niebler report represents an important contribution to the debate on improving the EU legislative procedure , with a view to ensuring that new legislation serves citizens and is genuinely necessary .
Unfortunately , there have been accusations that regulations are also being created which result merely from the desire to make the EU institutions better known , or from the actions of lobbyists .
This means that we need to make constant improvements to procedures relating to what is known as the impact assessment for a particular legislative act .
As rapporteur in previous years for the subject of better law making , I would like to highlight several aspects of this problem .
Firstly , we should note the need to maintain the institutional balance enshrined in the Treaty , within which framework the European Commission proposes laws and Parliament and the Council adopt them .
The independence of impact assessments is extremely important , but they must not be removed from Parliament 's democratic control .
In my opinion , the proposal to modify impact assessments after the introduction of amendments by Parliament is very important , and I also share the opinion of those who believe that we need to apply uniform criteria for impact assessments in all the institutions .
At the same time , I would draw attention to the fact that the most crucial aspect of law making is the political will to resolve a given problem , and an impact assessment prepared as part of a particular project can merely supply objective information .
I have already had the opportunity to say in this House that it is time indeed that impact assessments be not only systematic , but , above all , credible .
That we should objectively assess the consequences of a piece of legislation before taking it any further , rather than seeking by all means to justify it .
And that it is not up to the Commission services , judges , parties and torturers all together to preside over this assessment .
I do not know whether the solutions put forward by the rapporteur are the right ones .
On the other hand , I do know that I agree with her diagnosis and that some of her observations are particularly relevant .
Member States must therefore be closely involved in these studies because they are in a better position to assess the national impact of initiatives coming from Brussels .
These studies must guide the choices and reflection of national parliaments , who , from now on , are the guardians of the respect for the principle of subsidiarity .
These studies should lead to the abstention of the Commission , if its action turns out to be pointless , redundant or costly .
Finally , we should be able to quickly draw the consequences of a piece of legislation , the implementation of which creates more problems than it solves .
For all these reasons , even though I am under no illusions about its realisation , I voted for Mrs Niebler 's report .
I welcomed this report because impact assessments ( IAs ) are a key instrument in the legislative process , and one which European legislators should make greater use of in future .
The benefits of IAs are obvious .
IAs show legislators the possible consequences of their policy options and help them to make a decision .
IAs can thus make a significant contribution to better law making .
However , IAs can in no way be a substitute for political debate and the legislator 's democratic and legitimate decision-making process .
IAs merely contribute to the preparation of the specific content of a political decision .
This report falls into four sections .
First of all , the report sets out the general requirements for IAs at European level .
The second section discusses the Commission 's IAs and highlights scope for improvement .
The third section is devoted to the IAs carried out by the European Parliament .
The fourth and final section calls for an autonomous IA structure within the European Parliament which all of Parliament 's committees should use to further improve law making and create synergies .
in writing . - I have several reasons why I support this resolution .
First of all , it underlines that impact assessment can never be a substitute for political debate and the legislator 's decision-making process , but should only help the technical preparation of political decisions .
This would certainly improve the decision-making process .
Secondly , the impact assessments have to take a large number of criteria into account in order to provide the legislator with a comprehensive picture .
Only in this way can the legislator do his job efficiently .
The process of assessing the impacts of a regulation contributes significantly towards reducing the bureaucratic burden that is a by-product of statutory regulation .
A special Impact Assessment Board was set up at Commission level some time ago , and it assesses impacts both ex ante and ex post .
The Commission also carries out public consultations on its legislative plans .
The European Parliament has so far lacked an impact assessment body .
I therefore applaud the fact that the report calls for the creation of infrastructure making it possible to evaluate the impacts of proposals and plans formulated in Parliament .
I would also like to call on the Commission to concentrate more , when performing impact assessments , on the transparency of the entire assessment process , to strive harder for its independence , and not to aim for just one solution to a problem in its proposals , but to assess multiple variant solutions to a specific situation independently .
I would also like to call for a simplification of the process of public consultations , and an extension of the deadlines for submitting concrete proposals , including the possibility of submitting proposals in all official languages of the Union .
I supported Mrs Niebler 's report on guaranteeing independent impact assessments .
Impact assessments are a key instrument in better law making policy , which aims to improve and simplify new and existing legislation .
Impact assessments are , in fact , a suitable instrument for evaluating the impact of the adoption of new laws and the simplification and recasting of existing laws .
However , I believe that recognition of their usefulness should always depend on respect for certain fundamental principles , such as transparency and independence .
I therefore agree with the rapporteur when she underlines the fact that the Commission has recently raised the quality of its impact assessments , while pointing out that further improvements are still needed .
Finally , I applaud the decision to create an autonomous impact assessment structure for the European Parliament , with a view to further enhancing the quality of European Union law making .
in writing . - I voted for this report .
Impact Assessments ( IAs ) are a key instrument for the legislative process , of which European legislators should make greater use in future .
The benefits of IAs are obvious .
They show legislators the possible consequences of their policy options and help them reach a decision .
IAs can thus make a significant contribution to better law making .
However , they can in no way be a substitute for political debate and the legislator 's democratically legitimate decision-making process .
They merely permit the technical and substantive preparation of a political decision .
The impact assessment instrument presented by the rapporteur is a good way of improving the quality of law making at European level .
Mutual assessment , however , should take into account not just financial impacts , but should also focus on other aspects , such as the economic , environmental and social aspects .
As a doctor , I would like to emphasise , above all , the impact on human health .
We must also not forget the very important role played by Member States in impact assessment , as they must incorporate the proposed legislation into their legal systems .
Impact assessments are a key instrument for the legislative process , and one of which European legislators should make greater use in future , as they show the possible consequences of their policy options .
We should not forget , however , that they merely permit the technical , substantive preparation of a political decision .
We believe that the impact assessments used by the European institutions should comply with certain principles .
First of all they should be completely independent and transparent .
They should cover all categories of legislative proposal , employ a clear methodology , and must always be kept up to date with current developments in the legislative process .
We also believe the Commission should provide Parliament with a detailed explanation in cases where it considers it unnecessary to assess the impact of its decisions .
Finally , we confirm the importance of the creation of an autonomous structure for carrying out impact assessments within Parliament , with a view to further enhancing the quality of its law making and creating new synergies .
I welcome this text which condemns the European Commission 's partiality .
It is a shame that it does not condemn the fact that the European Commission alone has the power to initiate legislation .
Impact assessments ( IAs ) are very important to the legislative process and should be encouraged in the future .
IAs have great benefits : they alert legislators to the consequences of their options , and contribute to better and more conscious decision making .
They therefore make a significant contribution to excellence in law making .
in writing . - I scrutinised the report very attentively and summarised its key points : ( 1 ) the scope of scrutiny ( not only cost-benefit analysis , but an integrated approach ) ; ( 2 ) the inclusion of stakeholders from all the policy areas while the methodology and final quality control should remain under the remit of the European institutions , with an increased consultation period from 8 to 12 weeks ; ( 3 ) the revision of the interinstitutional common approach to impact assessment to encourage all the institutions to implement a common methodology on IAs .
Potential for improvement at the Commission level : ( 1 ) the increased scrutiny by the European Parliament and the Council over the Impact Assessment Board ; ( 2 ) systematic ex-post assessments of existing legislation and analysis of the relevant ECJ case-law .
Potential for improvement at EP level : the main focus is the creation of an autonomous structure within the EP led by a supervisory board consisting of MEPs , possibly appointed at the beginning of each term , making use of the existing resources but also of seconded national experts .
I abstained from voting because I do not understand on which criteria experts for the Advisory Board will be appointed and what power they will have .
I cannot support the report .
I voted for this report because I believe impact assessments ( IAs ) are a key instrument for the legislative process , and one which European legislators should make greater use of in future .
The benefits of IAs are obvious .
They show legislators the possible consequences of their options and help them in making a decision .
IAs can thus make a significant contribution to better law making .
However , they can in no way be a substitute for political debate and the legislator 's democratic decision-making process , merely enabling the technical preparation of a political decision .
The European Commission has raised the quality of its IAs , particularly through the foundation of its Impact Assessment Board ( IAB ) .
However , in light of the report of the European Court of Auditors , I believe the Commission 's IAs could be improved .
I agree that closer involvement of the European Parliament 's committees in this work could be useful in improving the quality of IAs .
Impact assessments make a significant technical contribution to better law making as they show legislators the possible consequences of their policy options .
They are a key instrument for the European legislative process .
The draft report divides these evaluations into four sections .
The first section takes the view that the impact assessments used by the European institutions should comply with certain principles and should be completely independent and transparent .
The second section discusses the Commission 's impact assessments and highlights scope for improvement .
The third section is devoted to the impact assessments carried out by the European Parliament , which its committees are invited to use more extensively in order to further improve law making .
The fourth and final section calls for an autonomous impact assessment structure within the European Parliament which all of Parliament 's committees should use to create more synergies .
With regard to the above , and in view of the fact that impact assessments can in no way be a substitute for political debate and the legislator 's democratically legitimated decision-making process , but merely permit the technical , substantive preparation of a political decision , I voted in favour of the motion .
in writing . - Impact assessments ( IAs ) are a key instrument for the legislative process , and one of which European legislators should make greater use in future .
The benefits of IAs are obvious .
They show legislators the possible consequences of their policy options and help them in making a decision .
IAs can thus make a significant contribution to better law making .
However , they can in no way be a substitute for political debate and the legislator 's democratically legitimated decision-making process .
They merely permit the technical , substantive preparation of a political decision .
The IAs used by the European institutions should comply with certain principles .
First of all , they should be completely independent and transparent , cover all categories of legislative proposal and employ a clear methodology .
The policy options listed should also include the option of taking no action .
The specific consequences for small and medium-sized enterprises should be taken into account where appropriate and they must always be kept up to date with current developments in the legislative process .
Parliament 's key demand is the creation of an autonomous structure for carrying out impact assessments within Parliament , with a view to further enhancing the quality of its law making and creating synergies with the possibility of a common mechanism for all EU institutions .
in writing . - I welcome this report as I believe impact assessments to be a key instrument in the legislative process .
European legislators should make greater use of these instruments as they can improve the legislative process by showing the possible impacts of their policy decisions .
Legislators must not be afraid to state harsh realities when looking at potential impacts .
Not only should impact assessments state the possibilities and make recommendations to legislators , they must also be prepared to recommend taking no action at all if it is considered to be the most appropriate course .
Legislation coming from Europe has a massive impact on the lives of those living within its borders and we must use every opportunity to ensure this legislation is as fair and balanced as possible .
European legislation is too often complex , difficult to understand and difficult to apply .
This is why impact assessments can make a significant contribution to improving the quality of EU law making , particularly in terms of reducing the timescales and costs of the legislative process .
I support this measure because , by taking the requirements of Member States into greater consideration , it will be possible to evaluate the possible social , environmental , financial and economic consequences of a legal act .
Impact assessments should also be completely independent and transparent and be carried out in the early stages of the legislative process .
The independence of impact assessments ( IAs ) needs to be guaranteed , above all , because of their importance in the decision-making process .
As such , while they do not replace the decision of whether or not to adopt a given solution , they can be decisive in shaping the choice of a given political solution .
It is , therefore , crucial to adopt any measures that might strengthen the guarantees that IAs will be transparent and independent , since that will help maximise this instrument 's role as an aid to the decision-making process , and as a guarantee of the quality and suitability of the EU institutions ' activities .
in writing . - We abstained .
Moreover , we presented an alternative resolution in which we wanted to clarify the role of impact assessment and external experts in the impact assessment process .
Impact assessment can only be an aid for making political decisions and should never replace political decisions within the democratic decision-making process .
Impact assessments are a key instrument for the legislative process .
The benefits are obvious : they make a significant contribution to better law making . However , they can in no way be a substitute for the legislator 's democratically legitimated decision-making process .
The report adopted today underlines Parliament 's belief that the impact assessments used by the European institutions should be completely independent and transparent .
They should cover all categories of legislative proposal and employ a clear methodology .
Parliament also calls for the creation of an autonomous structure for carrying out impact assessments within Parliament , with a view to further enhancing the quality of its law making and creating synergies .
in writing . - I welcome S & D amendments to this report at committee stage representing greater transparency in the legislative process and promoting greater ease of access for SMEs and NGOs through the publication of road maps and an extended consultation period .
Impact assessments are so important to our work in Parliament and should play a greater role , which is why I supported this report .
The impact assessments ( IAs ) carried out in the European Union benefit all Europeans because they contribute to better law making through independent analysis of potential and possible European-level measures .
The rapporteur demonstrates the need to analyse better and more efficiently the economic , social , environmental and public health consequences of the Union 's political choices .
IAs play a key role in a policy 's entire development cycle , and are also necessary for high-quality legislation , and for its proper transposition and application .
I therefore support Parliament 's proposed criteria for consideration when IAs are undertaken .
With regard to this , I should like to stress that these IAs need to be undertaken as early as possible in order to minimise potential negative effects , and to take into account the greatest possible number of institutional , economic and civil stakeholders .
However , they must not just be promoted prior to a piece of legislation ( ex ante ) , but also following its adoption ( ex post ) .
IAs must be independent and undertaken in a transparent and objective way .
They should accompany legislative proposals and follow a common system and common methodology within the European Parliament .
Impact assessments are a valuable legislative instrument , serving as a knowledge-based preparation for political decisions , and thus contributing to better law making .
Transparency , a uniform quality standard and the presentation of the advantages and disadvantages of a sufficient number of political options are the key to reliable impact assessments .
For this reason , I voted in favour of the alternative proposal tabled by the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance .
I am voting for this report , but I believe that a potential optional system could be beneficial for consumers and small and medium-sized enterprises if the Commission puts forward concrete data that indicate a need for further progress in order for the consultation carried out by the Commission to remain transparent .
in writing . - I voted in favour of this resolution on the Green Paper from the Commission on policy options for progress towards a European contract law for consumers and business .
Contract law determines and organises transactions within the Internal Market ; its potential for both hindering and facilitating those transactions is therefore obvious .
Choosing the right way forward in the area of contract law can make a significant contribution to improving the functioning of the Internal Market and opening up its full potential for businesses , in particular SMEs , and consumers .
The potential benefits of European contract law to the Internal Market have been discussed for a good many years .
The EP pronounced itself for the first time on the issue in 1989 and , with this resolution which the EP adopted today , it intends to respond to the recent Commission Green Paper on European contract law , and to set out the Parliament 's priorities in this area .
I support the view of the rapporteur that the option of setting up an optional instrument ( OI ) for European contract law by virtue of a regulation is to be favoured .
It could be complemented by a ' toolbox ' for Commission and legislator which should be implemented by an interinstitutional agreement .
The most obvious obstacles which consumers and small and medium-sized enterprises face with regard to the Single Market are complex contractual relations , unfair terms and conditions in contracts , inadequate and insufficient information , time-consuming procedures , language barriers , different taxation systems , reliability of online traders , demographic composition of the population of individual Member States , concerns regarding confidentiality , complaint handling and intellectual property rights .
European contract law stipulates and regulates Internal Market transactions , and aims to resolve problems relating to the Single Market which have arisen for various reasons , including even differences in contract law legislation .
This makes it vital to provide a coherent European contract law regime in order to achieve the Internal Market 's full potential and help meet our Europe 2020 strategy objectives .
Choosing the right way forward in the area of contract law can make a significant contribution to improving the functioning of the Internal Market and opening up its full potential for businesses , in particular , small and medium-sized enterprises , and consumers .
This is why I voted in favour of this report .
The potential advantages of a European contract law for the Single Market have been debated a great deal over these last few years .
In this regard , I think that we need to support the introduction of an optional instrument by way of regulation so that this parallel system does not work against national systems .
This is the approach chosen by Mrs Wallis ' report and I therefore supported it .
I voted in favour of this report .
In the wake of the global financial crisis , it is very important to realise the full potential of the Internal Market , and thus help meet the strategic goals of the Europe 2020 strategy .
Today , owing to many factors , including a failure to implement existing single market legislation , the Single Market remains fragmented .
Consumers have no confidence in cross-border commerce and companies face huge administrative and legal difficulties if they want to expand their activities in other EU Member States .
Divergence of contract law at national level leads to additional transaction costs , legal uncertainty for companies and a lack of consumer confidence in the Internal Market .
It is partly for these reasons that consumers and enterprises , particularly small and medium-sized enterprises ( SMEs ) with limited resources , avoid cross-border transactions , which prevents the creation of a competitive Internal Market .
I agree with the report 's call to take action and propose methods of harmonising contract law practice at EU level , which would ensure equal and fair conditions for market participants .
Contracts are the fundamental links in relationships between companies and consumers .
The European Union 's Single Market is founded on a variety of contracts regulated by various national-level bodies of law .
These differences in contract law discourage companies , and small and medium-sized enterprises ( SMEs ) in particular , from dedicating themselves to cross-border trade , thus preventing them from accessing the new opportunities and income offered by the Internal Market .
Furthermore , consumers are disadvantaged by limited choice , high prices and lower quality because of weak cross-border competition .
It should be noted , for example , that only 8 % of consumers buy online from other Member States .
This report , which I voted for , advocates the need for an Optional Instrument ( OI ) for European-level contract law in the form of a regulation .
This will enable consumers to enjoy better protection under the umbrella of European contract law , and better security when they make cross-border transfers .
For their part , companies - SMEs in particular - will find it easier and less costly to conclude contracts under the umbrella of a common body of EU contract law .
I voted against Mrs Wallis 's report because the optional instrument envisaged , based on a regulation , basically marks the first step towards harmonising contract law in Member States .
I think that such harmonisation , even to a minimal extent , is inconceivable at the present stage in view of the different way contractual relations are regulated in Member States .
For example , there is the right in rem effect , which does not feature in German law .
Apart from this , harmonisation of contract law would not prevent the discrepancies in other areas influencing transnational trade within the EU .
There is no categorical proof indicating that it is these legal differences which are preventing transactions from being completed with foreign companies and consumers .
Contracts with an international element are currently drawn up based on international private law and , at EU level , on the basis of Regulation ( EC ) No 593 / 2008 .
An additional instrument would introduce unnecessary confusion .
With regard to contractual relations without any international element , I think that every Member State must continue to apply its own national legislation , according to its legal tradition and established practices .
I voted against a report that proposes an optional legal instrument for contract law , effectively laying the foundations for a future body of European civil law , to take precedence over domestic civil laws .
This would mean the end of national legal traditions and the laws that every Member State has laid down on issues as sensitive as civil and contract law .
In any case , although the objective of introducing an optional instrument is to facilitate cross-border trade , taking the needs of consumers and companies into due account , it must be borne in mind that existing European legislation already satisfies the needs of the various actors involved .
The real objective of the report therefore appears to be more ambitious than the creation of a European civil code , with which I cannot agree .
I offer my congratulations on the work carried out by the rapporteur , for which I voted .
This report responds to the needs of consumers and small and medium-sized enterprises , which , unlike other actors representing bigger economic entities , have obvious difficulties accessing the Internal Market because of the enormous costs they have to bear .
As a direct result , both SMEs and consumers tend to carry out transactions within the domestic market , which is often much less competitive , and therefore do not access the cross-border market , in which products are often at least 10 % cheaper than the domestic offer .
The divergence in contract law rights must be remedied , and the creation of an optional instrument for European contract law by means of a regulation , which would flank rather than replace Member States ' national contract law systems , is an optimal solution that would give the parties the freedom to choose the legal instrument most suited to their needs .
in writing . - I voted against the introduction of EU contract law as I do not believe Brussels should be making legislation where national legislation already exists .
By introducing EU contract law and making it optional for businesses to choose domestic or European legislation , it confuses the system and will create legislative overlaps that may result in expensive tribunals .
It is also likely that EU contract law will favour EU social and employment policy , such as the Working Time Directive , which has both proven highly unpopular and caused disruption in the UK for a range of essential industries and services .
It is also highly likely that legislation that , for the time being , carries a discretional opt-in will later be made obligatory by the EU .
The Wallis report sets ambitious objectives in respect of conceivable measures with a view to establishing a European contract law for consumers and businesses .
The issues at stake are crucial since this is about improving how the Internal Market works by including businesses and consumers more .
On the one hand , we need to get rid of the differences in terms of contract law so as to remove the obstacles facing businesses .
On the other hand , we need to ensure a high level of protection for European consumers .
Given the significant impact of contract law on financial transactions and , therefore , on the Internal Market , I welcome all the efforts made by the Commission and the European Parliament towards harmonising their parameters within the EU and adapting them to the Single Market .
I am voting for the report tabled on this issue .
in writing . - Many recent events have shown us the importance of consumer confidence and this is , in part , borne from proper laws to protect consumers in the marketplace .
As such , it is imperative that this issue is addressed on a European level .
The Wallis report is an important step in implementing the Single Market Act , and I am delighted about its adoption .
At a time when differences in national laws restrict cross-border trade substantially , especially for SMEs , introducing a framework for European contract law is a real step forward that we should support .
By regulating both business-to-business and business-to-consumer contractual relations , adopting an optional instrument together with a ' toolbox ' could ensure enhanced protection of consumers in Europe .
The existence of European-level contract law , which has been debated at length within the institutions , could represent a range of benefits for businesses , for consumers and for the smooth running of the Internal Market .
We are therefore not indifferent to the potential linked to the existence of a common body of general standards and principles applicable to contract law , in terms of increasing cross-border transactions , of regulating e-commerce and of improving consumers ' access to products .
However , and as argued by the rapporteur , I believe that an optional instrument for European contract law that exists alongside national legislation , but does not replace , is a suitable choice .
This report , by Mrs Wallis , concerns policy options for progress towards a European contract law for consumers and businesses .
A correct option in terms of European contract law could benefit the Internal Market , small and medium-sized enterprises and consumers .
This issue has been current in the European Parliament since 1989 , which led the Commission to draw up an action plan in 2003 .
The commission tabled a proposal for a directive on consumer rights in 2008 , has drafted two progress reports and has now tabled a series of measures in the form of a Green Paper , to which this report seeks to respond .
Given that the proposals tabled - following ten years of studies - will contribute to solving the detected failings , which are essentially to do with contracts , and that there is a need to promote the Internal Market by removing barriers , I am voting for this report , which introduces an optional instrument ( OI ) that could be complemented with ' a toolbox ' aimed at resolving the problem of contracts .
The report seeks to dress itself up in rhetoric surrounding the defence of consumers and small and medium-sized enterprises ( SMEs ) .
Its context , however , includes dangers for both : consumers & SMEs .
The rapporteur 's vision is markedly neoliberal , as is clear from the stress given to breaking down ' barriers faced by those who wish to enter into cross-border transactions in the Internal Market and considers that , along with other measures , the European contract law project could be useful for realising the full potential of the Internal Market ' .
The liberalisations and deepening of the Internal Market that the EU has been carrying out demonstrate that it is big business that benefits above all .
The present dynamics suggest that proposals for the harmonisation of contracts - still optional at this stage - will be implemented with these same interests at the forefront .
These reservations are borne out by statements in the report , such as that the optional instrument ' must offer a very high level of consumer protection , in order to compensate consumers for the protection that they would normally enjoy under their national law ' .
It also stresses that the instrument proposed at EU-level , which is the same for all contracts in the European Union , is also set out in very general terms .
This is a clearly neoliberal report that is concerned with the interests of businesses - larger businesses in particular - because in a totally liberalised Internal Market , it is those with power who gain the most , despite the propaganda about defending small and medium-sized enterprises and consumers .
However , all this is an attempt to dress up the product in order to hide its real dangers from the electorate .
Therefore , we are not voting in favour of the report .
It also advocates an EU-level instrument , albeit optional , that is the same for all contracts in the European Union , which is also set out in very general terms .
Here are some statements made in the report :
' Supports action to address the range of barriers faced by those who wish to enter into cross-border transactions in the Internal Market and considers that , along with other measures , the European contract law project could be useful for realising the full potential of the Internal Market ' ;
' Believes that both business-to-business and business-to-consumer contracts should be covered ; emphasises that the [ optional instrument ] must offer a very high level of consumer protection , in order to compensate consumers for the protection that they would normally enjoy under their national law ; wishes for further explanation on how this could be achieved ' .
Contract law determines and organises transactions in the Single Market .
By selecting the right way forwards in the area of contract law , it is possible to contribute in a significant way to the better functioning of the Single Market and to making its full potential available to businesses ( especially small and medium-sized ones ) and consumers .
Bearing in mind the fact that every initiative in the area of contract law will have to respond clearly to the actual needs and problems of businesses and consumers , I take the view that any justification in this area will have to be based on practical evidence relating to the current situation in contract law and any difficulties encountered by businesses and consumers , particularly in cross-border transactions .
The broad and balanced involvement of the participants is of fundamental importance .
It will be particularly decisive during the legislative process , and all available resources will be required in order to ensure inclusivity and transparency .
We need diverse impact assessment , drawing on a broad range of policy options and focusing on the practical issues that are important for the operation of an optional instrument .
What Mrs Wallis is proposing is nothing short of creating a 28th legal system , in addition to national laws , which it intends to replace in practice ; the words legislative ' harmonisation ' and ' standardisation ' are now feared in the European political context .
This new European law is supposed to remove barriers to cross-border trade , arising from the differences between national legal systems .
The problem is that nothing in Mrs Wallis ' report proves the objective existence of such barriers , and therefore of a problem that needs to be solved .
Consequently , nothing , except the will to initiate a new method of imposing supranational legislation , justifies such a position .
In addition , it would run the real risk of being used to bypass protective national provisions , especially in relation to consumer rights .
That is why I voted against this report .
I abstained from voting on this report because , according to the rapporteur , complexity in contractual relations is one of the most evident impediments that consumers and small and medium-sized enterprises ( SMEs ) face in the Single Market .
Hence , the proposal to establish a common European contract law , which would benefit consumers and help ensure increased cross-border trade within the Internal Market .
According to the rapporteur , all parties , be it in business-to-business ( B2B ) or business-to-consumer ( B2C ) transactions , should be free to choose or not to choose the optional instrument ( OI ) as an alternative to national or international law ( opt-in ) .
Further attention is required to ensure that the OI offers protection to consumers and small businesses given their position as the weaker commercial partner and that any confusion is avoided when making a choice of law .
I abstained from voting because the EU recently adopted the Rome I Regulation , which regulates this area and defends consumer rights well , whereas this proposal is purely based on the UK situation and would only cause turbulence and increased bureaucracy .
I do not support the proposal to create an entirely new legal instrument in the form of a European contract law .
The creation of this instrument is the first step towards the creation of a pan-European civil code , which would gradually replace the contract law of the individual Member States .
The proposed concept may talk about the voluntary application of this instrument , but nevertheless it is clear from many indications that volunteering is only a kind of precursor to a subsequent mandatory application in cross-border contractual relationships .
If this instrument is created , we will be introducing a completely new type of supranational law , which will be on the boundary between EU law and international private and commercial law , not to mention the fact that the mandate for creating a European contract law for consumers and businesses does not have sufficient support in primary EU law .
We should therefore stick to a standard instrument , for which there is sufficient legal support in primary law in the form of harmonisation .
When it comes to implementing the common market , we should not make do with removing the positive barriers between the Member States of the Union .
To enjoy the fruits of an effective integrated market , it is also necessary to tackle the indirect causes that stifle the cross-border aspirations of our fellow citizens .
On top of a number of administrative difficulties , European entrepreneurs are too often faced with very diverse contractual regulations in force in the Member States .
These obstacles are particularly difficult to overcome for SMEs , which nevertheless are the most effective tool for boosting growth .
As a result , the European Commission has published a Green Paper on the subject and launched a broad public consultation .
I voted for Parliament 's present resolution for it takes a common sense approach by proposing an instrument that is concurrent with national legislation and would facilitate cross-border trade .
This ' European contract ' would be optional , would come with a ' toolbox ' to clarify how it should be used and it would encourage greater protection of consumers .
in writing . - I voted against this report .
Divergences in European contract law end up discouraging businesses from engaging in cross-border trade and keep them from benefiting from opportunities and gains which the Internal Market offers .
Consequently , consumers are also disadvantaged by limited product choice , higher prices and lower quality due to weak cross-border competition .
In this regard , we wish to introduce some innovations , including business-to-business and business-to-consumer contracts regulated by an optional instrument that would enlarge the parties ' choice , and the introduction of a monitoring and review mechanism in order to ensure that the optional instrument keeps up with market needs and legal and economic developments .
Simplicity and readiness for use should be a key objective .
Provisions on sale of goods merit priority , as do service contracts .
Finally , the introduction of a trust mark system would ensure additional consumer protection .
Choosing the right way forward in the area of contract law can make a significant contribution to improving the functioning of the Internal Market and opening up its full potential for businesses , in particular , small and medium-sized enterprises , and consumers .
Although I believe that there is still a lot to be done in terms of small and medium-sized enterprises ( SMEs ) and of consumer rights , this report is a first step in facilitating cross-border trade between SMEs .
in writing . - Labour Euro MPs want to see improvements in the Single Market and to facilitate cross-border transactions for consumers and small businesses .
However , consumer and business groups have come together on this issue to reject Mrs Wallis ' proposal of an optional instrument of contract law .
They maintain that rules of national contract law are not a factor in influencing consumer attitudes to buying from another Member State ; in fact , there are other genuine barriers to cross-border trade , such as administrative and cultural differences and a lack of effective means of redress for consumers .
Mrs Wallis has failed to provide compelling evidence of the need for an optional instrument .
Indeed , such a proposal could even undermine existing consumer rights .
We need to take time and evaluate the seven options in the Green Paper and make an evidence-based decision on the basis of clear impact assessments .
Similarly , we cannot accept the ECR toolbox-based approach without sufficient evidence and impact assessment to demonstrate that this is the best way to protect consumers and help businesses .
We owe it to our consumers and businesses to make the right decision for them and ensure that any change of law affecting their rights is properly thought through .
Contract law determines and organises transactions within the Internal Market , so its potential for both hindering and facilitating those transactions is therefore obvious .
Choosing the right way forward in the area of contract law could make a significant contribution to improving the functioning of the Internal Market , and to opening up its full potential for businesses , in particular , small and medium-sized enterprises , and consumers .
It merits attention that the Parliament has , in its various resolutions on this matter , repeatedly acknowledged the benefits an improved contract law framework has on the Internal Market , has further welcomed the idea of a common frame of reference , and has insisted on close involvement of itself and the stakeholders concerned .
in writing . - On 1 July 2010 , the Commission presented a Green Paper on policy options for progress towards a European contract law for consumers and businesses .
The policy options include soft law options , an opt-in regime called the 28th system , the unlikely approximation of substantive national law ( because of resistance by the Council and the impossibility of overnight merging of national legal traditions ) and the option of creating a fully fledged European civil code .
I totally support the report , especially in the context of human rights violations in the Latvian Republic .
I voted in favour .
European contract law should ensure a more smoothly-running Internal Market and this report draws particular attention to the potential benefits for SMEs and consumers .
The related efforts to find a common legal framework here have been ongoing since 1989 .
In 2008 , the EU Commission circulated a proposal for a directive on consumer rights .
It is of far greater importance for Europe 's consumers that consumer protection should be improved at EU level .
This should not take the form of restrictive actions , such as those once familiar when bank accounts were overdrawn , but instead should combat shady business practices , fraud , etc .
It is open to question whether European contract law will improve market access for small enterprises because , according to analyses , it is mainly medium to large-sized retail businesses that are involved in cross-border trade , something that is due to the bureaucratic red tape entailed , as well as the costs .
The existing problems with cross-border online shopping will persist for some time to come .
Furthermore , it has not been established beyond all doubt that standardisation is really necessary .
When in doubt , I back the principle of subsidiarity , which is why I am voting against the Wallis report .
A Europe that belongs to its citizens can only work as a Europe of homelands , subsidiarity and national sovereignty .
Until now , it has seemed as if European contract law was something unnecessary and the general principle applies that if a provision is not necessary , then it should be omitted .
I also believe that this report is a diversionary tactic , designed to draw attention away from the fact that something far more important , namely , EU-wide consumer protection , is still in need of improvement .
It is for that reason that I am voting against this report .
A unified contract law regime must be applied in the European Union .
Above all , this would remove obstacles often faced by consumers and small and medium-sized enterprises ( SMEs ) in the Single Market relating to the complexity of contractual relations .
Furthermore , a common European contract law would ensure increased cross-border trade in the Internal Market .
The Rome I Regulation currently in force is an adequate regulatory instrument , which provides for a high level of protection of the weaker contractual party .
The provisions of this regulation protect consumers when seeking redress from businesses in other Member States with whom they have entered into a contract .
Given that a well-functioning legal regulation mechanism is already in force in this area in the European Union , I do not endorse this resolution on policy options for progress towards a European contract law for consumers and businesses , which proposes adopting a new regulation , which would set up a new optional instrument , to be applied in business-to-business and business-to-consumer transactions .
Attention should be drawn to the fact that the new regulation would result in much confusion and a lack of clarity in this area .
Furthermore , its implementation would require additional funding and increased bureaucracy .
Divergences in contract law in the Member States create structural problems that discourage businesses and consumers .
Mrs Wallis 's motion for a resolution favours the creation of an optional instrument for European contract law for consumers and businesses by virtue of a general regulation , and this is why I voted in favour of the text .
Furthermore , the instrument would not replace Member States ' contract laws , but would merely help ensure a better choice of contract model between the parties , thanks to examples based on general principles , definitions and model regulations for both commercial and consumer contracts , without going against the principles of subsidiarity and proportionality .
I voted in favour of the report on the creation of a European law of contract for consumers and businesses which will help to facilitate cross-border transactions and strengthen the Internal Market , especially for small and medium-sized enterprises ( SMEs ) and consumers .
The differences in contract law between the various Member States are slowing down SMEs wishing to carry out cross-border transactions .
We need to adopt a flexible procedure that will provide security to small and medium-sized enterprises and consumers and help to protect the parties ' rights .
That is why creating an optional instrument that will operate as a standard for SMEs alongside national rules , by broadening the parties ' options , is the right strategy .
I voted for this report on policy options for progress towards a European contract law for consumers and businesses .
In fact , contract law determines and organises transactions within the Internal Market , so its potential for both hindering and facilitating those transactions is therefore obvious .
Choosing the right way forward in the area of contract law could make a significant contribution to improving the functioning of the Internal Market , and to opening up its full potential for businesses , in particular , small and medium-sized enterprises ( SMEs ) , and consumers .
I would stress the need for broad and balanced stakeholder involvement .
The present Commission working method involving an expert and a stakeholder group already ensures the participation of stakeholders .
However , as the process has not yet left the consultation phase , it is important to ensure that the legislative procedure itself does not start yet .
Stakeholder involvement will be particularly essential during that legislative procedure , the inclusivity and transparency of which will have to be ensured by all available means .
in writing . - The EU cannot claim to be a single market if obstacles to trade still exist .
The immense costs incurred in cross-border trading represent a serious barrier .
Between legal fees , translation fees and implementation fees , it can cost small businesses up to EUR 15 000 to enter the e-commerce market of just one Member State .
According to a Flash Eurobarometer survey in 2008 , this barrier is seen as a major concern by up to 60 % of retailers .
If laws regulating consumer transactions were harmonised throughout the EU , small and medium businesses ( SMEs ) and consumers in all Member States would benefit .
The removal of these barriers would encourage more SMEs to exploit the potential of e-commerce .
I believe SMEs are crucial for economic recovery in many Member States .
Ireland 's path to recovery is being export-led ; thus the removal of barriers entering in the EU market is crucial .
The findings and recommendations of this report also show the potential for great benefits for consumers .
If cross-border trade increases , consumers will be offered a wider choice of products and more competitive prices .
One of the most burning issues in EU law involves the harmonisation of contract law .
On the one hand , it seems that the need for greater internal consistency is being felt , in order that companies can benefit from the common market 's potential without fearing that there might be solutions in a given foreign legal system that they had not anticipated and for which they had not prepared , which has been a real problem .
On the other , however , there is a certain resistance amongst Member States to sacrificing their legal solutions , which is hardly surprising given that these have developed over centuries and that they are widely known by their respective populations .
As such , in its Green Paper of 1 July 2010 , the Commission tabled several solutions for regulatory models ranging from mere soft law to a European civil code .
Of the various hypotheses , the European Parliament is in favour of the creation of an optional instrument in the form of a regulation , that governs cross-border transactions first of all , and that can potentially also be used for internal contracts , albeit optionally .
This seems like a reasonable solution to me , so I voted in favour .
in writing . - In favour .
The report intends to respond to the recent Commission Green Paper on European contract law and to set out the Parliament 's priorities in this area .
The potential benefits of European contract law for the Internal Market have been discussed in the interinstitutional framework and with the broad public for a many years , and Parliament pronounced for the first time on the issue in 1989 .
The Commission broadened the debate by issuing its communication of 2001 , focusing on possible problems which divergences in contract law might raise within the Internal Market and on possible options for action .
Within the light of the responses to this consultation , the Commission issued an action plan in 2003 , proposing , inter alia , the elaboration of a common frame of reference and containing definitions , common principles and model rules , with a view to improving the quality and coherence of European contract law .
In a further communication , in 2004 , the Commission set out the follow-up to that action plan and also proposed to review the Union acquis in this area .
In 2008 , it submitted a proposal for a directive on consumer rights .
I consider that we need to improve the operation of the Internal Market and explore every avenue that will benefit businesses , especially SMEs , and consumers .
Within this framework , Mrs Wallis 's report is a move in the right direction : it refers to the adverse impact which differences in contract law within the Internal Market are having both on consumers and on businesses , and to the benefits to the Internal Market of an improved contract law framework .
I consider that , in order to achieve this , we need to create a user-friendly , flexible , clear legislative act which , where feasible , is binding on the Member States and which will facilitate and provide security of law to contracting parties , without interfering in national laws and without affecting the financially weaker .
in writing . - I am disappointed that this report has passed through Parliament .
I was unable to support it because , as a response to a Commission Green Paper , it ruled out far too many options for the future of an EU contract law and neglected a duty to request an impact assessment on the full costs and implications of each of the Commission 's options .
As yet , there is no European contract law , even though the option of such a law has been debated within European institutions for over 20 years .
The Commission now intends to propose , by way of regulation , the introduction of an optional instrument , commonly referred to as the ' 28th law ' , which could govern cross-border contracts .
Whilst the intention to simplify contract law and expand cross-border trade is commendable , I nonetheless have doubts about the relevance of this approach : indeed there is a high risk that national rules , which provide maximum protection for consumers , will be bypassed .
For this reason , I have decided to abstain on this own-initiative report , pending the Commission 's proposal for a regulation on this matter .
One consequence of the implementation of the Internal Market is an increase in the number of potential consumers in the European Union .
To date , however , there has been no European-level harmonisation of the rules on contracts for consumers and businesses .
This results in the constant presence of obstacles to the Internal Market 's full implementation because of differences in the law at national level , and because of the fragmentation of consumer law itself .
The report 's proposal is to analyse the viability of an optional instrument in this area , formalised with a regulation and complemented with a ' toolbox ' , which would make it possible to ensure legal certainty and security .
Such an instrument would make the Single Market run more smoothly , would benefit businesses and consumers , and would also be advantageous to the legal systems of the Member States themselves .
For the above reasons , I voted for this report and I support a European Commission proposal on this matter , which should , in future , involve the European Parliament itself , as well as economic and civil-society stakeholders .
The fact that we have 27 legal regimes is one of the most formidable barriers encountered by entrepreneurs and consumers in the EU who wish to take advantage of the benefits of the Internal Market .
The work in progress on the establishment of an alternative EU contract law fills me with optimism , particularly in the context of the EU 's Digital Agenda and e-commerce 's potential for the Single Market .
The rapporteur favours an optional instrument .
Consumer protection organisations are already sceptical about the EU 's approach to this topic .
On the one hand , they question the causal link with the basis for future contract law , while also , more importantly , fearing a further complication of the legal situation .
At present , a ' toolbox ' is the preferred option because this would meet current needs and special provisions in relation to the most common types of contract would be a genuine aid for consumers .
However , all options should be kept open and examined at present .
I voted in favour of the text presented by Mrs Wallis .
The problems deriving from divergences in Member States ' contract laws often discourage businesses , in particular , small and medium-sized enterprises , from engaging in cross-border trade and keep them from benefiting from opportunities and gains which the Internal Market offers .
The text voted on today aims to create an optional instrument for European contract law by means of a regulation .
This optional instrument would stand alongside Member States ' contract laws as an alternative option which the contractual parties would be free to choose .
Sixty percent of Internet transactions within the European Union fail , mainly due to the fact that the parties involved in such transactions are afraid of the unfamiliar legal systems of other Member States .
In this situation , many EU citizens are deprived of the opportunity to take advantage of the online market .
In this instance , the differences that exist between the legal systems of the Member States constitute a barrier to the proper functioning of the EU market .
I therefore also believe that an optional instrument , or a ' 28th legal regime ' , stands a good chance of helping to unlock the potential of the European market in the field of e-commerce , and of helping to expand the market for entrepreneurs while guaranteeing equal access to goods and services for consumers .
I am voting for this report because it includes a range of concerns highlighted by the Group of the Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats in the European Parliament ( S & D ) , by acknowledging the limitations of gross domestic product ( GDP ) and the need to include additional indicators to measure economic and social progress in the medium and long terms .
I would also draw attention to the establishment of clear and measurable indicators that take into account climate change , biodiversity , efficient resource utilisation and social inclusion , which could help lead to a more inclusive society based on knowledge , and to lower carbon emissions .
I voted in favour of this resolution on GDP and beyond - Measuring progress in a changing world .
GDP is an indicator of economic market activity that has become a standard benchmark used by policy makers throughout the world .
It is necessary to emphasise that GDP is a measure of production and does not reflect environmental sustainability , resource efficiency , social inclusion or social progress in general .
Furthermore , it can be misleading in the sense that remedial measures following certain incidents such as accidents and natural disasters are treated as a benefit instead of a cost .
I therefore welcome the provision set out in the resolution that we need to develop additional indicators for measuring medium and long-term economic and social progress , and to establish clear and measurable indicators that provide information on climate change , biodiversity , resource efficiency and social inclusion .
We also need to develop indicators that reflect the household level more accurately : income , consumption and wealth .
It is therefore important to develop a tool to complement GDP .
It should be developed so that it can be applied in a practical way , using clearly defined indicators and relying on high-quality data .
Gross domestic product is the best known measure of macro-economic activity .
It was developed in the 1930s and is used by political decision makers in discussions as an indicator of growth in their countries .
In the light of the ever closer degree of interdependence between economic , social and environmental issues , GDP today suffers from many shortcomings , as it does not record important social factors such as well-being , social inclusion , climate change or resource efficiency .
Therefore , in a context in which the correlation between a range of non-market activities and GDP is no longer automatic , there is a need to develop additional clear and measurable medium- and long-term indicators that ensure comparability between countries and regions and that can be used for projecting future developments and designing policies .
I would like to support the adoption of a clearly defined measuring system which will go beyond GDP , in the sense of complementing GDP in the context of making and assessing decisions .
GDP is an indicator of economic market activity which has become a benchmark used by policy makers .
The need to improve data and indicators to complement GDP as part of assessing society 's overall development is increasingly recognised by all international institutions .
This report emphasises the need to measure the quality of life in societies .
Achieving and sustaining quality of life involves important factors such as health , education , culture , employment , housing and environmental conditions .
I support the establishment of a solid legal framework for European environmental economic accounts and encourage the need to compile reliable , harmonised statistics .
in writing . - I voted in favour of this report because it stresses the importance of agreeing on a systemic approach to setting up a coherent ' Beyond GDP system ' to contribute to improved policy analysis .
GDP is an indicator of economic activity that has become a standard benchmark used by policy makers throughout the world .
But GDP is only a measure of production .
It does not measure environmental sustainability , resource efficiency , social inclusion and social progress in general .
Therefore , it can be misleading .
We need to measure quality of life in societies ; we need to consider that achieving and sustaining quality of life involves important , consensual factors such as health , education , culture , employment , housing , environmental conditions , etc .
For these reasons , this report deserves to be given the highest consideration .
It takes the view that indicators which measure such factors should be assigned a greater role .
As the Stieglitz Committee demonstrated in France in 2008-2009 , we need to think of new development indicators to add to GDP .
Hitherto a key reference , despite leading to possible errors of appreciation ( for instance , the rebuilding that follows natural disasters is recorded as economic progress ) , GDP on its own will no longer do .
I voted for Mrs Rosbach 's report since it calls on the Commission to continue its research in this area by challenging the reluctance of the Conservatives who believe that only GDP is reliable and the illusions of a section of the left who would like us to measure precisely ... happiness !
The Commission 's work will have to be closely monitored because it could lead to an important development : a new , more appropriate method of calculating how European funding is allocated to the regions ( regional policy ) .
Until now , funding has been granted on the basis of GDP per person in the regions concerned .
Gross domestic product ( GDP ) is an indicator of economic market activity that has become a standard benchmark used by policy makers throughout the world and is best known as a measure of macro-economic activity .
GDP does not reflect current environmental sustainability , resource efficiency , social inclusion or social progress in general .
I agree with the Commission 's proposal to develop additional indicators for measuring medium and long-term economic and social progress , and to establish clear and measurable indicators that provide information on climate change , biodiversity , resource efficiency and social inclusion .
For many years , GDP has been the main index for economic assessment , but its shortcomings are increasingly apparent when it comes to assessing social or environmental progress .
Hence , the importance of this resolution which insists on the need for the European Union to adopt other indicators in addition to GDP in order to take better account of , among other things , climate change , biodiversity or even social integration , these being major political challenges that are close to my heart .
I voted for this report because defining and implementing a new range of indicators is an important challenge for measuring the quality of life of European citizens more accurately , and improving the political answers that cannot be drawn up solely on the basis of GDP .
I think that this initiative is the first encouraging step towards greater account being taken of social and environmental issues in European public policies .
However , to be fully useful and effective , this will have to be followed by the genuine introduction of a new range of indicators as well as their effective and coherent political use , so that they are not turned into gimmicks but , well and truly , into genuine tools that help with decision making .
Gross domestic product is the best known measure of macro-economic activity .
It was developed in the 1930s and has come to take on the role of a comprehensive indicator for overall societal development and progress in general .
A series of international initiatives highlighted broad support by policy makers and experts from the fields of economics , environmental protection and civil society for the development of indicators to complement GDP , providing more comprehensive information to support policy making .
GDP does not , in fact , provide a reliable basis for policy debate .
In particular , it does not measure environmental sustainability or social integration .
In the political and scientific discussion that has been going on for years , I believe the problem is more about how this approach can be achieved using clearly defined and quantifiable indicators .
At European and Member State level , there have been many initiatives to fill the gaps in these areas .
Unfortunately , there are only partial signs of coherent action .
Therefore , while I acknowledge the importance of adopting a clearly defined system for measuring GDP , I call on the Commission to submit , in the first instance , a tiered strategy that shows how the new ' Beyond GDP ' approach can be used in day-to-day political work .
I welcome the Rosbach report because it clearly defines GDP as an indicator of the economic activity of the market and production in the relevant country , but which does not measure environmental sustainability , resource efficiency , social inclusion and social progress .
A high GDP , even when calculated per capita , can be misleading because GDP is not distributed equally among the population , which is why it is not a good indicator of quality of life in a society .
To enable us to cope with current and future problems , new indicators need to be devised which will complement and further refine GDP .
This will allow us not only to define the quality of life more accurately , but these indicators will also provide a more reliable knowledge base , which will contribute to a better analysis of the policies in different areas .
The report by Mrs Rosbach is a critical analysis of the Commission 's communication ' GDP and beyond - Measuring progress in a changing world ' .
While the Commission 's aim - to adopt a measuring system that would go beyond gross domestic product to provide a more comprehensive picture of a country 's progress and development , including , for example , environmental sustainability and social inclusion - is important and non-controversial , the rapporteur questions the strategy that the Commission is proposing to achieve it .
The initiatives suggested are not , in fact , part of a tiered , pragmatic strategy indicating how the new ' Beyond GDP ' approach should be used .
I share this view , and therefore I voted in favour of Mrs Rosbach 's report .
I voted for this report because I believe that it is only by using proper instruments that we can have a realistic view of the situation , and therefore do our best to change it if necessary .
Gross domestic product , or GDP , is an instrument designed to indicate the aggregated added value of all money-based economic activities .
It is easy to see how a wealth indicator based on dated parameters is anachronistic now , in 2011 .
I believe we should introduce new indicators for measuring GDP , such as environmental sustainability and social inclusion , so that all the information making up GDP provides a truer picture of the country or region to which it refers .
Adapting to the times means taking into consideration all the important variables , without falling into the trap of creating an excessively artificial system , which would be difficult to apply .
I believe that , with clearly defined indicators , the work can be carried out in the best possible way .
Although gross domestic product ( GDP ) is a measurement of production that is useful for economic market activity , it does not take into account the sustainability of the development demonstrated , or environmental and social aspects , etc .
I therefore welcome the ' GDP and beyond - Measuring progress in a changing world ' initiative , which aims to encourage and raise awareness of the use of other complementary GDP indicators when evaluating and discussing politics .
I believe this system of measurement based on corroborating various study parameters will lead to political decisions more suited to the needs of society and the economy in general .
in writing . - While academics will argue over the best possible way to measure progress , we as European legislatures must be confident in the method we pick and ensure that it stands up to argument both today and in the future .
Economic literature has been asking for years whether it is necessary to continue using the rate of growth of GDP as an indicator of the progress made by a geographic area over a given period of time .
I believe that there is currently no other indicator that is as concise or complete .
We cannot present our citizens , who are caught up in their own everyday problems , with a clinical file describing the state of the economy .
At the same time , we cannot insist exclusively on strictly economic indicators , which are not always able to pick up on social phenomena .
I therefore agree with the report 's general objective .
We should join forces with the international academic community and try to move beyond GDP .
There are plenty of examples all over the world , from the UN Human Development Index to Bhutan 's Gross National Happiness index .
It is necessary to identify the priority objectives and measure their achievement strictly , accurately and in a way that cannot be distorted by vested interests .
We need to remember that it does not matter how many watches we have , but how we spend our time .
I voted for this report because I think that indicators need to be found to complement GDP and help us measure factors such as climate change , biodiversity or resource efficiency .
As Joseph Stiglitz expressed it so well , GDP is not only an instrument which is inadequate for reflecting citizens ' welfare , but it is also restricted to measuring economic market activity .
I hope that the European executive will come up with specific proposals for additional , more extensive and sustainable indicators so as to remedy the current shortcomings .
Indicators are a concise way of interpreting a given phenomenon .
Simple phenomena can be interpreted using simple indicators , while complex phenomena require complex indicators .
Gross domestic product is a simple indicator , while development is a complex phenomenon .
Indeed , the economic development of an area has various dimensions that are not included in GDP , which takes a snapshot of a given moment .
Other elements of interpretation are totally neglected , such as investment in intangible infrastructure , including know-how ( people , processes and products , to mention just a few examples ) , and investment in tangible infrastructure , including communication and transport networks ( ICT networks and road and rail networks , for example ) .
In addition , GDP is not even suitable for identifying regions assisted by EU regional cohesion policy .
For these reasons , the European Commission 's efforts to go beyond GDP and create a series of data and indicators that will improve its ability to interpret phenomena and help to better define policies and financial allocations should be commended .
The report that we have adopted seems to me to be moving in this direction .
in writing . - GDP ( gross domestic product ) is the aggregated added value of all money-based economic activities .
It is the most widely known and used measure of macro-economic activity .
Indeed , GDP has become the primary indicator for overall societal development and progress in general .
There is growing international recognition of the inadequacy of GDP as an indicator of social progress , social inclusion , environmental sustainability and resource efficiency .
I support this report which calls for the development of clear and measurable indicators that take account of climate change , biodiversity , resource efficiency and social inclusion .
It further underlines the need to measure quality of life in societies , considering that achieving and sustaining quality of life involves important , consensual factors such as health , education , culture , employment , housing , and environmental conditions .
It also fully supports the establishment of a solid legal framework for the European Environmental Economic Accounts as a positive step in the ' GDP and beyond ' process , and , indeed , welcomes the Commission initiative to present an index for environmental pressure , to be submitted alongside GDP .
Despite all the more or less sentimental constructions that we might make , the truth is that it is by analysing gross domestic product ( GDP ) that we can achieve a reliable image of societies ' state of development and progress .
That is why GDP is - and should continue to be - the main economic indicator to be taken into account .
However , it should be complemented , wherever appropriate , with other indicators , which should be studied and introduced gradually .
In 2007 , the European Parliament , alongside the Commission , the Club of Rome , the World Wildlife Fund ( WWF ) and the Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development ( OECD ) , organised a conference on the theme of ' Beyond GDP ' , at which those involved advocated the need to develop other indicators complementary to gross domestic product ( GDP ) .
This report , by Mrs Rosbach , is based on a communication tabled by the Commission on 28 September 2009 called ' GDP and beyond - Measuring progress in a changing world ' , and it reflects this need to provide politicians and researchers with data that is more comprehensive .
Over recent decades , gross domestic product ( GDP ) has been the most-used unit of macro-economic measurement , and has started to be used most recently as an indicator of social development .
A number of sociologists have been arguing , most recently , that this is not the best indicator as it does not consider aspects such as sustainability or social integration .
Since I agree with the rapporteur 's position , I voted for her report , but I believe that the proposal can , and must , be improved by tabling a strategy that is more comprehensive and gradual .
The neoliberal guidelines and policies implemented by the EU have endangered social progress and inflicted severe blows on Europe 's peoples .
The exacerbation of social inequalities in the countries of the EU , which are currently reaching worrying levels , is a telling example of this .
This is something we should keep in mind when we analyse development and progress indicators , as this report does .
Gross domestic product ( GDP ) is frequently used as a basis for assessing these two factors - development and progress - and is a statistical indicator with natural shortcomings .
By taking into account only economic activity - wealth creation - and being useful , therefore , in determining economic growth , it does not cover parameters as important as wealth distribution , social inequalities , the quality of goods and services , non-commercial transactions or even outcomes not recorded by the market , which are essential to the assessment of development and progress .
In many situations , GDP can increase while the majority of a country 's citizens become poorer , because GDP does not take into consideration the level of inequality in a society .
For all these reasons , it becomes necessary to take into account any other indicators that might overcome these shortcomings so as to make social progress measures as complete , credible and close to reality as possible .
There are increasingly large economic divergences and social inequalities caused by the EU 's neoliberal guidelines and policies , and by the increasingly unfair sharing and distribution of national income , both at EU level and at national level .
It is therefore increasingly controversial to use gross domestic product ( GDP ) as a basis for working with social development and progress , and a statistical indicator for measuring them .
It is a statistical indicator with many shortcomings , since it takes into account only economic activity , leaving aside other important factors like wealth distribution , social inequalities , the quality of goods and services , non-commercial transactions or even outcomes not recorded by the market .
This means that , in many situations , GDP can increase while the majority of a country 's citizens become poorer , because GDP does not take into consideration the level of inequality in a society .
As such , we are able to consider it acceptable to take into account other indicators that might complement these shortcomings so as to make social progress measures as complete , credible and close to reality as possible .
GDP has become an indicator of social development and progress generally .
It is not , however , a measure of environmental sustainability or social inclusion .
With regard to the need to improve this data and the indicators , the Commission has released a communication entitled ' GDP and beyond : Measuring progress in a changing world ' .
In this communication , it proposes , for example , creating comprehensive indicators which would provide a more reliable knowledge base .
I believe it is necessary to create an instrument that can supplement GDP , taking account of the fact that it must have a practical application , use clearly defined indicators and rely on high-quality data .
The Commission 's objective of going beyond gross domestic product and finding another measuring system ( which would still incorporate GDP ) is rightly criticised in the parliamentary report , which emphasises the fact that if the Commission has not yet clearly defined the changeover or accurate indicators , the debate will have to be postponed .
I therefore voted in favour of the motion .
Gross domestic product is the best known measure of macro-economic activity and is used in political analysis and discussions worldwide to indicate social development .
Unfortunately , despite being widely used , there is a growing awareness that the economic and social fabric in Europe has profoundly changed .
Nowadays , in addition to information about income and wealth , other indicators of an environmental nature influence the quality of life in a country and can no longer be ignored .
This is why I support the report by Mrs Rosbach , which draws up new indicators taking account of major strands of environmental policy such as energy use , biodiversity , water use and waste generation .
The challenge lies in integrating existing indices with other elements that are politically relevant and empirically measurable , and which provide reliable statistics on the future development of countries .
In this sense , I believe that by eliminating subjective factors such as personal happiness , which cannot be considered to be indicators , the new text has reached a good compromise .
Finally , I hope that both Eurostat and the Eurobarometer will play a major role in this innovative process . Thank you for your attention .
I welcomed the report because GDP is an indicator of economic market activity that has become a standard benchmark used by policy makers throughout the world .
However , GDP is a measure of production and does not reflect environmental sustainability , resource efficiency , social inclusion or social progress in general .
Furthermore , it can be misleading in the sense that remedial measures following certain incidents such as accidents and natural disasters are treated as a benefit instead of a cost .
We need to develop additional indicators for measuring medium and long-term economic and social progress .
I feel that we need to establish clear and measurable indicators that provide information on climate change , biodiversity , resource efficiency and social inclusion , as well as indicators that reflect the household level more accurately : income , consumption and wealth .
There is also a need to measure quality of life in societies , because in order to ensure and sustain quality of life , it is necessary to take into account important , consensual factors such as health , education , culture , employment , housing , environmental conditions , etc .
Indicators which measure such factors should be assigned a greater role .
The further development of qualitative and quantitative metrics should be based on the European Quality of Life Survey ( EQLS ) indicators , covering the core areas of quality of life .
I share the rapporteur 's analysis in the report voted on today .
Gross domestic product no longer seems able to meet growing economic and political requirements .
I think it is necessary to find a complementary system which could contribute to improved policy analysis and debate through the use of clear supplementary indicators for measuring medium- and long-term economic and social progress .
This will certainly not be an easy task , given the delicate nature of the matter and the potential impacts of decisions taken in this context .
The challenge we are preparing to embrace therefore lies in finding reliable indicators that are theoretically consistent , politically relevant and empirically measurable .
GDP is the most effective instrument for measuring macro-economic activity , while also serving as an indirect indicator of social development and progress .
However , it cannot provide information about all the areas which are the subject of political debates , such as the environment and social inclusion .
This indicator underpins many of the European Union 's policy decisions and instruments .
I think that we need to step up our efforts to provide indicators which will meet the needs of all citizens .
They specifically need to measure in a sustainable manner the progress made in achieving economic , social and environmental objectives .
In conclusion , future European policies need to be based on complete , up-to-date data , covering all the vital aspects .
in writing . - I welcome this report which stresses that GDP is an indicator of economic market activity that has become a standard benchmark used by policy makers throughout the world ; emphasises that GDP is a measure of production and does not measure environmental sustainability , resource efficiency , social inclusion and social progress in general ; underlines furthermore that it can be misleading in the sense that remedial measures following certain incidents such as accidents and natural disasters are treated as a benefit instead of a cost ; notes that besides measuring economic development and productivity , there are other indicators that influence and explain the living standards in a country and that have not been quantified until now , although relevant indicators exist ; stresses the need to develop additional indicators for measuring the full impact of economic activity .
Nowadays , gross domestic product is no longer a sufficient , appropriate indicator for measuring progress , and it is therefore necessary to develop more comprehensive indicators that would provide a more reliable knowledge base in an ever changing world .
There is often a lack of clearly defined information , data and indicators .
At European and Member State level , there have been many initiatives to fill the gaps highlighted .
Although it is difficult to develop a method that is coherent at the same time , we believe that what is required is a comprehensive concept , taking account of existing measures , which can be implemented in practice .
It is important to develop a new tool that can complement GDP , that has practical use , that is based on clearly defined indicators , and that relies on data of a high quality .
We agree with the rapporteur that it is necessary to submit a tiered strategy that should show how the new approach can be used pragmatically in day-to-day political work .
I voted for the report on GDP and beyond - Measuring progress in a changing world , by Mrs Rosbach , because I believe that gross domestic product is no longer a sufficient , appropriate indicator for measuring progress in a changing world , and it is therefore necessary to develop more comprehensive indicators that would provide a more reliable knowledge base .
It should be remembered that GDP is a measure of production and does not measure environmental sustainability for example .
It is necessary to develop other indicators that will help explain which factors influence the living standards in a country .
I am therefore in favour of the creation of additional indicators for measuring medium- and long-term social and economic progress , for example , indicators that take account of climate change , biodiversity , resource efficiency and social inclusion .
The development of these new indicators will help to understand and measure the quality of life in societies .
Therefore , the development of a Member State or region cannot be assessed solely by an economic indicator such as GDP : quality of life , which is determined by factors such as health , education , culture , employment , housing and climate and environmental conditions , must also be taken into account .
As rapporteur for the opinion of the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy for this report , I believe that achieving and sustaining quality of life involves important , interlinked factors such as health , education , culture , jobs , housing and environmental conditions .
I therefore believe that the indicators measuring these factors are also important , and that more importance should be attached to them .
I voted in favour because this report is a step , albeit a hesitant one , towards improving and complementing gross domestic product ( GDP ) as an instrument for the measurement and evaluation of social and economic performance , and , by association , of the progress of societies .
We all agree that there is a need to improve data and indicators to complement gross domestic product ( GDP ) for overall societal development .
The ' GDP and beyond - Measuring progress in a changing world ' initiative is a complementary instrument capable of contributing to improving analysis and political debate .
GDP is an indicator of market economic activity that has become the standard point of reference at the service of the world 's decision makers .
GDP is a measure of production that does not measure environmental sustainability , resource efficiency , social inclusion and social progress in general .
I therefore agree that in the future , other types of instruments should be studied that allow for a greater number of reliable data for measuring a world that is changing .
in writing . - It is known that GDP ( gross domestic product ) is the aggregated added value of all money-based economic activities .
GDP is the expression of a production / consumption-based society and does not take into account changes and assets in important fields .
Taking into account the need for improved data and indicators to complement GDP , various measures are suggested that would provide a more reliable knowledge base .
The need to develop additional indicators for measuring medium- and long-term economic and social progress is highly urgent .
I voted in favour .
Today , the European Parliament adopted a resolution on GDP and beyond - measuring progress in a changing world .
Gross domestic product is a widely used index for measuring social development and economic progress .
However , its universality raises doubts as to whether it fails to take into account a series of indicators which are crucial for quality of life in a given country .
There are also some significant parameters which are interpreted incorrectly .
The Commission has suggested that it is essential to develop an indicator which clearly depicts the situation in the country in question , and which also reflects the situation of households and individuals , as well as how efficiently the country 's resources are exploited and the state of the environment .
The Commission expects greater involvement from the Member States in terms of systematising research into the quality of public life , which would make it possible for clear comparisons to be made between countries .
A coherent policy would result in it being easier to analyse research , and also in it being possible to predict the potential long-term development of countries .
I voted in favour of this resolution on GDP and other indicators aimed at measuring progress and the general development of society .
GDP is an indicator of economic market activity that has become a standard benchmark used by policy makers throughout the world .
However , this indicator is not holistic .
It does not reflect environmental sustainability , resource efficiency , social inclusion or social progress .
Moreover , in certain cases , GDP may provide inaccurate and misleading information .
Consequently , we must make every effort to develop additional medium and long-term indicators for measuring the factors mentioned and the household level .
I welcome the proposal that when measuring quality of life for society , much attention should be paid to health , education , culture , employment , housing and other similar factors , relating to the core areas of quality of life .
Thus , we must find means of developing an appropriate and effective tool to complement GDP , which could be applied in a practical way , using clearly defined indicators and relying on high-quality data .
' GDP and beyond - Measuring progress in a changing world ' is a report that aims to assess levels of progress in the European Union through gross domestic product , which has taken on the role of a comprehensive indicator for societal and economic development .
Unfortunately , however , it no longer provides a reliable basis for policy debate because it does not measure environmental sustainability or social integration .
There is increasing awareness of the need for improved data and indicators to complement progress assessment criteria .
For this reason , I voted for a text that tries to integrate development in the European Union with new social indicators , seeks a clearly defined measurement system that goes beyond GDP , and complements it in the context of decision making .
I voted for this report entitled ' GDP and beyond - Measuring progress in a changing world ' .
As the report rightly says , gross domestic product ( GDP ) , which is used by political decision makers worldwide and referred to in public debates , has also come to take on the role of a comprehensive indicator for overall societal development and progress in general .
However , it does not provide a reliable basis for policy debate on every issue .
For example , GDP does not measure environmental sustainability or social integration .
In the Commission communication on ' GDP and beyond - measuring progress in a changing world ' , various measures are suggested as suitable ways to complement GDP .
In particular , it focuses on developing more comprehensive indicators that would provide a more reliable knowledge base .
I would express my support for the Commission 's intention to adopt a clearly defined measuring system that would go beyond GDP , in the sense that it complements GDP in the context of decision making and assessment , using clearly defined and quantifiable indicators .
Gross domestic product is the best known measure worldwide .
It has come to take on the role of a comprehensive indicator for overall societal development and progress in general , but does not take into account or measure environmental sustainability or social integration .
There is a need for improved data and indicators to complement GDP , or else it will not provide a reliable basis for policy debate .
This issue has already been discussed in prior years and particularly in 2007 , when the European Parliament and the Commission , together with various bodies and associations , held a conference entitled ' Beyond GDP ' .
At this conference , the Commission considered that GDP is not a suitable long-term measurement system , just as economic and social progress are not sufficient to assess issues such as climate change , resource efficiency or personal well-being .
New indicators were subsequently proposed for measuring progress in the achievement of social , economic and environmental objectives .
For the above reasons , and in order to be able to develop a clear and comprehensive set of indicators that are , at the same time , consistent , relevant and objectively measurable , I voted for the motion being discussed .
The Commission Communication ' GDP and beyond - Measuring progress in a changing world ' focuses on developing more comprehensive indicators to complement GDP , which will provide a more reliable knowledge base .
GDP has come to take on the role of a comprehensive indicator for measuring society 's overall development and progress , but it does not provide a reliable basis for policy debate on every issue .
In particular , GDP does not measure the level of environmental sustainability or social integration .
I voted for this report because it is important that we develop a tool which can complement GDP , taking into account that it has to be done in a way so that it can have practical use , based on clearly defined indicators and high-quality data .
This report calls on the Commission to submit a tiered strategy for the ' Beyond GDP ' approach which should explain how the new approach can be used pragmatically in day-to-day political activities .
I believe that achieving and sustaining quality of life involves important , interlinked factors such as health , education , culture , jobs , housing and environmental condition .
I therefore believe that the indicators measuring these factors are also important , and that more importance should be attached to them .
I voted in favour because this report is a step , albeit a hesitant one , towards improving and complementing gross domestic product ( GDP ) as an instrument for the measurement and evaluation of social and economic performance , and , by association , of societies ' progress .
Gross domestic product ( GDP ) is the standard macro-economic indicator , used , as a rule , to measure the economies of various states .
Nevertheless , it is merely an indicator of wealth , with less potential for comparing social development .
The success of GDP is due , to a large extent , to its simplicity at the cost , therefore , of the completeness of the results attained .
It would be useful , therefore , to develop new indicators that enable other aspects of the reality to be sounded out , in order to obtain a better overall view of countries ' development .
It is a complex process which should involve professionals from all areas , in order to obtain a broader and more complete indicator .
I support this .
As my colleague , Mrs Bélier , has said , although this report could have gone further with the ambitions and guidelines that it could have set , it does represent a first step and a strong signal sent out to the Council and the Commission for Europe to press ahead with an overhaul of the wealth and development indicators so as to make them more representative of the environmental and social realities and constraints with which we are confronted .
With this decision , MEPs recognise the need to go beyond and abandon an outdated model , which brings about social inequality and destroys the natural heritage , in order to start a new economic model on a European level .
It paves the way for the recognition of new indicators that are fairer and that will allow us to undertake the ecological and social transition of our societies .
This report proposes the adoption of a clearly defined measuring system that would complement gross domestic product as an indicator of overall social development .
The complementary tool should have practical use and be based on clearly defined indicators and reliable data .
Only in this way can GDP make a sufficient contribution to policy debate and decision making .
The Commission is therefore invited to present a comprehensive , tiered strategy that should show how the new approach can be used pragmatically in day-to-day political work .
The report on the Commission communication of 20 August 2009 on ' GDP and Beyond - Measuring progress in a changing world ' highlights the importance of gross domestic product as a comprehensive indicator of social development and economic growth .
The objective is to adopt a new clearly defined and quantifiable measuring system based on reliable , accurate data , but the Commission 's communication does not indicate the tiered strategy for delivering it .
I voted in favour of the report as I believe it is important to carry out socio-economic analyses using appropriate tools that will complement GDP .
in writing . - I support this report , which recommends several concrete actions , including the creation of an environmental index , more timely publication of environmental and social data , more accurate reporting on social disparities and extending the system of national accounts to include environmental and social issues .
In the Commission communication to the European Parliament and the Council entitled ' GDP and beyond - Measuring progress in a changing world ' ( COM ( 2009 ) 433 final ) , it is acknowledged that ' GDP has also come to be regarded as a proxy indicator for overall societal development and progress in general ' but ' does not measure environmental sustainability or social inclusion ' .
In a world in which people 's quality of life is increasingly measured using other , non-economic factors , various international institutions , like the United Nations ( UN ) , the World Bank and the Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development ( OECD ) , are currently studying the definition of new indicators , so as to measure and analyse economic and social progress .
As such , I voted for this report , as I believe it is important for the European Union to implement a systematic approach in order to measure social welfare in all its aspects , giving particular emphasis to economic and environmental factors , and to improving quality of life in the medium and long term .
I believe that the aforementioned indicators will take on a strategic importance in the definition of future cohesion policy , thereby contributing to smart , sustainable and inclusive growth , in line with the principles enshrined in the Europe 2020 strategy .
I voted in favour of the report on GDP and beyond - Measuring progress in a changing world , for the following reasons .
Everyone knows that GDP is an indicator used to measure macro-economic activity and cannot be used to measure other things .
Consequently , new indicators need to be developed , which is precisely what Mrs Rosbach 's report does .
I consider that GDP is a limited indicator and that indicators should be developed to supplement it .
The report addresses the above issues , which I consider to be very important and in need of immediate resolution , which is why I voted in favour of this particular report .
I voted in favour of the identification of new parameters more representative of a country 's progress , and not just its consumption , although I think more should be done .
The report in question has had a long and difficult journey , and finally made it to the plenary session having lost much of its content along the way .
Parliament should have put forward a proposal taking into account factors including education , health and personal activities , but it confined itself to highlighting the need to establish new parameters , delegating the task of defining them to the Commission .
Gross domestic product is an outdated indicator based on economic principles that , by reducing quality to quantity , overlook the meaning of things and individual and collective well-being , undervalue work in itself compared to the object of production , and consider only the production of new objects , not maintenance .
If we cast a glance at the International Monetary Fund ( IMF ) GDP scale ( the EU is in first place , Lithuania is 82nd ) , we can see that GDP does not tell the entire story .
GDP does not sufficiently reflect the complex socio-economic reality of national and regional challenges .
Although GDP is a strong macro-economic indicator , it does not reflect Lithuania 's greatest social problems , such as unemployment , the quality of education and health care systems and disparities in income distribution .
In Lithuania , and at EU level , there is often a lack of clear information , data and indicators , and I therefore support the rapporteur 's proposal to provide a better report on social indicators .
I hope that this will provide more comprehensive information for developing policies .
Nowadays , unfortunately , politicians often do not have such information .
The development of EU policies should not be purely based on abstract statistics .
Above all , EU policy should be measured by the progress made in improving the well-being of Europeans .
The ' Beyond GDP ' method mentioned in this report may prove very useful .
However , before implementing it , we should find out more about the possibilities of adapting the new method in everyday life .
I am voting for this report because it is a thorough evaluation of the process and implementation to date and because it launches a debate on its future governance , exploitation and financing of the decision to create global navigation satellite systems and other autonomous European systems .
This includes all commercial aspects of the exploitation as well as the legal , contractual and financing structures of the different exploitation models that will guarantee that the governance model is put into practice .
The Galileo programme ( satellite navigation ) is extremely important as it enables the European Union to be competent in cutting-edge technologies .
Unfortunately , Galileo is facing additional delays and costs .
Faced with this situation , it is essential that we consider new solutions .
This is why I supported Mr Remek 's report , which is aimed at looking into all the possible sources of funding on top of the contribution from the European budget .
Galileo , together with EGNOS ( European Geostationary Navigation Overlay Service , an augmentation system that improves the accuracy and the reliability of the US Global Positioning System ( GPS ) information ) , is the Global Navigation Satellite System ( GNSS ) developed by the EU .
When completed , it is expected to consist of 27 satellites plus a suitable number of spare satellites in orbit at an altitude of approximately 23 000 km above the surface of the earth , and a worldwide network of approximately 40 ground stations .
The EU decided to set up its own global navigation satellite system for two key reasons : firstly , Europe 's independence from other global navigation systems and autonomy , and secondly , to gain a share in this fast growing worldwide high-tech market , which today , to a large extent , is dominated by the US .
I agree that there should be a broad and comprehensive debate at political level about the desired level of ambition ( deciding the level of services provided ) and the financial resources available ( whereby a political choice would need to be made between a purely EU funded programme and one allowing national or private contributions ) .
The result of this debate will impact the policy options for the future governance and management of the GNSS systems .
The project to implement a European satellite navigation programme is a major challenge and undoubtedly useful for the future of technology in Europe , but the forecasts of expenditure and investment by the European bodies for this project are still not clear or transparent at present .
Further expenditure is expected in a few years ' time , in addition to that initially planned by the programme , and I believe it is likely that additional sums will be needed to complete the project .
I therefore abstained from the final vote on the own-initiative report .
in writing . - ( FR ) It is with satisfaction that I voted in favour of this report , which is the culmination of a far-reaching political decision , particularly regarding the implementation of Galileo .
It is absolutely crucial that the European autonomous satellite radionavigation system be commissioned as soon as possible and , as the report highlights , with long-term funding guarantees .
Competition from the United States ( with the Global Positioning System - GPS ) requires us to introduce Galileo quickly , bearing in mind what is at stake economically , technically , politically and strategically .
The European Union has set itself the objective of becoming the world leader in Global Navigation Satellite Systems ( GNSS ) with the European Geostationary Navigation Overlay Service ( EGNOS ) and Galileo programmes , thus ensuring its technological independence from American GPS .
Considering the significant economic returns from such programmes , I voted in favour of the Remek report which calls on the Commission and the Member States to ensure sufficient funding in order to make sure these projects are completed by 2018 , thus asserting themselves as credible challengers to the American system .
in writing . - At a time when the Commission , and indeed this Parliament , ought to be searching for , and bringing forward , proposals on how to save money , we are offered this report which suggests the completion of the Galileo satellite navigation system at an additional cost of EUR 1.9 billion in the next Multiannual Financial Framework .
Let us not forget that this is against a backdrop where the Galileo satellite project started off with a budget of EUR 7.7 billion and is now projected to cost EUR 22.6 billion .
To such a proposal , I categorically say no .
Current budget lines already in place for this project are easily sufficient to bring about its completion , yet - true to form - the suggestion is to spend even more .
I know that if I speak to my constituents , they will give little support to the current spending on Galileo , let alone an increase .
Again , I urge MEPs and the Commission to be realistic and to be cautious with the money we have and with which we should aim to bring maximum benefit to our constituents .
European satellite navigation systems have been causing delays and additional costs , which should lead those responsible to give thought to the patterns currently being followed for their implementation .
At a time when countries like Portugal are resorting to aid from the other Member States , and when Europe is , as such , facing a serious economic and financial crisis that threatens its stability , an even greater effort should be made to avoid cost overruns and excessive expense .
I am not questioning the strategic importance of these projects , but I cannot fail to highlight that they have been falling short of expectations .
I agree that , as both Galileo and the European Geostationary Navigation Overlay Service ( EGNOS ) are European programmes and are in the common public interest of the Union , they should , overall , be financed through the EU budget , but I think that other possible sources should be weighed up , including innovative forms of financing .
This report , drafted by Mr Remek , deals with European satellite navigation programmes .
It is a report whose purpose is a mid-term review of these programmes , including assessment of their implementation , future challenges and financial perspectives .
Since 2000 , when the Global Positioning System ( GPS ) service was made available , this sector has grown exponentially ( EUR 124 billion in 2008 ) , with the domestic market forecast to be worth EUR 230 billion overall in 2025 .

In 2008 , the EU decided to create its own satellite navigation system ( Regulation ( EC ) No 683 / 2008 ) , Galileo and the European Geostationary Navigation Overlay Service ( EGNOS ) , with the objective of ensuring Europe 's independence and autonomy , raising its market share and putting the industry in a position to be competitive in a strategic and fast-growing market .
I voted in favour of the rapporteur 's proposals , in spite of the cost overruns recorded in the implementation of the project , because I understand that the EU should be at the forefront of researching and developing cutting-edge technology , especially when that same technology represents a scientific and economic asset to the EU .
As we have said regarding the application of a global European satellite navigation system for transport , the use of this technology could represent an important contribution to the development , modernisation and diversification of public services , in the creation of opportunities for cooperation , and progress in science and its applications , and in the exchange and accessibility of information , with the guarantee of respect for the public 's rights , freedoms and guarantees .
The issue at stake , however , is not that of the existence of a global navigation satellite system for Europe based on use for non-military ends and not integrated into the EU 's security arrangements .
The problem is its potential use for military and aggressive ends .
In particular , the fact that this satellite navigation system being set up in competition with the Global Positioning System ( GPS ) of the United States , on which the EU depends , and which is well known to be under military control , with financing from US federal military programmes , is worrying .
We are therefore reaffirming our doubts about the limits to the potential uses of these programmes in a context of assumed EU-US competition regarding the functionalities and efficiencies of these systems .
The issue at stake is not that of the existence of a global navigation satellite system for Europe based on use for non-military ends and not integrated into the EU 's security arrangements .
The problem is its potential use for military and aggressive ends .
Its use for non-military ends could represent an important contribution to the provision of public services , with opportunities for cooperation , and progress in science and its applications , and in the exchange and accessibility of information , with the guarantee of respect for the public 's rights , freedoms and guarantees .
However , the fact that this satellite navigation system has been set up in competition with the Global Positioning System ( GPS ) of the United States , on which the EU depends , and which is well known to be under military control , with financing from US federal military programmes , is worrying .
As such , we still have serious doubts about the limits to the potential uses of these programmes in a context of competition , both between functionalities and efficiencies of these systems , and between the EU and US .
The European Union has taken the important step of introducing , through its political decision based on Regulation ( EC ) No 683 / 2008 , an autonomous European Global Navigation Satellite System ( GNSS ) , owned and operated by the Union .
The Commission should produce a comprehensive analysis aimed at securing a more precise description of possible scenarios and resources in terms of operation and use after 2013 .
It will include all commercial aspects of use , such as the legal , contractual and financial structures of the various models of usage , ensuring the establishment of a stable model of administration .
in writing . - Galileo , Europe 's own global navigation satellite system , is of great importance to Europe and , in particular , the UK .
This project , which I fully support , has not only received significant public funding but private industry throughout the EU is also investing money , time and expertise into developing this system .
However , despite recognising the need to push forward with this , I felt the need to abstain on the final vote .
Mr Remek 's report suggests completing the Galileo system will require additional funding of up to EUR 1.9 billion in the next Multiannual Financial Framework ( MFF ) .
In this current difficult financial climate , I have to oppose this increase in spending , especially considering that the programme is already 60 % over budget .
I believe that Galileo must stay within its current budget .
Let us look at how we can improve the current system within the means that we have .
I would strongly urge the Commission to take robust action to improve its programme management and to achieve savings .
In order to do so , the Commission must undertake a thorough and comprehensive impact assessment , so that we can make an informed decision regarding the future funding of the programme .
I welcomed this document because this report is a response to the Commission 's Communication on the mid-term review of the autonomous European Global Navigation Satellite Systems ( GNSS ) ( Galileo and EGNOS ) , which assesses the process and implementation so far and launches the debate on its future governance , exploitation and financing .
The EU decided to set up its own global navigation satellite system for two key reasons : firstly , Europe 's independence from other global navigation systems and autonomy , and secondly , to gain a share in this fast growing worldwide high-tech market , which today , to a large extent , is dominated by the US .
Indirect benefits of the programme are estimated to be around EUR 60 billion per year ( including the downstream and upstream market and public benefits ) .
GNSS is seen as a disruptive technology , with high potential to create innovations , build up a high-tech knowledge base and increase productivity in many sectors .
Annual growth rates of the market for GNSS-enabled products and services are estimated to be above 10 % .
The Commission should launch a comprehensive analysis to identify more precisely the possible scenarios and means of operation and exploitation post 2013 .
This includes all commercial aspects of the exploitation as well as the legal , contractual and financing structures of the different exploitation models that will ensure that a stable governance model is put in place .
The EGNOS and Galileo systems , when they are completed , will increase security in transport , using certain applications .
These applications also represent the growing global markets from which the EU will benefit financially .
The development of these systems will make an essential contribution to the development of European aviation transport and to a more economical and efficient system of rail and road transport .
A problem for the development of these applications and for completing the systems on time may be a lack of investment .
It is important to see the benefit to the Member States of investment and of developing the systems so that they are completed on schedule .
I voted in favour of Mrs Ţicău 's report because the project under examination meets many expectations of those looking to developments in research and technology with optimism .
EGNOS and Galileo are projects that will generate approximately EUR 60 billion of indirect benefits to the European Union economy and society , in the form of enhanced road and aviation security , reduced air pollution and pesticide consumption , new jobs and public safety , generating very significant value for money .
Therefore , before a decision is made on a further financial commitment from the EU budget in the next Multiannual Financial Framework , a clear assessment of all the possible technical options and related costs and benefits needs to be presented by the Commission .
Ten years ago , the European Union launched two satellite navigation programmes : Galileo and EGNOS ( European Geostationary Navigation Overlay Service ) .
The first will be operational in 2014 and will be accurate to within less than a metre , whereas GPS is accurate to within several metres .
This technological progress will enable European companies to innovate and position themselves at the cutting edge of services made possible by global positioning .
However , there is also a strategic dimension to Galileo .
At present , Europe is dependent on the GPS system , which is American .
When Galileo is in place , the Union will enjoy total independence as well as superiority in this area , and it is plain to see the importance of the applications .
The civilian and military resources of the Member States will be much more effective as a result .
I voted for this resolution which , while praising the technical success , reminds the European Commission of the points where the programme can be improved : funding , public awareness , and involving our international partners .
in writing . - The main challenge for the international activities of the GNSS Programmes will be to ensure the compatibility and interoperability with Galileo , to access global GNSS-related resources and set worldwide standards , to ensure security of the space segment and network of ground stations , while ensuring a stricter control of sensitive GNSS technologies developed with European funding , and to join in an international effort to develop innovative applications and specialised applications of supra-regional interest .
An important objective will be to create market opportunities for the European GNSS technology and applications industries .
We believe that the EU 's Global Navigation Satellite System ( GNSS ) , consisting of the Galileo and EGNOS programmes , is an important step for Europe , firstly , as it ensures its autonomy and independence from other global navigation systems and , secondly , as it enables it to claim a share of this booming worldwide high-tech market .
It is very important , however , that continuity of service is guaranteed , as a ( temporary ) limitation or degradation of GPS signals will have tremendous effects on our economy and society , without other independent GNSS systems in place .
Nevertheless , to fully exploit its advantages , Galileo needs to reach full operating capacity , and to do so will require additional investment .
Currently , the financial picture is anything but positive .
On this point , we think that a broad and comprehensive political debate should take place about the desired level of ambition and the financial resources available .
Finally , we maintain that it is important to launch a comprehensive analysis to obtain a more precise identification of the possible scenarios and means for operation and exploitation after 2013 , which includes all commercial aspects of the exploitation as well as the legal , contractual and financing structures of the different exploitation models that will ensure that a stable governance model is put into place .
The European satellite navigation programmes , Galileo and the European Geostationary Navigation Overlay Service ( EGNOS ) , will enable Europe to establish autonomy and strategic independence from other economic blocs , which is very important , and will contribute to improving the lives of the European public , as well as bringing direct and indirect benefits to the European economy .
However , the problems financing these programmes could cause significant delays in their implementation , along with the inherent damage .
We have to implement a medium- to long-term financing strategy in order for it to be possible to create the necessary market confidence and , consequently , to attract investment and the purchase of applications and services .
Only a fully functional Galileo and EGNOS system will be an asset to the EU , in all its policies , not least in transport , in agriculture , in the fight against climate change , in the prevention of natural and man-made disasters , and in the area of science , technology and innovation .
The European Parliament has always supported the European Union 's Global Navigation Satellite System ( GNSS ) , implemented by means of the Galileo and the European Geostationary Navigation Overlay Service ( EGNOS ) programmes .
Unfortunately , today , the European Union is dependent on the Global Positioning System ( GPS ) of the United States .
Nonetheless , Galileo offers clear advantages over the GPS system .
Furthermore , EGNOS is used on a daily basis by 80 000 European farmers and has recently been certified for civil aviation , and should shortly be certified for maritime transport .
Space policy and the GNSS programme are of strategic importance and should provide tangible benefits for citizens and businesses .
From this point of view , the Commission must ensure the compatibility and interoperability of Galileo with other satellite navigation systems .
Finally , it is important that these European programmes receive the funding they need to be brought to fruition .
in writing . - The EU took an important step with its political decision .
The report is a mid-term review of this flagship initiative , assessing the process and implementation so far and launching the debate on its future governance , exploitation and financing in the EU system .
In my view , it is necessary to launch a comprehensive analysis to obtain a more precise identification of the possible scenarios and means for operation and exploitation after 2013 .
I fully support the report of Vladimir Remek and I voted in favour .
The GNSS ( Galileo and EGNOS ) satellite navigation system project , like the Schengen Information System II project , has turned into a bottomless money pit .
The follow-up costs still seem impossible to estimate in concrete terms ; all that is clear is that savings are necessary if we are to prevent a final explosion in the already mushrooming project costs .
However , problems arise here when the associated cuts in services only affect the citizens of Europe as taxpayers , only leaving services for military use untouched .
Further discussions relating to the previous procedure and implementation and its future administration , use and funding are required in this context .
It certainly seems unlikely that an increased use of private enterprise in this area will bring any financial relief .
The Commission 's evaluation is certainly awaited with anticipation .
The Galileo idea is a good one in principle ; however , the costs must be brought under control .
I took this into consideration when voting .
Once again ( as in the case of the ITER project ) , the EU has managed to delay a project for so long that the costs are impossible to estimate .
This is equally true for the follow-up costs for the GNSS ( Galileo and EGNOS satellite navigation systems ) and Schengen Information System II projects .
It is not just follow-up costs that have exploded : ' normal ' project costs have also reached massive proportions .
An attempt is now being made to limit damage by making savings .
These are necessary moves .
Unfortunately , it seems as if these cuts will only affect the European taxpayer as they will result in reductions in services .
Although GNSS will only have a military application , it will be the taxpayers who foot the bill - twice over now as a result of the follow-up costs .
This situation casts a pall over the GNSS project , which is otherwise something to be welcomed .
For that reason , I have abstained from voting .
I voted in favour of the report on the mid-term review of the Galileo programme .
The ambitious European endeavour to develop a European satellite navigation system , based on a constellation of 30 satellites and offering quality global positioning services , guarantees Europe 's autonomy and independence from other global navigation systems and a share in the important global high-tech market , on which the USA and Japan are currently top of the league .
Moreover , Galileo will have the facility to support the implementation of previous traffic management systems for all means of transport ( road , air , sea , etc . ) , which will improve efficiency and reduce the environmental impact .
In the agricultural sector , Galileo will be able to support improvements to agricultural output by guaranteeing more efficient use of land and water , thereby reducing the need for fertilisers and pesticides .
However , the questions raised and my previous question to the Commission about the very high cost of this particular endeavour have remained unanswered .
To be precise , the cost of implementing the programme was initially estimated at EUR 3 330 million ( of which 1 800 million was to be paid by the public sector ) .
This was increased to EUR 5 580 million , all of which is to be paid by the public sector at a very difficult time for the economy .
I voted in favour of this report .
The EU has taken an important step with the adoption of its policy decision , recorded in Regulation ( EC ) No 683 / 2008 , on the creation of autonomous European global navigation satellite systems ( GNSSs ) - Galileo and European Geostationary Navigation Overlay Service ( EGNOS ) - under the ownership and management of the EU .
The communication considered in this report constitutes a mid-term review of this emblematic initiative in which there is an assessment of the process and its implementation to date , with a debate launched on its future governance , use and financing .
In the current economic context , there is a pressing need to conduct a wide-ranging political debate about the desired level of ambition , which will determine the level of service provided , and on the resources available , during which it will be necessary to make a political choice between a model whereby it is exclusively funded by the EU and one whereby national or private contributions may be permitted .
The result of this debate will be reflected in the political choices regarding future governance and management systems for GNSSs .
The Galileo system will improve the accuracy and the reliability of US Global Positioning System ( GPS ) information .
This new system will be important for ensuring Europe 's autonomy and independence from other global navigation systems and enabling it to claim a share of this booming worldwide high-tech market .
As we know , the programme is funded fully by the Union budget with a budget of EUR 3.4 billion until 2014 .
We know that the indirect benefits of the programme are estimated to be around EUR 60 billion per year , but the Commission has admitted that additional investment will be required in order to reach full operational capacity .
As it is not clear how much the Galileo system will cost the taxpayer , I abstained on this measure , not least to reiterate the request to the Commission to clarify the project 's future costs .
The Galileo programme , which , in conjunction with the European Geostationary Navigation Overlay Service ( EGNOS ) , aims to create a global navigation satellite system ( GNSS ) , is in line with a strategic choice on the part of the Union : it confirms its entry onto the global market , while its efforts assert itself in the global market , which is currently dominated by the United States , and is important to boosting the European economy itself .
Let us remember that , as is said in the report , 7 % of EU gross domestic product ( GDP ) depends on the use of the Global Positioning System ( GPS ) , reinforcing the need for an autonomous satellite navigation system .
The intention at the moment is to carry out a comprehensive analysis of the project .
Among the conclusions to draw from it , it should be stressed that the running costs of these programmes are estimated to be some EUR 800 million per annum and that revenue will only reach EUR 80 million per annum by around 2030 .
Nevertheless , it is estimated , on the other hand , that the indirect benefits could be worth as much as EUR 60 billion per annum .
In this context , I think it is important , as the rapporteur suggests , to launch the debate about the structure of this programme and how to make money out of it in future , so as to adopt robust and safe solutions for the future of Europe .
I fully support the autonomous European global navigation satellite system , and I agree with the adoption of all the measures essential to securing its full operational capacity .
This view prevails across the groups of the European Parliament , as is borne out by the fact that no amendments have been submitted for the report .
In the report of Mr Remek , we call on the European Commission to move towards a solution to the problems that have arisen and to ensure a funding procedure for the programme such that it can achieve full operational capacity in 2018 .
In the interests of retaining the EU 's competitive advantage , the launch must not be delayed , otherwise other countries such as China , India and Japan will outstrip us .
in writing . - This has been a disastrous vote for the Greens .
We voted against the two separate votes ( paragraphs 19 and 20 ) , and both were adopted ; we voted against at the final vote , but the text was adopted .
Our concerns are mainly about the speed with which some wish to pursue this , despite the numerous questions we still have .
I voted for this report because I agree on the importance of the Galileo project , as part of a European global navigation satellite system .
It will ensure the European Union 's autonomy and independence from other global navigation systems , and enable it to claim a share of this booming worldwide high-tech market .
Given that our competitors are getting stronger and advancing dynamically , and that to fully exploit its advantages , Galileo needs to reach full operation capacity , the project would require additional investment , as indicated by the rapporteur .
in writing . - I welcome this report , which asks for the Commission to launch a comprehensive analysis to obtain a more precise identification of the possible scenarios and means for operation and exploitation after 2013 .
This includes all commercial aspects of exploitation as well as the legal , contractual and financing structures of the different exploitation models that will ensure that a stable governance model is put into place .
The report was adopted in committee by an overwhelming majority ( 44 to 4 ) .
The European initiative to create the Galileo and European Geostationary Navigation Overlay Service ( EGNOS ) programmes will not only enable Europe to establish autonomy and strategic independence from other economic blocs , but , above all , will also bring improvements to the daily lives of Europeans , and will generate direct and indirect benefits for the European economy .
However , in order for the programme 's real benefits to be achieved , there is a need to establish a medium- and long-term strategy for financing and governance , covering the main actions to be carried out .
That is the only way it will be possible to create the necessary market confidence and , consequently , to secure investment as well as the purchase of applications and services .
Only if they become fully functional will the Galileo and EGNOS systems provide concrete benefit for all European Union policies , specifically , in transport , in agriculture , in the fight against climate change , in the prevention of natural and human disasters , and in the area of science , technology and innovation .
To increase support for these projects , it is crucial to increase communication between those in charge of them and the general public , in order to create a direct relationship between these initiatives and European citizens .
Further to that , I believe it is necessary to create an appropriate financial structure so it can be realised and then applied .
in writing . - This report looks at the progress that has been made towards a European global satellite navigation system , or Galileo , and looks at issues regarding the future governance of the initiative .
When fully operational , Galileo will be a rival to American GPS , and will operate on a wider and more accurate system of satellites and ground stations across the world .
Although there has been substantial technical progress , the report is more critical of the financial situation regarding the project .
It raises issues that need to be addressed and recommends courses of action that can ensure that the satellite system reaches Full Operational Capacity ( FOC ) as soon as possible , meaning a quicker return on the investment , and this report serves as the basis for the debate on how the Commission can best achieve this .
I am voting for this report in that it presents suitable political priorities for Parliament for the Multiannual Financial Framework , in both legislative and budgetary terms .
Some priorities included by the Group of the Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats in the European Parliament which I would highlight are , for example : 1 ) investment for jobs and growth ; 2 ) the social aspect , and the workers ' rights and conditions ; 3 ) sustainability ; 4 ) European added value ; 5 ) proposed structure and duration .
I note the need to pay particular attention to the outermost regions , to regions with serious and permanent natural or demographic limitations , such as the most northerly regions with very low population density and islands , and to cross-border and mountain regions ; this is because the resources and capabilities of these regions can play a significant role in the future competitiveness of the European Union .
in writing . - I voted against the Garriga Polledo report from the SURE committee because it wants to increase the EU budget for the period 2014-2020 by 5 % .
I could not vote in favour of the Conservative Party amendment to freeze the budget at 2013 levels because I firmly believe it is a reduction that is needed , and their stand represents a weak starting point for negotiations .
I introduced an amendment to reduce the budget by 2.8 % , which is the average rate of irregularities affecting the EU budget as reported by the European Court of Auditors .
Among the amendments and innovations I opposed was an amendment to create an informal and powerless monitoring group in the European Parliament to scrutinise programmes .
in writing . - I voted in favour of this important resolution on Investing in the future : a new Multiannual Financial Framework ( MFF ) for a competitive , sustainable and inclusive Europe .
I support the rapporteur that with the rejection of the option of freezing the resources , as proposed by five Heads of Government in December 2010 ( France , United Kingdom , the Netherlands , Germany and Finland ) , the European Parliament is sending a strong political signal for the negotiations between the 27 Member States , due to start after the official presentation of the European Commission proposal expected on 29 June .
It is important to note that unanimity between the Member States and the assent of the European Parliament are needed to take the final decision , not expected until at least June 2012 .
We , Members of the European Parliament , demand at least an increase of the level of resources of 5 % compared to the 2013 budget .
It is also important to note that the European Parliament proposes to introduce a new structure for the financial framework under a single ' Europe 2020 ' heading and asks for a 5 , or 5 + 5 year-long framework as of 2021 .
After around a year 's work , the special committee on policy challenges and budgetary resources has finally presented the future decisions determining priorities in expenditure for the efficient and effective use of European Union appropriations leading to the implementation of result-oriented policies .
Bearing in mind that the European Union budget is primarily an investment budget , which can generate more investment from public or private sources , it must be possible to adjust it adequately to changing needs and circumstances .
The decision to increase the resources of the new Multiannual Financial Framework by 5 % will guarantee the stability of existing programming cycles and new investment in areas such as European energy and transport networks , which will allow Europe to defend its competitiveness and prepare the ground for long-term economic growth .
These sectors also appear in the Europe 2020 strategy , which aims to deliver smart , sustainable and inclusive growth through knowledge , innovation and the promotion of social and territorial cohesion .
in writing . - The report on a New Multiannual Financial Framework ( MFF ) for a competitive , sustainable and inclusive Europe is a valuable piece of collective analysis on the future configurations of the EU budget .
It estimates the financial resources needed for the Union to attain its objectives and carry out its policies for the period starting 1 January 2014 .
Its essential point is a request for an increase of at least 5 % in the total EU budget for 2013 , and the request for the introduction of an autonomous source of funding .
The report stresses very clearly that without sufficient additional resources in the post-2013 MFF , the Union will not be able to fulfil the existing policy priorities , linked , in particular , to the Europe 2020 strategy , or the new tasks provided for by the Treaty of Lisbon , let alone respond to unforeseen events .
I voted in favour of this report also because it calls for a more transparent , simpler and fairer financing system for the European Union .
I voted in favour of this excellent report by my colleague , Mr Garriga Polledo , as it provides an extremely good presentation of the budget that the European Union will need after 2013 to respond to the political challenges it will face .
If Europe really intends to implement the policies laid down in the European Treaties , including the most recent policies , it must have the financial resources it needs to fulfil these ambitions .
Therefore , I voted for the collection of ' own resources ' and the creation of a ' tax on financial transactions ' to fund the European Union 's budget .
This necessary increase in the European budget must be accompanied by substantial savings through optimising ( pooled ) expenditure .
Furthermore , the common agricultural policy ( CAP ) , which is essential for the food security and independence of our continent , and EU regional policy , strengthened by creating an intermediate category of regions to enable additional financial support to be channelled to those regions where per capita GDP is between 75 % and 90 % of the European average , such as Auvergne and Limousin , find within it all the space that they deserve .
This report is therefore of inestimable support to citizens !
The European farming sector is of socio-economic importance , particularly in terms of ensuring the security of food supply and in terms of promoting rural communities and the environment .
So , the CAP must have a strong budget and proper resources so as to be able to meet those goals .
I fully support what is in the report on the broad aims and tasks of the CAP and that there be no cuts in CAP funding for 2013 , so that it would be able to properly meet those broad needs .
Much is expected of the next Multiannual Financial Framework in terms of achieving the aims of the Europe 2020 strategy , encouraging research and innovation , combating the challenges facing the environment , achieving the aims of the European Social , Cohesion and Regional Funds , and fostering education , mobility , training and lifelong learning .
The EU must have adequate resources and a strong Multiannual Financial Framework if it is to achieve those goals and meet the needs of the people of the Union .
I voted in favour of this report .
The European Union faces enormous challenges , and will require significant financial resources to overcome these .
It is clear that the EU budget 's current resource system will be incapable of ensuring the implementation of all the commitments made .
I agree that it is necessary to fundamentally review budgeting principles , so that , in future , funds for the EU budget are collected from own resources .
We also urgently need to consider innovative financing mechanisms , such as a tax on financial transactions , which would make a significant contribution to financing the EU budget .
I cannot support the report by Mr Garriga Polledo .
The reason for this is that I am fundamentally against Member States ' contributions being replaced with direct EU funding , for which read an EU tax .
After all , the Union should be at the service of Member States and that must be visible in the financing arrangements .
In terms of content , I have problems with the EU 2020 strategy being used as a guideline for the Multiannual Financial Framework .
The objectives of the strategy concern social and employment policies , which fall within the competence of individual Member States .
The failed Lisbon strategy shows where we will end up if we base our strategy on matters over which the EU has no say .
The report also seeks to reduce the amount of arrears by increasing payments .
If projects are not being implemented smoothly , then the sensible thing to do would be to enter into fewer new contractual commitments .
In brief , the report shows no trace of understanding of prudent budgetary management , in light of the enormous economic problems facing European economies .
' Cut your coat according to your cloth ' is a better suggestion than this undesirable call for more and new resources .
In this way , we are repeating , at a European level , the mistakes which several countries have made in recent years .
The Polledo report focuses attention on the numerous challenges faced by the European Union , but mainly on the need for ordinary citizens to be convinced that European institutions and the European Union are serving their values and interests .
This is why I support the forthcoming Multiannual Financial Framework , which will help convince European citizens that the Union has the ability to think and act to protect their long-term interests and achieve effective results in ensuring stable growth and internal cohesion .
Although there are a few decisions which I do not fully agree with , the report is , on the whole , beneficial to Bulgaria 's interests , and I voted to adopt it .
I voted against Mr Garriga Polledo 's report because of some points that I feel are critical in the motion put to the vote .
Although I support some paragraphs , such as the one regarding the reduction of the European Parliament to one seat , the report hopes that an actual European tax will be introduced to finance European Union activities .
It discusses funding for Roma communities , a subject that my political party has always opposed , and the allocation of large amounts of funding for a new round of enlargement of the European Union in the direction of the Western Balkans , another point with which I do not agree .
Finally , European funding has been pledged to help developing countries combat climate change , an issue which , aside from environmental propaganda , will certainly not change the future of the ecosystem .
I voted in favour of this resolution because I feel that the European Parliament 's contribution to the debate on how money from the EU budget should be distributed in future ( 2014-2020 ) , and which areas should be financed to help Europe recover following the global crisis , is particularly important .
Following the debate , the resolution adopted criticised the idea put forward by certain Member States of freezing the EU budget at 2013 levels , given the financial difficulties that many EU countries have faced in recent times .
Instead , when determining the EU financial perspective 2014-2020 , we were urged to continue to guarantee the required financing for areas that stimulate economic growth and successful development .
These areas include research and fostering innovation , combating unemployment , poverty and exclusion , adequate preparedness for demographic changes , responsible use of natural resources , internal and external security , regional and agricultural policy , and development of energy and transport infrastructure .
I congratulate the rapporteur on his work , which I endorsed .
Europe must use the next Multiannual Financial Framework ( MFF ) to provide definite answers to the citizens , who have been suffering from the economic crisis for too long now , and to ensure robust long-term growth .
So far , the European Union has fallen short of the expectations and ambitions it should have .
We will have to face very complex challenges as well as the economic crisis , demographic decline and energy shortages .
The response to these challenges will have to be sought in the Europe 2020 strategy , which should be the policy reference of the next MFF .
We must identify a number of key priorities for the next MFF , such as growth and employment , sustainable development , cohesion for growth and employment , citizenship and Global Europe .
The next MFF must therefore be designed in such a way as to ensure flexibility in order to avoid the shortcomings of the current MFF .
In fact , it would be a good idea to plan a mid-term review to allow for the possibility of revising the ceilings .
Finally , it is crucial to enhance the current system of extra-budgetary instruments for flexibility , simplifying their use and providing them with sufficient envelopes .
The next MFF should strike the right balance between stability , medium-term predictability and flexibility , a principle which should remain at its core .
I voted on Wednesday , 8 June for an increase in the 2014-2020 budget .
As we know , the budget represents the start of any political act .
If you have no budget , you have no project .
The EU budget must therefore reflect the EU 's growth strategy and its ambitions for its citizens .
The Member States have suggested freezing the EU budget for two reasons .
On the one hand , the money comes from contributions by the States and , on the other , a stable budget for the 2014-2020 period means that all the EU 's major projects to restore growth and to invest in the future are jeopardised .
Member States would like to see the EU playing a decisive role when it comes to taking risks but they criticise it when it does so .
I therefore , like the majority of my fellow Members - with the exception of the Eurosceptics - voted for a 5 % increase in the budget to fund future major projects .
We are now well aware of the fact that States are incapable of resolving on their own the problems caused by globalisation .
The next step will be to provide the EU with a budget based on ' own resources ' in order to curtail our reliance on the ' bad ' will of States .
The EU 's powers have increased over the years , especially after the entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon .
However , the budget has grown only very slowly .
Our ambition is to have a competitive , sustainable and inclusive Europe .
If we want to achieve this ambitious goal , I believe that the financial resources the EU has need to be just as ambitious .
This is why I believe that a minimum 5 % increase is needed to the budget envisaged for the next MFF .
The EU also needs to hold an in-depth discussion on the topic of own resources involving both representatives of the European institutions and national parliaments , so as to reach a consensus on an own resources system which will ensure the effective implementation of European policies .
I support the idea expressed in this report about the need to channel the resources towards those measures aimed at achieving the Europe 2020 strategy objectives .
I also fully concur with the need to ensure coherence and complementarity between the various instruments which currently exist for supporting research , development and innovation .
Finally , a credible budget must be coherent and guarantee efficient expenditure by avoiding any duplication in the use of funds .
I voted in favour of this report .
The great virtue of this report is to seek to mobilise all the EU 's budgetary resources in a coherent fashion and as a means to achieve the Europe 2020 strategy , and to take a stand that is diametrically opposed to the narrow approach of most Member States .
While these Members bring Europe down to the common denominator of their contributions , which they would like to see fall , and of its financial returns , which they would like to see increase , this report argues for strong , integrated community policies , both in terms of long-standing policies and in terms of the new competences entrusted under the Treaty of Lisbon .
in writing . - We need to gear the EU budget for the 21st century .
The budget must match our ambitions .
New pan-European investments are needed to boost European-level added value by acting as a catalyst for further private investment and by creating economies of scale .
Major green investment is needed in areas like renewable infrastructure , with more wind farms in the north and solar energy in the south .
Irish investment in wind energy will only pay off , for example , if there is European infrastructure to export that energy via the UK and France .
With oil prices rising and increasing environmental damage , we know the EU must now drive forward to a more sustainable society by becoming more energy efficient , by using more renewable energy , by investing in public transport and ensuring our children live in a clean and healthy environment .
The long term EU budget should also follow the agreed so-called EU 2020 strategic objectives , especially our internationally binding climate objectives .
CAP should be reformed to pay farmers for the delivery of public goods , such as an attractive countryside rich in biodiversity .
We need to maintain the CAP budget to ensure these vital environmental services are provided in Ireland and across Europe .
in writing . - ( NL ) The report on the EU 's Multiannual Financial Framework does not in any way take into account the frustrations of the Member States and of the voters and taxpayers throughout Europe .
We keep hearing calls for more revenue for the European Union , at the same time as all other levels of administration are having to make cuts .
Our failure not to take this into account bears witness to our profound arrogance and alienation from the world .
Europe must cut its coat according to its cloth , confine itself to its core activities and must itself make a number of savings .
Only in this way will we be able to restore confidence amongst the voters .
I voted for the report on the new Multiannual Financial Framework because it introduces the option of applying a financial transaction tax at European level .
This would levy a tax on speculative financial transactions to discourage this kind of practice and would help generate new incomes intended for European Union Member States .
The European Union , through its funding for research and innovation , and through its support to agriculture but also to regional development , contributes in a very tangible manner to boosting the European economies .
For this reason , I fully support the proposals adopted today by our Parliament to set the European Union 's budget for the next seven years .
In order to meet citizens ' needs , Parliament has proposed to create , in the context of the Structural Funds , a new category of regions where GDP per capita is between 75 % and 90 % of the Union 's GDP .
These regions will thus receive financial aid according to criteria more suited to their situation .
I fully support this proposal , which will , for instance , benefit directly people living in my constituency in Languedoc-Roussillon .
The European Parliament has spoken out again on the European budget through the Multiannual Financial Framework , a kind of EU five-year plan .
Now the EU , which requires what can be very demanding sacrifices of Member States , in no way provides for the application of this good advice to itself .
The proposals contained in this text are unrealistic and are nearer to mind-numbing mantras ; waste and bureaucracy still have a bright future ahead of them .
Worse still , in order to escape ' blackmail ' by Member States , which are naturally reluctant to increase their already very high contributions , Parliament once more raises the issue of own resources for the EU , or , in short , a European tax .
' Do as I say and not as I do ' could be the new European motto .
By adopting this report , I welcome the fact that Amendment 74 was preserved , since it advocates the creation of a category of regions referred to as ' intermediate ' for the next programming period 2007-2013 of the cohesion policy and is therefore along the lines of fairer distribution of structural and cohesion funds between regions .
I have a positive view of the report 's focus on the common challenges that Europe is facing .
It addresses the issues of the climate and the environment as constituting an element of all policy areas , the fight for democracy , peace and freedom at a global level , and the urgent need for research , innovation and infrastructure .
The Europe 2020 strategy and investment in initiatives with European added value permeated the debates during the work on the report .
However , I am deeply concerned about the fact that we have given the authority to set priorities to the Council .
The European Parliament should have had the courage to set priorities .
Even though all of the requirements for an inclusive , sustainable and competitive Europe are included , there is nevertheless no way in the world that we could finance everything all at once from the EU budget .
I want a realistic and implementable negotiating strategy and this has not been achieved , as no clear priorities have been set in this report .
I therefore abstained in the final vote .
At a time when the EU has already understood that greater coordination of economic policy and greater control of budgetary policy are both necessary , the idea that the Multiannual Financial Framework ( MFF ) should support economic governance seems an extremely relevant one to me .
Further to this idea , I find countless concerns in the report that deserve to be worked on and studied .
I consider placing the MFF at the service of the objectives of the Europe 2020 strategy , and the concern for at least maintaining the common agricultural policy ( CAP ) budget and keeping the two-pillar system , to be positive .
However , I would state , once again , that the call for the introduction of a financial transaction tax has once again appeared in a report which is not directly related to setting out financial policy , and which I do not consider transparent practice .
I would congratulate the rapporteur on his excellent work , which has resulted in a report enabling us to start drawing up the next Multiannual Financial Framework ( MFF ) for the post-2013 period , which constitutes a challenge for the Commission and for the Council .
The Europe 2020 strategy is consensual , its priorities are clear and its objectives are measurable .
It will be the guide for the forthcoming financial perspectives .
However , the strategy will only be successful if it has budgets corresponding to its actions and objectives .
In this sense , it is necessary for the MFF 's values to match the ambition and commitment that the Europe 2020 strategy constitutes .
Cohesion policy is a result of the solidarity principle .
It is important that this cohesion be economic , social and territorial , and that it support the poorest regions .
I consider it essential that funding for cohesion policy be at least maintained at the same levels .
The common agricultural policy ( CAP ) has been a success .
Therefore , the total sums channelled into agriculture should also be kept up and should be distributed more equitably .
It is important that we move towards an MFF whose revenues are not more than 80 % dependent on national budgets .
There is , therefore , a pressing need to go ahead with the debate on the new own resources .
The rapporteur has stated that the time has come to put a stop to loudly proclaimed statements of intent that are not properly backed up with the financial resources enabling the announced objectives to be actually achieved .
This report is a perfect example of this exercise .
By basically proposing that the EU budget be frozen until the 2020 review , with a residual increase of 5 % , many of the objectives that feature in the course of its 40 pages are being compromised , particularly , that of social and economic cohesion .
In the face of a serious economic and social crisis , exacerbated by EU policy , the budgets made possible by these financial perspectives will thus be rendered incapable of ensuring a redistributive function , which is essential to the effective realisation of the principle of cohesion .
We have made countless proposals on the need to increase the EU budget to support economic and social cohesion , as well as to reduce the compulsory nature of national contributions , cutting them to a maximum of 10 % of the total cost for the project submitted , particularly in the countries with the greatest financial difficulties .
Furthermore , we have been stressing the importance of promoting investment in public services , of supporting production , of creating jobs with rights , of eradicating poverty , and of combating social inequality .
The path proposed in this report is something else ; something very different .
That is why we voted against it .
In spite of the occasional positive point , the report does not recommend a break with and a change from the European Union 's policies on its financial resources .
We therefore voted against .
It is especially serious that it does not tackle , as an absolute priority , the response to the serious social problems created by the economic and social crisis , with a significant increase in the EU budget for supporting economic and social cohesion , accompanied by a cut in compulsory national contributions , reducing them to a maximum of 10 % of the project submitted .
Above all , in the countries with the greatest financial difficulties , it should commit to investment in public services , to supporting production , to creating jobs with rights , to eradicating poverty , and to combating social inequality and all types of discrimination , not least gender .
It is also necessary to promote peace , development cooperation and aid , and a significant cut in military spending and overseas representation .
Lamentably , the report limits itself to proposing a residual increase in current EU budget values of 5 % , despite opposing the freezing of the post-2013 EU budget , as advocated by some Member States .
However , this suggested increase means that the next Multiannual Financial Framework ( financial perspectives ) 2014-2020 would represent just 1.11 % of EU gross national income ( GNI ) , as opposed to 1.06 % , the sum projected for 2013 .
In a situation where many Member States are implementing tough fiscal measures , the EU budget needs to be better justified than ever before .
It must ensure the highest possible level of European added value , it must be sensibly managed and it must support public and private resources as far as possible .
The structure of the future Multiannual Financial Framework ( MFF ) should be realistic , and it should enable continuity of planning and avoid the shortcomings of the current MFF , especially the lack of flexibility within the areas .
With regard to the method for developing a system of own resources for the EU , which is gradually being replaced by Member State contributions and is consequently perceived as an excessive burden on the public finances of Member States , the reform of this system is more necessary than at any time in the past .
In my opinion , a better system ensuring fairness , transparency and sufficient budgetary revenues would make it possible for the budgetary decision-making process to focus more on the key priorities of the Union .
In particular , the current exemptions and corrective mechanisms should be gradually phased out , which would be an essential step towards greater fairness and transparency in the EU budget .
in writing . - The EU budget post-2013 must be fit for purpose to maintain competitiveness , to increase economic growth and to combat high unemployment in Europe .
I believe that agriculture and a strong , well resourced common agricultural policy are central to this objective .
I fully support the call in the report to link agriculture to the Europe 2020 strategy as I firmly believe that the agriculture and food sector can make a valuable contribution to future economic growth in Ireland and across Europe .
That is why it is essential that we protect and maintain the some EUR 1.7 billion which Ireland annually receives under the CAP .
A strongly funded common agricultural policy will protect Europe 's food security , contribute to our climate change targets and maintain employment in our rural communities .
I am pleased that the report recognises the role played by the fisheries and aquaculture sectors in maintaining employment in coastal , island and remote regions .
I believe that we must direct more funding to these communities under the European Fisheries Fund post-2013 .
The peace process in Ireland has benefited hugely from the EU budget .
I urge all Members to support the retention of these important programmes .
To be brief , notwithstanding the exceptional length of the text , Parliament calls for the European budget , in its total amount and distribution , to be adapted after 2013 to the competences and very large number of priorities of the European Union , as it defines them .
It therefore demands for it to be increased - by at least 5 % in the first instance .
How is it to be financed ?
By a new European tax , of course !
Who are they trying to kid ?
Europe already costs a great deal .
What has been the result ?
Powerlessness in the face of the crisis , harm caused by the euro , the trade agreements and the Schengen Agreement , useless posturing , interferences and obstacles in other domains .
At a time when Member States are being asked to slash their own budgets drastically , when people are being summoned to tighten their belts , when social security systems are being undermined by unemployment and immigration , while those responsible for the crisis continue to line their pockets and markets continue to speculate , it is obscene for this assembly , in cahoots with Brussels , to demand a single cent more to pursue these policies and make them worse .
With the adoption of the Garriga report on the political and budgetary challenges facing the European Union after 2013 , Parliament is anticipating , much too timidly in my view , the debate to come on the future financial prospects of the Union .
This report reiterates its opposition to pitting against each other the different policies that fall within EU competence and insists on the need to mobilise sufficient funds , consistent with the EU 2020 strategy .
It sends a clear message to Member States : we intend to support strong integrated policies and to do this by increasing the budget by at least 5 % .
Furthermore , in a context where citizens are subjected to austerity , we must maintain a strong cohesion policy .
That is what we propose in this report , with support for the plan to create an intermediate category of regions , which will enable a distribution of Structural Funds that is more in accordance with the real economic and social situations of our territories .
Finally , the Union must grant itself financial resources that match its ambitions .
We have therefore reiterated our desire to introduce a tax on financial transactions , a project which is widely supported by the public and which would encourage greater support on their part for the European project .
By voting for the Garriga Polledo report , the European Parliament has made its voice heard on the future of the European budget and put forward an ambitious proposal for the next Multiannual Financial Framework .
The request to increase the post-2013 EU budget by 5 % , and therefore to increase the total European Union GNI from 1.06 % to 1.11 % , corresponds to a desire to honour commitments made to support growth and development , first and foremost , the Europe 2020 strategy , for which adequate resources are needed .
It is important , in fact , to remember the added value of the European budget , which can act as a driver for economic growth , research and development and employment , particularly for young people , alongside national budgets .
The report also reinforces Parliament 's position in favour of new financial instruments , such as the tax on financial transactions and Eurobonds , which are an opportunity for the European economy .
It is now down to the Commission to take up Parliament 's ambition , presenting its proposals for the next European financial framework and not falling victim to the restrictive budget policies of Member States .
I voted in favour of this report insofar as it launches an appeal to set up strong , integrated EU policies .
Two other important points received my support .
Firstly , the creation of a category of ' intermediate regions ' within cohesion policy in order to ensure that the distribution of Structural Funds matches more closely the real economic and social situation of the territories ; and secondly , a renewed call for the creation of a tax on financial transactions as a new resource to safeguard European economic policies .
At a time of austerity policies and when unbounded financial speculation persists , it is fair to require the financial sector to play its part in relaunching an economy that has been battered by its irresponsible behaviour .
The resolution adopted by the European Parliament is our first contribution to the debate on the future financial perspective .
I wholeheartedly support the proposal to increase the European Union 's budget in the upcoming budgetary perspective .
I believe that the European Union needs an ambitious budget , which will correspond to the challenges facing us .
Reducing or freezing the European budget , as proposed by some of the Member States , is not a good solution for the European economy .
The European budget must be a budget which will support the Member States as they exit the crisis , and which is also able to respond to unexpected events more flexibly .
I also welcome Parliament 's support for the idea of categorising some areas as intermediate regions , in order to ensure that their further development is promoted despite the fact that they exceed the currently binding criterion of 75 % of the European Union 's GDP .
Introducing this category will help regions which are still contending with many development challenges even though they have exceeded the EU average and , in the near future , this will include Polish regions .
I believe that the EU budget must be given sufficient resources to be able to finance the commitments that have been decided upon .
At the same time , I would like to emphasise that the EU ought to have an attitude of restraint and provide these resources by means of redistribution within the existing EU budget .
I do not believe that the overall size of the budget should increase .
I would prefer to see the agricultural budget reduced in favour of the priorities of research and development and the conversion to green energy , etc. set in the Europe 2020 strategy .
Therefore , I also do not believe that the 2013 budget level for agriculture should be retained , but would welcome the distribution of agricultural aid evenly between the Member States .
I also believe that it is very important to improve the efficiency of the EU 's administrative expenditure , and one way of doing this is to increase the transparency of the process for distributing and using this expenditure .
I do not believe that the own resources ceiling should be revised , as it should be possible to finance EU policy within the current income ceiling .
I also see a need for a review of the EU 's own resources system .
The current system is very complicated and lacks transparency .
The rebates have not made the system any fairer , but instead have given rise to a number of new exemptions and corrections .
However , a change in this system does not give the EU a direct right of taxation , as the Treaty does not provide for any such competence for the Union .
Any change to the own resources system also requires all Member States to give their approval in order for it to enter into force .
In the vote on the report on the EU 's long-term budget in Strasbourg on 8 June 2011 , we Swedish Conservatives in the European Parliament chose to vote against the proposal .
This was because the proposal does not set priorities for important and less important expenditure , which we consider to be necessary .
Instead of showing leadership and focusing on what will bring growth and competitiveness to Europe , the proposal calls for an increase in the budget of 5 % so as to avoid the need to prioritise .
At a time when the EU Member States are fighting massive budget deficits and growing national debt , the European Parliament is choosing to demand more money for the EU .
This is a line that we cannot support .
We should instead phase out the subsidies for the common agricultural policy ( CAP ) and the Structural Funds , but unfortunately , the proposal that was voted through goes in the opposite direction .
While we voted against the report as a whole , we welcome the wording in the proposal concerning a ' significant increase ' in appropriations for science and research .
This is something that we have worked hard for and its inclusion is a step in the right direction .
When determining the EU financial perspective 2014-2020 , it is necessary to ensure adequate financing for areas that stimulate economic growth and successful development ; in other words , to focus on research and fostering innovations , combating unemployment , poverty and exclusion , adequate preparedness for demographic changes , responsible use of natural resources , internal and external security , regional and agricultural policy , and the development of energy and transport infrastructure .
I abstained from voting on this document because we need to fundamentally review the common agricultural policy , which must guarantee a fair and uniform system of direct payments , and many other important areas , without which we will be unable to create a competitive and strong Europe .
This report is perhaps one of the most important of this legislature .
I had the opportunity to be the rapporteur for the Committee on Culture and Education and I believe that the agreement which has been reached , albeit far from perfect , is probably the best we could achieve in the current economic climate .
I confidently voted for it and hope that it will send a clear message to the Council , which will take into account the European Parliament 's position .
I voted for this resolution because the statement identifies the main problems and priorities for the EU in the new Multiannual Financial Framework .
I should particularly like to emphasise the call contained in the resolution for the Commission to present proposals for an effective and efficient EU common agricultural policy ( CAP ) , which would more fairly distribute direct payments between Member States and farmers , and strengthen the link between delivery of public goods to society and support payments to farmers .
I fully support the call for the funds allocated to the CAP in the budget year 2013 to be maintained at the same level for the next financial programming period also , so that the CAP can fulfil its expanded objectives and tasks .
The new EU financing system must be more transparent , simpler and fairer .
That is why I support the proposals for the system of national contributions , which places disproportionate emphasis on net balances between Member States instead of on the principle of European solidarity and the European common interest , to be slowly replaced by the Union 's own resources , which the Union would collect directly and independently of national budgets .
Even though the European Parliament 's report on Investing in the future : a new Multiannual Financial Framework ( MFF ) for a competitive , sustainable and inclusive Europe contains many ideas that should be supported , I did not support it because I believe that it damages the European Union 's image in the eyes of its residents .
The report suggests increasing the tax burden on European citizens , and I cannot agree to that .
One can agree that Europe must have its own finances and that this can be done by tax collection .
However , this would require the creation of a federal Europe , which should be done through open debates , and not through the back door using tax policy .
If we wish to continue in this direction , we must first ensure that Member States agree to renounce their tax revenues for the good of the European Union , and only then would it be possible to create a self-financed common budget .
To make this type of decision , European politicians must involve society , which has not happened in this case .
I should like to congratulate Mr Garriga Polledo on the excellent work he has carried out on the important matter of the future financial perspective .
Mr Garriga Polledo has presented the House with an effective summary encompassing the positions of the various national delegations and the various political groups .
I strongly support the decision to request an increase in resources for the next Multiannual Financial Framework of at least 5 % .
In addition , I would like to highlight the part of the report regarding the common agricultural policy , in view of my role as rapporteur for the opinion of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development .
Therefore , I fully support the decision to at least retain the existing agricultural budget , while recalling that the CAP is the only real European policy that can play an important role in a strategic sector that provides goods for public use and generates real European added value .
Finally , I would like to highlight the vote on cohesion policy , where a safeguard clause was successfully added in the event that intermediate categories are introduced in order to avoid resources being withdrawn from the regions eligible for funding under the convergence , competitiveness and cooperation objective .
This means that additional resources will be needed to finance a new objective .
We believe that the EU budget must be given sufficient resources to be able to finance the commitments that have been decided upon .
At the same time , we would like to emphasise that the EU ought , as far as possible , to have an attitude of restraint and provide these resources by means of redistribution within the existing EU budget .
We would prefer to see the agricultural budget reduced in favour of the priorities of research and development and the conversion to green energy , etc. set in the Europe 2020 strategy .
Therefore , we also do not believe that the 2013 budget level for agriculture should be retained , but would welcome the distribution of agricultural aid evenly between the Member States .
We also believe that it is very important to improve the efficiency of the EU 's administrative expenditure , and one way of doing this is to increase the transparency of the process for distributing and using this expenditure .
We do not believe that the own resources ceiling should be revised as it should be possible to finance EU policy within the current income ceiling .
We also see a need for a review of the EU 's own resources system .
The current system is very complicated and lacks transparency .
The rebates have not made the system any fairer , but instead have given rise to a number of new exemptions and corrections .
However , a change in this system does not give the EU a direct right of taxation , as the Treaty does not provide for any such competence for the Union .
Any change to the own resources system also requires all Member States to give their approval in order for it to enter into force .
This motion for a European Parliament resolution on Investing in the future : a new Multiannual Financial Framework ( MFF ) for a competitive , sustainable and inclusive Europe is important both in terms of achieving the EU 2020 objectives ( with regard to restoring and providing long-term protection for the levels of economic growth ) and of preventing a recurrence of the current economic crisis .
This report states that the Europe 2020 strategy should define the policies of the new MFF as the ( EU 2020 ) objectives can only be achieved through optimum use of existing resources ( established through the relevant policies ) .
Therefore , the process of setting the key priorities for the future MFF , such as knowledge for economic growth , cohesion for economic growth and employment , management of natural resources and sustainable development , citizenship and Global Europe , will help ensure the appropriate allocation and optimum use of existing funds .
Drawing up a new MFF as set out in this report will help devise a long-term action plan which will produce definite results and offer the potential to ensure economic growth for the EU .
I supported Mr Garriga Polledo 's report because I found its general outlines justified in the light of the challenges that the European Union is to face over the coming years .
It is unrealistic to transfer new responsibilities to Europe without increasing the financial resources on which it can draw .
I would , however , have liked the European Parliament to move beyond the stage of legitimate demands and set a certain number of priorities .
The ' ever more ' refrain of a number of my fellow Members is too glib a response .
What we need is to be convincing about the effectiveness of European expenditure compared with national expenditure .
Furthermore , the qualitative dimension of expenditure is at least as important as the quantitative one .
Finally , the transfer of funds unspent at European Union level to the EU budget rather than returning them to the Member States represents a source of considerable ' savings ' .
As for introducing a system of own resources , I remain extremely hesitant about the unilateral introduction of a tax on financial transactions without a serious impact study .
Support for a measure of this nature without being aware of its implications shows that the majority of the European Parliament is on the wrong track .
in writing . - I voted with a heavy heart against this resolution .
While believing that good value can be obtained when 27 Member States pool their resources , I could not vote for a 5 % increase in the EU budget beyond 2013 when we have not thoroughly examined existing expenditure with a view to eliminating waste and duplication .
The EU budget beyond 2013 must prioritise growth and job creation .
The European Union budget should provide the highest degree of European added value , be managed soundly , and leverage as many public and private resources as possible .
In order to respond to the challenges ahead , we support the objectives of the Europe 2020 strategy , a strategy that should help Europe recover from the crisis and come out stronger , through job creation and smart , sustainable and inclusive growth .
It is the policy reference for the next Multiannual Financial Framework ( MFF ) , which should be as ambitious as possible .
Against this background , we believe that the key priorities for the next MFF should be grouped around the following themes : knowledge for growth and employment , sustainable development , cohesion for growth and employment , citizenship and Global Europe .
The structure of the next MFF should be realistic , facilitate planning continuity and avoid the shortcomings of the current MFF .
It should especially strike the correct balance between stability , medium-term predictability and flexibility .
Finally , we believe that in order to make the European Union budget more equitable and transparent , the existing exceptions and correction mechanisms should be progressively phased out .
The Garriga report is a test to see how efficiently EU policies are working for the future programming period .
The rapporteur presents us with a major challenge . This involves satisfying national interests , which are so diverse , while , at the same time , improving European added value , which is reflected in the Multiannual Financial Framework .
I think that European citizens need to have a better understanding of the cohesion policy 's objectives .
A strong Europe , which is a Europe that will cope with the global competitive environment , is achieved by maintaining the cohesion policy as a key element in EU policies , aimed at achieving balanced development in every region .
I want to insist on maintaining a significant proportion of the future budget outlook for the cohesion policy .
Narrowing the economic and social disparities within the EU must continue to remain its main priority .
In order to achieve the proposed results , we must keep the main criteria for allocating funds according to the level of development and the convergence between the EU 's regions .
I support this report because I think that supplementing the Multiannual Financial Framework after 2013 is a viable solution , which involves making changes to the current structure .
In addition to the provision of funding for research and development and energy and transport , we must also consider investments in the areas of cohesion and agriculture .
Mr Garriga Polledo 's report ' Investing in the future : a new Multiannual Financial Framework ( MFF ) for a competitive , sustainable and inclusive Europe ' is a very important step in the institutional and economic reorganisation of the European Union following the entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon .
We all know that the new Treaty calls for new fields of competence to be reflected in the next MFF .
This will certainly help us face the new global challenges .
I voted in favour .
in writing . - Labour Euro MPs believe the focus and priority for EU spending must be the funding of economic investment and research which boosts the economy and creates jobs .
Targeted EU spending is one way in which we can boost local economies and bring jobs to our communities .
In the face of government cuts , the EU is providing vital funds for the UK regions .
However , taxpayers want to see better value for money .
That is why Labour Euro MPs voted against calls for a 5 % budget increase .
Savings can and must be made in other areas , in particular , the common agricultural policy , including harmful agricultural export subsidies and tobacco subsidies , in order to fund Europe 's economic priorities .
The debate on the next Multiannual Financial Framework is an opportunity for fundamental reform and it must be seized .
A ' business as usual ' policy is not an option in a Europe that needs finance for jobs and growth .
Labour Euro MPs do not believe that families should continue to bear the full cost of the UK 's budgetary contribution .
That is why we back a debate on alternative ways to fund the EU , cutting the amount coming from VAT and the national budget through options such as coordinated measures addressing the under-taxed financial sector .
This report makes Europe 2020 the very framework of the future European budget .
It endorses the European semester , the European stability mechanism and the Euro Plus Pact .
Not a single word is mentioned in connection with the nuclear issue .
Should there be a budget for that ?
I think not .
At this moment , many Member States are making difficult budgetary adjustments , so defending the EU budget should be very well justified .
The EU budget should provide the highest level of European added value ( EAV ) , should demonstrate robust management , and should serve to stimulate public and private resources as much as possible .
The Europe 2020 strategy is the EU 's response to such challenges .
It is a strategy which should help Europe to recover from the crisis and emerge invigorated , through the creation of jobs and smart , sustainable and inclusive growth .
I agree with the rapporteur when he says that ' the Europe 2020 strategy should be the policy reference of the next [ Multiannual Financial Framework ] and that it should reflect the ambitions of the strategy ' .
The priorities for the next MFF should be grouped around the following issues : knowledge for growth and jobs , management of natural resources and sustainable development , cohesion for growth and jobs , citizenship , and Global Europe .
in writing . - The report by the Special committee on the policy challenges and budgetary resources defines Parliament 's political priorities for the post-2013 Multiannual Financial Framework .
An important point in the report is the request for the introduction of one or several genuine own resources to replace the present GNI-based system and to achieve an autonomous , fairer , more transparent , simple and equitable financing system .
In order to avoid abusive use of accounting figures , it is necessary to support this report .
I voted in favour .
Since the fiasco with the euro rescue package , the net contributors have been asked to pay up two and three times over .
In future years , real hard cash will be poured into these rescue mechanisms instead of guarantees .
This will have to be financed by the net contributors , in other words , the hard-working citizens of Germany , France , Italy , the Netherlands and Austria , from their national budgets ; the first painful cuts are already being felt in these countries .
Demanding budgetary increases in this difficult situation is scandalous .
We do not need a bloated EU budget that is perhaps up to ten times higher than necessary ; we do not need a budget funded by the EU taxpayer that has lost any sense of the need to economise ; we do not need a further bloating of Brussels bureaucracy that robs the shirts from the backs of the net contributors .
Instead , we should consistently pursue every opportunity to make savings .
Farming subsidies , the largest and most contentious budgetary factor , should be renationalised .
This would take the pressure off the EU budget and the Member States will be better able to respond to the specific character of their agricultural sector .
For this reason , I have no hesitation in voting against the Garriga Polledo report .
I voted against Amendment 39 in this report and , by extension , for Amendment 62 .
I think that an intermediary category is needed for regions for the duration of the next programming period , with the only proviso being that the allocation of funds earmarked for these regions does not affect the allocations intended for achieving the convergence and competitiveness objectives .
Today , during the vote on the Garriga Polledo report on Investing in the future : a new Multiannual Financial Framework ( MFF ) for a competitive , sustainable and inclusive Europe , I abstained from voting on the amendments tabled by the Group of the Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats in the European Parliament , the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance and the Confederal Group of the European United Left - Nordic Green Left concerning the forwarding to the European Commission of suggestions regarding the introduction of a tax on financial transactions .
I could not support this course of action , although I am an ardent supporter of a tax which would provide the EU with its own revenue .
A European tax will guarantee that the EU 's goals can be accomplished , without the constraints imposed by the positions of the Member States , which too frequently sacrifice the EU 's interests to short-term goals .
However , I believe that it is unwise to propose the introduction of a tax on financial transactions in the European Union alone .
We are faced with the challenge of making the European economy the most competitive in the world and , in my opinion , it is unacceptable to create a burden which will result in the outflow of capital from Europe .
Similarly , I believe that attempts to introduce a carbon tax as an alternative to FTT are exceptionally harmful .
Europe 's hardworking citizens are being required to pay more and more .
Following the disastrous euro rescue package , which simply involved the net contributors taking a hit for the mismanagement and corruption in a few southern states , the plan is now to ask the already overburdened citizens of the net contributor countries to cough up even more money .
Instead of taking every opportunity to save money , expenditure is being further increased .
We should be aiming to reduce the burden , not increase it .
I therefore voted against this motion .
We must establish a Multiannual Financial Framework ( MFF ) that would ensure the transparent and efficient financing of EU policy and would prevent a repetition of the crisis .
The Europe 2020 strategy should be the implementation reference for the MFF .
Above all , any new system for financing the budget should not increase the burden on national treasuries or the tax burden for citizens .
In order to reduce EU citizens ' dissatisfaction with current expenditure , it is necessary to improve the quality of the implementation and application of expenditure .
We must increase transparency in the allocation and use of funds and reduce administrative costs and bureaucracy .
Significant attention should be paid to reducing poverty and unemployment , to industry and energy , and the creation of a knowledge-based society .
We must provide for adequate financing for large-scale research and development projects .
Given the importance of small and medium-sized enterprises ( SMEs ) , the appropriate financial resources must be put towards improving their operating conditions .
I do not agree with the proposal to reduce the financing allocated to the common agricultural policy in the future because agriculture is a particularly sensitive sector .
Reduced financing will have particularly negative consequences for farmers in all EU countries .
The European Social Fund should become a political priority in order to achieve social and employment goals .
We must improve systems for monitoring and evaluating the implementation of cohesion policy .
As we approach a new stage of EU enlargement , the MFF must provide for properly balanced expenditure .
I voted for the report by Mr Garriga Polledo because I believe that in the future , financial instruments should be efficient , strengthen cohesion and prepare the European Union for the challenges of the global market .
I agree with the content of the text , although there are two points that I did not agree with and which I opposed : the tax on financial transactions and the amendments to introduce the ' intermediate category ' .
I do not believe that a reference to the tax on financial transactions should be included in this report .
A debate about this tax is important , but it requires in-depth analysis .
The addition of an intermediate category , on the other hand , would compromise the horizontal approach for Objective 2 regions , which has proven to be effective in recent years , the phasing-out system and funds for Objective 1 regions .
This would hurt Italian regions to the benefit of regions in the new Member States which , with the recent enlargement , have already received a huge share of funding .
The new Multiannual Financial Framework ( MFF ) is crucial in order for the Europe 2020 strategy to be properly realised and , in general terms , to be able to provide the conditions for robust development which can respond both to the problems that Europe 's various peoples are experiencing and to their expectations of improvement in their lives .
In this context , I commend the author of the report for the proposal of a seven-year MFF , in line with the Europe 2020 strategy , subject to mid-term review , advocating , as a minimum : the maintaining of the EU budget , with particular emphasis on the common agricultural policy ( CAP ) and on cohesion policy ; a greater sense of flexibility , which becomes more necessary as the financial constraints become more tangible ; and also greater democratic responsibility , so that European funds can genuinely promote development projects that are capable of being sustainable .
In this context , it is important that regions that have already emerged from Objective 1 are able to move to an intermediate stage , reinforcing the development which they have already proven themselves capable of , instead of them being abruptly abandoned , jeopardising the progress that has been achieved in the meantime .
We have a positive view of the report 's focus on the common challenges that we are facing : climate and environmental issues , the fight for democracy , peace and freedom at a global level and the urgent need for research , innovation and infrastructure .
The Europe 2020 strategy and investment in initiatives with European added value permeated the debates during the work on the report .
However , we are deeply concerned about the fact that we have passed the authority to set priorities over to the Council .
This is very unfortunate for the European Parliament .
Even though all of the requirements for an inclusive , sustainable and competitive Europe are included , it is impossible to finance everything all at once from the EU budget .
We want a realistic and practicable negotiating strategy , but as no clear priorities have been set in this report , we feel that this goal has not been fulfilled .
Our proposals to modernise the agricultural budget were not included in the final document .
For these reasons , among others , we abstained in the final vote .
I voted in favour of the report presented by Mr Garriga Polledo on behalf of the Special committee on the policy challenges and budgetary resources for a sustainable European Union after 2013 .
In a context where populism is on the increase , the effectiveness and even relevance of EU policies are regularly brought into question .
Nonetheless , in the face of current crises , whether financial , economic , social or climatic , we do not need less but rather more Europe .
This report therefore proposes finally giving the EU the resources to match its ambitions , by arguing for a substantial increase in the EU budget of a minimum of 5 % and a mobilisation of the budgetary resources of the Union for the benefit of the EU 2020 strategy .
Thanks to action by the Group of the Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats in the European Parliament , the European Parliament also argues in this report for two strong measures : as far as revenue is concerned , an in-depth reform of the own resources system , in particular , through the creation of a tax on financial transactions ( Tobin tax ) ; as far as expenditure is concerned , the creation of a category of ' intermediate regions ' to increase solidarity between the territories of the EU and ensure a fairer distribution of the regional policy 's Structural Funds .
The combination of a smaller working population and a higher share of retired people will place additional strains on social welfare systems and economic competitiveness , causing increasingly significant problems in terms of gender poverty , given the high number of elderly women and current disparities in social protection .
The importance must be emphasised of gender budgeting as a good governance tool to improve efficiency and fairness , proper monitoring of how budgetary allocations affect the economic and social opportunities of men and women , and flexibility to restructure the ones that negatively affect the achievement of gender equality .
Specific measures to develop the technical and scientific skills of young women need to be included in the European investment plan for employment , environmental protection and innovation , in order to improve their qualifications and employability , in particular , in strategic growth sectors in which they are under-represented .
The European Social Fund ( ESF ) should provide adequate resources for measures aimed at improving labour market access and combating unemployment and social exclusion .
At the same time , I call on the European Commission to propose active measures through the European Agricultural Fund for Rural Development ( EAFRD ) in order to support women 's employment in rural areas .
in writing . - Renegotiation of the EU budget will impact on how the Union operates in the coming years and on the programmes it can afford .
The budget as a percentage of the EU Gross National Income should reflect the agreed priorities of the European Union .
But the negotiations must also reflect Member States ' needs in light of the consolidation efforts under way in many countries , including Ireland .
The aim to boost employment , productivity and social cohesion in the Europe 2020 growth strategy cannot be discarded because of the current financial problems .
Productivity-enhancing policies , particularly those in green energy and research and development , must be recognised as the driver of the EU 's economic future .
Another issue of major importance , not just to Ireland but to the EU as a whole , is the common agricultural policy .
It is recognised that significant change is coming after 2013 , but changes to payments under the CAP should gradually evolve to allow farmers to adjust to the new arrangements .
At the same time , the CAP budget must help European farmers adapt to new challenges and opportunities .
The EU Multiannual Financial Framework represents an opportunity to make strategic choices for the future .
In fact , at a time of profound contrition in state action , the increasing of EU budgets represents an act of confidence in the common project and of reinforcement of action undertaken at supranational level .
In fact , there is a series of challenges facing Member States , whose proper solutions can only be found at EU level .
in writing . - ( FR ) To do more with less money , as certain Member States recommend , is mission impossible !
That is why the report adopted this afternoon on the new post-2013 Multiannual Financial Framework is important .
It provides guidelines to enable the European Union truly to enter a period of competitiveness , solidarity and good governance .
It points out that , in the absence of significant reallocations within the additional resources budget , Europe will never be able to accomplish the new missions assigned to it under the Treaty of Lisbon nor embark on the road towards sustainable growth .
However , there are very many domains which can contribute to synergies or economies of scale : the European External Action Service , humanitarian aid and civil protection , pooling of resources in defence , research and innovation , major infrastructure projects ( especially in the areas of energy and transport ) .
Another idea that has mileage in it is to gradually abandon subsidies that are harmful to the environment , along the lines of what the Commission has done for tobacco .
I am also pleased that the European Parliament has reaffirmed its support for own resources because it is only right that the Union should manage its own budget .
I voted against the amendments to Mr Garriga Polledo 's report calling for intermediate categories of regions , or regions with per capita gross domestic product between 75 % and 90 % of European Union GDP , to be introduced for the next financial programming period .
This innovation is apparently one of openness and greater financial flexibility , but in a period of austerity and budget restrictions like the present , it will inevitably lead to cuts in funding for other regions , particularly Objective 1 ( convergence ) regions , which specifically include the regions of southern Italy .
I note with regret that my fellow Members failed to pick up on this aspect and have allowed themselves to be influenced by reasoning that goes against the principles of European solidarity .
Fortunately , Amendment 64 , which was approved , underlines that these transitional measures must not in any case be established at the expense of the current convergence , competitiveness and cooperation ( Objectives 1 , 2 and 3 ) regions .
The responses we should bring to the challenges that face us - the economic crisis , the rapid rise of the emerging economies , climate change , turbulent demographic change and so on - can only be effective if we create them collectively , at European level .
I am absolutely convinced that we should move in the direction of greater involvement of the European Union .
While the EU budget is a major political lever , the ceiling on the EU 's own resources has remained unchanged since 1993 .
This resolution calls for the European budget to be allocated resources equal to the EU 's ambitions .
I am wholly in favour of this idea and give it my support .
Personally , I am particularly in favour of implementing the European tax on financial transactions as quickly as possible , if we cannot have an agreement at world level .
Although I am not entirely in favour of the resources released in this way being allocated to the Union 's budget , as I think that the Millennium Development Goals should benefit , at least in part , I wished to vote for paragraph 171 to send a positive signal to the Commission and the Council regarding the implementation of this tax .
in writing . - In favour .
As my colleague , Bas Eickhout , said before , freezing or decreasing the EU 's budget post-2013 is not a credible approach if the EU and its Member States are serious about achieving the policy priorities they have set themselves , notably in the Europe 2020 strategy .
Coordinating EU funding and actions is clearly a better way for us to achieve our common goals , as opposed to individual actions .
We welcome the fact that MEPs have clearly set out their stall to this end ahead of the forthcoming debate on the future financing of the EU .
The EU needs a proper and predictable system for financing its own budget in order to end the perpetual , damaging squabbling over national contributions to the EU budget .
Introducing a true and meaningful ' own-resources ' system for financing the EU budget is the only way to achieve this and we are happy that the EP has thrown its weight behind this long-standing Green priority .
I believe that with today 's vote , the European Parliament has sent a strong and clear signal to the Member States asking to freeze the European Union budget for 2014-2020 .
This substantial reduction in resources is not , in fact , a valid choice for those who believe in a truly competitive Europe , and the countries pursuing it should clearly specify which priority projects will have to be abandoned in order to allow for these cuts .
The bad habit of making political commitments without having the necessary financial resources must be broken because it undermines the planning and credibility of the whole European system .
Reducing long-term budgets could compromise both the increase in expenditure on research and innovation and investment in infrastructure , foreign policy and enlargement .
Furthermore , to reduce them now would have serious consequences for the future of all the Member States .
Within the framework of voting on ' Investing in the future : a new Multiannual Financial Framework for a competitive , sustainable and inclusive Europe ' , I voted in favour of creating an intermediate category of regions with a per capita GNP between 75 % and 90 % of the Union 's GNP .
Ten French regions should benefit from the creation of this new category , including Nord-Pas-de-Calais and Picardie .
The creation of this third category of regions will enable them to benefit from funding for employment , sustainable growth and competitiveness .
Another important point in this report is that it supports the creation of a system of funding the European budget that is transparent , simpler and more equitable .
Amongst the measures put forward by the Commission , there is the creation of a tax on financial transactions .
Parliament regularly speaks in favour of this , and I strongly support this measure which will improve how the market operates by reducing speculation , by contributing to financing global public goods and to reducing budget deficits .
While I would have liked a more ambitious outcome , the Garriga Polledo report on the financial perspective from 2014 is a step forward , the result of a broad political compromise within the Special committee , created for the first time in Parliament , before the Commission presents its proposal .
The report acknowledges the need for more resources to be put in place to meet the objectives of the Europe 2020 strategy , to develop European policies and to meet the commitments arising from enlargement and the Treaty of Lisbon .
It advocates new own resources , opening the door to a fiscal union and a tax on financial transactions which should be extended to the rest of the world .
From 2020 , it proposes five-year periods ( or five-plus-five-year periods ) which are more in tune with the mandate of the institutions .
I consider the support for activities related to the sea and the creation of a new category for regions that have between 75 % and 90 % of EU per capita income to be very positive for Galicia .
This is necessary in order to avoid the flow of EU funds being interrupted and to provide a transition towards improved competitiveness and the promotion of convergence on a sustainable development path .
When the European Parliament voted on Wednesday 8 June on investing in the future : a new Multiannual Financial Framework ( MFF ) for a competitive , sustainable and inclusive Europe , I chose to vote against the report .
At a time when the EU Member States find themselves under serious budgetary pressure , I am disappointed to see that , instead of setting priorities , the European Parliament is choosing to increase the budget by at least 5 % .
The European Parliament voted for contributions to continue in areas that keep the European economy locked in its old ways , by , among other things , setting aside amounts for the common agricultural policy that are at least as large as for the 2013 budget year .
I am also opposed to the European Parliament 's proposal to reform the EU 's financing by introducing an own resources system .
Some of these resources are intended to come from a financial transaction tax ( FTT ) .
in writing . - I will be supporting an amendment in the Multiannual Financial Framework ( MFF ) report which limits Member State EU contributions to the rate of inflation ( currently 3.2 % ) or below , as suggested by the Heads of State of the UK , France , Germany , Netherlands and Finland .
The MMF Garriga Report seeks to increase funding from Member States for the period 2014-2020 by 5 % , and this I cannot support at a time when extreme adversity is being experienced in the UK from the government 's dangerous and socially divisive austerity measures .
I do support many of the measures promoted in the report and in the Green 's amendments , particularly around the Green New Deal , the end of national rebates and Own Resources for the EU , and am mindful that part of the above-inflation increase is needed to meet obligations under the Lisbon Treaty .
There are , however , many expensive budget lines remaining in the MFF that shouldn 't be supported , and I 'm thinking of the EUR 6.6 billion to be spent on nuclear fusion as just one example .
My argument is that if there isn 't enough funding after inflation-only increases in Member State contributions , ways should be found to re-allocate budget lines to meet any shortfalls .
Europe 2020 is the European strategy seeking to respond to the new global challenges for the EU and its various Member States , so it is important to structure the economic and financial conditions which will guide its application in the 2014-2021 period .
This report aims to contribute to setting out the post-2013 Multiannual Financial Framework ( MFF ) , approving a 5 % increase in budget appropriations on the current MFF , the maintenance of funding for cohesion and agriculture , and a financial strengthening of the areas of research , development and innovation , and of energy and transport .
I voted in favour of the report since I view the strategic content as a positive and , overall , since the budget is in line with the objectives enshrined in the Europe 2020 strategy .
The strengthening of economic governance and the importance of cohesion policy are some of the areas that I would like to emphasise in the pursuit of a smarter , more sustainable and more inclusive Europe .
I consider it important to create an intermediate category for regions whose per capita gross domestic product ( GDP ) is between 75 % and 90 % of EU GDP , thus contributing to increased equality at regional level .
However , I would like to stress that this new category should not harm the more disadvantaged regions in terms of the allocation of EU funding .
The MEPs of the Greek Communist Party voted against the report because it expresses in no uncertain terms the strategic policies and economic priorities of monopoly capital , which the EU is being called upon to serve and implement over forthcoming years , on the back of the unfolding capitalist crisis .
The information from the current financial framework illustrates that , instead of being used to satisfy grassroots needs , the funds available under the euro-unifying budget are being directed against them , in order to support the profitability of the monopoly groups .
It is a dirty lie that the basic feature of the report is the alleged demand by the European Parliament for spending under the EU budget to be increased by 5 % after 2013 .
Its predominant feature is that it calls not only for this increase , but for all spending under the EU budget to be directed towards promoting the barbaric measures unleashed by capital , the EU and the bourgeois governments against the working classes and grassroots classes in all the Member States .
It calls for the money of the workers of the Member States which finances the EU budget to be used to promote capitalist restructurings , to sweep away labour rights , to support the profitability of euro-unifying monopolies , to consolidate the mechanisms of the ' memoranda ' and secure lenders in the debtor Member States and to support repressive mechanisms and imperialist interference by the EU .
Today , I voted in favour of creating ' intermediate regions ' , and I am pleased that this position was adopted by Parliament as a whole .
This decision will mean that relatively rich areas of poorer Member States ( such as Mazovia and Warsaw ) will still receive support .
The position adopted by Parliament today is the first victory in the battle over the shape of the new financial perspective for the period 2014-2020 .
For Poland , and also for Warsaw , a key factor will be the level of funding and the priorities set out under the cohesion fund .
The Garriga Polledo report assumes a figure of between 75 and 90 % for the intermediate category for regional support .
This range is unacceptable to me because it offers the prospect of payments to few areas that require support , including in the western part of the EU .
This goes against the actual aim of regional support , namely the strengthening of the weakest regions .
The next Multiannual Financial Framework ( MFF ) is a perfect opportunity to show European residents that the Union can achieve long-term goals , such as stimulating strong growth and internal cohesion .
We must not miss such an opportunity .
I am pleased that the rapporteur stresses the importance of cohesion policy for growth and employment .
For Lithuanians , it is crucial that the sums earmarked for cohesion policy in the next MFF are not smaller than those in this financial period .
European cohesion policy continues to play an important role in reducing significant social and economic disparities among the Member States .
For instance , Lithuania 's GDP per capita remains low ( when we joined the EU , it was 48 % of the Union average ) .
However , it is believed that by 2020 , Lithuania 's GDP will be at least 50 % greater than it was without cohesion policy assistance .
Lithuania 's goal of improving transport infrastructure and accessibility ( 23 % of the entire allocation of Structural Fund money ) , enhancing its R & D capacity ( 22 % ) , and supporting business creation , depends on cohesion policy .
Dwindling cohesion policy funds will continue to crush our economy .
We must not allow this to happen .
Trust in the EU will only return when our citizens are convinced that the Union serves their values and interests .
in writing . - By passing this report on the new Multiannual Financial Framework by 468 to 134 ( with 54 abstentions ) , the Parliament confirms that it is living in a different world from the harsh economic reality of our times .
When such tough economic decisions are being made at home , ( ... ) it is unacceptable for the EU to take no action to cut costs and eliminate waste . ( ... )
The Parliament decided to ignore the letter of the British Prime Minister , ( ... ) and the Heads of Government of France , Germany , the Netherlands and Finland , that there must be no increase in the EU Budget ( ... ) .
Indeed , many of us want budget cuts and a reduction in Britain 's excessive contribution . ( ... ) .
The British public ( ... ) will not accept taxes imposed by the EU and nor would the citizens of the other ( ... ) countries , if they but realised what was going on ( ... ) .
Informed economic opinion will tell you that lower taxes are the best incentive to economic growth and job creation .
This report is intended to provide the financial foundations of the EU superstate which I and my constituents ( ... ) reject .
I joined my fellow Conservatives in voting against this report .
( Written statement abbreviated in accordance with Rule 149 )
Corrections to votes and voting intentions : see Minutes
Composition of Parliament : see Minutes
Approval of the minutes of the previous sitting : see Minutes
Revised Hungarian constitution ( debate )
The next item is the Council and Commission statements on the revised Hungarian constitution .
President-in-Office of the Council . - Madam President , Commissioner , honourable Members , the Treaty has not conferred any power on the Council to deal with national constitutions of the Member States .
Under Article 4 ( 1 ) and ( 2 ) of the Treaty on the European Union , the adoption of a constitution remains in the exclusive competence of the Member State concerned .
Therefore , the Council has not been in a position to discuss the newly adopted constitution of Hungary .
Vice-President of the Commission . - Madam President , at President Barroso 's request , I am addressing the House here today on the subject of the Hungarian constitution .
At the outset , President Barroso stressed on various occasions that the Commission does not make political judgments on the fundamental constitutional and institutional choices of a Member State .
The adoption of a new constitution in a Member State is a matter for its people , for its institutions in accordance with the applicable national law and , where relevant , Union and international law .
The Commission may , however , assess the constitution - as it may any other legal act of a Member State - from the perspective of its compliance with Union law .
It goes without saying that the constitution of every Member State should reflect and comply with the European values of freedom , democracy , equality , rule of law , human dignity and respect of human rights , including the rights of persons belonging to minorities , without discrimination , as laid down in Article 2 of the Treaty .
The new Hungarian constitution will enter into force on 1 January 2012 and will require the adoption of implementing measures .
Therefore , at this stage , the Commission can only make a preliminary analysis , as the precise view on the interaction of the constitution with Union law and its legal effects can only be fully evaluated when taking into account the implementing legislative , administrative and judicial practice based on it .
The Commission is also following the work of the Venice Commission of the Council of Europe on this matter , and we are expecting a report on 17-18 June .
I also know that Thomas Markert , the secretary of the Venice Commission , was in the Committee on Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs on 25 May , and I read with great interest the remarks which he made .
As I have already explained , all the matters discussed at that time are linked to national competence .
We can become competent only when such matters are translated into legislation .
I now want to listen to what you parliamentarians have to say in order to understand the position of the European Parliament on this matter .
Madam President , please do not regard my attitude as impolite but I will address the left of the House : the majority comprising Greens , Communists , Socialists and Liberals , who forced this topic on today 's agenda in contradiction with the PPE and Conservative groups .
I have questions for you .
Do you find it compatible with the prohibition of discrimination based on birth that the European Union has Member States , such as Spain , Belgium or Sweden , where citizens are entitled to hold high-ranking state positions , for instance that of the monarch , based on their birth ?
My country 's new constitution does not apply such discrimination .
Do you find it acceptable that the Union has Member States , for instance the United Kingdom , that do not have a unified written constitution ?
My country 's new constitution is a democratic , written constitution .
Do you find it acceptable that the Union has Member States , for instance France , whose constitution does not contain fundamental rights ?
My country 's new constitution not only contains fundamental rights , but it is the first in the European Union to take the European Charter of Fundamental Rights as a standard .
Do you think it is acceptable that the Union has Member States where there is no constitutional court , or where there is one , but its powers are weak ?
My country 's new constitution is proud to guarantee a strong constitutional protection .
You claim to act in the spirit of a common Europe when you drag the new Hungarian constitution here for dissection .
In effect , however , you are betraying one of the most important principles of the Treaty of Lisbon , namely Article 4 ( 2 ) : ' The Union shall respect the equality of Member States before the Treaties as well as their national identities , inherent in their fundamental structures , political and constitutional ' .
If you have not organised or will not organise debates concerning the states I have mentioned above , or failed to remember here , in the European Parliament , that the socialist government of Hungary blatantly ignored the right to assembly in 2006 , then you , ladies and gentlemen , are using double measures .
You can see the mote in your brother 's eye but not the beam in your own .
You do not realise that you are not supporting European cooperation with this attitude , but you are provoking conflicts between the European nations .
This reveals your real partisan bias .
I would suggest you follow the example set by the new Hungarian constitution in your countries .
Curb indebtedness by constitutional methods to prevent another Greek , Irish , or Portuguese crisis from happening .
I suggest you protect with constitutional methods the rights of future generations , just as the new Hungarian constitution does , raising environmental , budgetary , and demographic sustainability to the level of constitutional principles .
Protect your nationalities and minorities , for instance the Roma , with strong , collective rights , just as the new Hungarian constitution does , uniquely in Europe .
You keep repeating unjustified charges , although we have disproved them and have proved our position time and time again , but I am telling you once more : the new Hungarian constitution does not ban abortion .
The new Hungarian constitution does not prejudice the freedom of religion and freedom of conscience .
The new Hungarian constitution does not restrict the rights of same-sex people .
The new Hungarian constitution has no competence beyond the country 's geographical area and provides unparalleled , strong legal protection for the nationalities within its area .
The new Hungarian constitution does not weaken , but strengthens the principles of division of power , and checks and balances .
The new Hungarian constitution is a European constitution in spirit , born in the spirit of ensuring all fundamental human rights to its citizens , and of cooperation and unity of nations .
In our constitution , there are 18 references to Europe , and we included ' Unity in diversity ' , the motto of the European Union , in it as well .
Ladies and gentlemen , we , Hungarians , are a nation that likes freedom and democracy .
We do not need to be lectured about democracy by those who have plenty of homework to do in their own backyards .
Madam President , the European Union is a union of values and a union in law .
It is defined as an instance of supranational integration of Member States , each one of which is a reputably constitutional state .
There is also a constitutional dimension to the European Union itself , however , insofar as not only is the architecture of its institutions subject to the law but there are also guarantees enshrined in law to protect the position of individuals with regard to the government authorities in Europe , and there exists an essential principle , that of democracy , which exalts pluralism .
That is surely why this revision of the Hungarian constitution is being debated in the European Parliament and has been the subject of consideration by two of this House 's committees in particular , namely , the Committee on Constitutional Affairs ( AFCO ) and the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs ( LIBE ) .
I think the primary concern can be summarised as the one underlying the impression that what is certainly a very large political majority , a two-thirds majority , but nonetheless a circumstantial political majority in the Hungarian Parliament , has succeeded in forcing a constitutional reform that places constraints on the achievement of political pluralism and , consequently , on the possibility of alternating between different political projects under the same set of rules of play .
I think that is why it has caused concern , from the point of view of its concordance with the principles enshrined in Articles 2 and 3 of the Treaty on European Union and with the political dimension of the rights enshrined in the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union .
No one has sought to prejudge what the Hungarian constitution will be or how it will be applied in practice and it will , of course , be subject to the checks and balances provided by the constitutional system , the constitutional balance of the Hungarian constitution itself and the fact that Hungary is subject to supranational bodies such as the Council of Europe and the European Union , which know about fundamental rights .
I must refer , however , to what I have just heard regarding the protection of minorities under the Spanish constitution , which has been set up as an example to some other constitutions that have been mentioned by Mr Szájer .
I cannot overlook this .
With all due respect , I must inform Mr Szájer that no shadow of discrimination by reason of origin or birth exists in the Spanish constitution .
No one is seeking to prejudge the outcome of the implementation of the Hungarian constitution but I do think that this Parliament is concerned that the Hungarian constitution must also adhere to the rule of accreditation of political pluralism and the alternation of different political projects under the same set of rules of play .
This debate and those that have preceded it are testimony to that concern .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Madam President , the new fundamental law of Hungary - one would say a far too controversial text for a constitution - has been rushed through the Hungarian Parliament after only one month of public consultations .
Hungarian civil society and the Venice Commission have expressed serious concerns regarding the duration and transparency of the process .
Sometimes , those questioning this text have been accused of doing so for purely political reasons .
One expected the new Hungarian constitution - 20 years after the fall of the Communist regime and at a time when Hungary holds the Presidency of the European Union - to entirely reflect the most cherished values in the EU .
Are these only political values ?
I admit that as a Liberal , I am worried about government eroding civil liberties and democratic control .
I am worried about legislation turning a blind eye to diversity , and I am convinced that not all Hungarian citizens recognise themselves in the conservative image portrayed by the constitution .
How could I remain indifferent about a text on pluralism and the concentration of power in regulatory authorities such as those set out in the still fresh Hungarian media law ?
We should all worry about democracy when a ruling party passes laws that cement its power well beyond the end of its term and limits the relevance of future elections , and about political leaders going as far as writing or amending fundamental laws that fit only their political credo or economic policies .
And yes , I am worried about the spill-over of these Hungarian patterns .
My own country 's leaders have been inspired by these actions , and some recent amendments to our Romanian constitution seem to be copied and pasted .
They will not be approved , but the attempt is there .
European institutions must not be shy at such times .
We need to strive to make all European citizens feel not worried but reassured that our values are at the core of our legislation and are there to stay .
on behalf of the ECR Group . - Madam President , Commissioner , this debate is an evaluation of the situation regarding the new Hungarian constitution , not the common law of the United Kingdom which has protected our citizens for nearly 900 years .
It is the Commission which is charged with assessing and acting on such issues as are laid out in the Treaties , and as requested by this Parliament only a few months ago .
This House was hoping to ask the Commission what its conclusions are and how it intends to proceed , and we still look forward to your guidance , but it seems we have to wait a little bit longer .
This is a Union of different cultures and differing priorities . However , we all share values of freedom , fairness and equality for every person and every Member State .
What we should not tolerate is intolerance itself .
What we ask now is for you , Commissioner , to give this House , as soon as possible , a definitive answer as to whether the Hungarian constitution is in line with European legislation and fundamental rights .
If it is not , what next ?
If it is , Commissioner , we need to know that , too , as soon as we can .
Madam President , I thank my fellow Member from the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) who wants to start a debate with us here about the Hungarian constitution .
That is laudable , because when I hear the representative of the European Council say ' We have not discussed this in the Council ' , and when I hear Commissioner Reding say ' A country 's constitution is up to that country alone and it is not for us , at European level , to interfere with that ' , then I am glad that we in the European Parliament are , indeed , having this debate amongst ourselves .
Are we really not supposed to get involved ?
Is this a purely Hungarian affair ?
I would not say so .
The state of democracy in a Member State of the EU does concern the other Member States .
If a country chooses to use a fair election and a two-thirds majority to create an autocracy , the rest of us are allowed to be shocked by that and to try and oppose it .
I quote György Konrád here , who says : ' In Hungary , a so-called majority knows how to create an autocratic regime in a democratic way ' .
That is true .
If you push a law through the Hungarian Parliament and decree that , from now on , it may only be amended with a two-thirds majority , you know that it is not going be easy to amend it again after the next election .
This sort of thing erodes the function of elections as a democratic instrument .
It is the right of a nation to say every four years , ' We liked this , but we did not like that ' , and to then bring about changes .
However , if a democratically elected regime sets things up so that no amendments can be made for many years after , that is unhealthy and wrong .
If we in Europe avert our eyes and say ' This is purely a Hungarian affair ' , if 26 Member States are not prepared to say , ' Friends , we do not treat people like that in our society ' , and if the European Commission says the same , what should we then say , as a group , to countries where the situation is even worse ?
What should we tell those Hungarians who are not part of the two-thirds majority ?
' Terribly sorry , you will not have any chance to reverse these laws after the next two elections , either ' .
I find it absolutely appalling that all of us in Europe are averting our eyes and that we are failing to take action .
Madam President , in this debate on the Hungarian constitution , we have , in fact , been having two debates .
One is on the debate on the content of the constitution , and the other is a debate about the debate ; in other words , on knowing whether it is legitimate or not to make pronouncements on the content of the Hungarian constitution in this Parliament or in any other institution outside of Hungary itself .
Regarding the debate on the content , we know that there are many parts that are of concern to us in Parliament , to the specific committees that have debated this document , or to the Venice Commission , for example .
The issue of non-discrimination ...
Mr Szájer tells us that it is not true that discrimination against , for example , gender or sexual minorities is not provided for , because there is a reference to all types of discrimination .
As far as I am concerned , that reference is too vague and leaves too much room for subsequent court judgments contradicting it .
It should be stipulated in the constitution , as is the norm in European countries , and as is the norm in the most advanced and progressive democracies .
The same goes for the foetus , the protection of the foetus , or , for example , for the Hungarian Republic 's checks and balances .
However , we then have the debate about the debate , and the debate about the legitimacy of this issue being pronounced on in Parliament must also be fought very clearly .
This is because , firstly , constitutions are not watertight .
It needs to be said that wherever there are violations of fundamental rights , the 500 million citizens expect the European institutions to make pronouncements .
Whether that violation is made by a law , by a constitution , or by a regulation , is irrelevant : wherever there is a violation of fundamental rights , it is not permitted under the Treaties .
Secondly , the explanation that , due to cultural differences , a constitution may be , let us say , free from criticism , is pure constitutional relativism .
That cannot be the case .
The fact of a constitution violating the spirit and letter of the Treaties , if that were the case , means it would be violating the sovereignty of the other 26 countries that have agreed to be in a European Union with the country that was able to violate the Treaties .
It is therefore an issue for the sovereignty of all .
I would like to take this opportunity to just say one thing .
The two-thirds majority - very often invoked here , and which , in fact , comes from 50 % rather than two thirds of the votes cast by Hungarian citizens , since they make up two thirds of the Members of the Hungarian Parliament , but only 50 % of the votes - serves for one thing everywhere : to confer a broad social consensus on the constitution .
Those in power in Hungary have just used the two-thirds majority for exactly the opposite purpose : to exclude the opposition , ensuring that the constitution is extremely controversial in their society .
It may be following the letter of the two-thirds rule , but it is violating its spirit .
( The speaker agreed to take a blue-card question under Rule 149 ( 8 ) )
( BG ) Mr Tavares , I have a very brief question for you .
On whose authority do you speak on behalf of all 500 million European citizens ?
This is because you are speaking out very boldly on their behalf .
However , I think that if Europe 's citizens were to be consulted , their comments will not reflect exactly what you have said .
Everyone in this Parliament has different views and represents different sections of European citizens .
Therefore , on whose authority do you speak on behalf of all of them ?


Madam President , Mr Stoyanov , I would encourage you to read the Union Treaties and the Rules of Procedure of this House , which state that we , being elected by the European citizens , should represent our own Member States and citizens , and the 500 million citizens of the European Union as a whole .
We are given a mandate by those citizens to respect and to make others respect the fundamental Treaties of the European Union , which protect the rights of their citizens .
It is very simple : whilst we have such a mandate , Mr Stoyanov and I have as much a right as each other to speak on behalf of the 500 million European citizens in this House , which belongs to the citizens .
Madam President , the revised Hungarian constitution of April this year has become the subject of justified criticism by the whole of European democratic society .
It has introduced into the Hungarian legal system provisions which ignore international law and are in direct conflict with the accepted international obligations of the Hungarian Republic .
The ruling Fidesz party has introduced into the constitution versions of texts through which Hungary usurps the right to decide on the status , rights and political organisation of all Hungarian-speaking citizens in surrounding states .
It has also reserved the right to provide all of these citizens of surrounding states , who have no links to Hungary whatsoever , with Hungarian citizenship , the right to vote in Hungary , the right to social security or education under Hungarian regulations and universal Hungarian diplomatic protection .
Under international law , the organisation of a political system is a sovereign matter of sovereign states , and therefore we cannot view the provisions of the Hungarian constitution under which Hungary reserves the right to decide on the organisation of the life of citizens of other states as anything other than a primitive and crude attack on calm and peaceful coexistence in Europe .
The idea of one nation , one empire and so on is not new .
This swarthy little Hitler , who has abused it for the last time in his desire for power and glory in Europe , was long ago condemned by the decent , civilised and democratic world .
I would therefore like to believe that democratic political forces in the Hungarian Parliament will correct all of the errors in another legislative process , and will amend the constitution to bring it into line with international law and Hungary 's international obligations .
( BG ) Madam President , I think that Parliament should apologise to the Commissioner for getting her involved in this debate .
This is because it has become patently obvious to everyone in this Chamber from what she said - at least it is basically to me , but I do not know whether it has become clear to everyone else - that new legislation implementing Hungary 's constitution still needs to be adopted , and then it will become clear whether anyone 's rights are being violated .
We are in a situation once again where a debate is going on here in Parliament intended to condemn a Member State for something which it has not yet done .
Fellow Members , in which of your Member States is anyone judged for something which they have not done ?
Or condemned for something which they have not done ?
None .
This is something that contradicts democratic values .
The people who initiated this debate must apologise not only to the Commissioner , but also to all European citizens , because it is precisely this kind of behaviour from Parliament which leads to a lack of interest from European citizens in its activities , disappointment and low voter turnout in European Parliament elections .
Madam President , this debate on the Hungarian constitution today is flawed for two main reasons .
It singles out one Member State out of 27 , and it concerns a national issue which falls within the sovereignty of Member States .
First of all , if we are going to discuss the content of a constitution , we should not single out one constitution of one Member State .
We should , if anything , debate the constitutions of each and every Member State .
Some of the elements which are being contested can , in fact , be found in a number of other constitutions in other Member States , and yet we are only debating one constitution in one Member State .
This is wrong .
Secondly , one has to ask what power , what competence , do we have to bring the issue of a national constitution to the European Parliament in the first place ?
Member States have a sovereign competence for establishing their own national constitutions , and in this case , we should respect the right of the Hungarian people to determine their own constitution adopted by their democratically-elected national parliament .
The debate we are having today on the content of this constitution should , if anything , be held amongst Hungarian people , and not in this House .
Whether we like it or not , whether we disagree or agree with this national constitution , we must respect the sovereignty and the hierarchy of law , otherwise we would be setting a dangerous precedent .
So when we single out a Member State , and when we try to act outside our competence , we send a wrong signal .
We would stand accused of political instrumentalisation , and we would be undermining the trust of citizens in our own institution .
We should not go down this dangerous road .
( SK ) Madam President , on behalf of the Group of the Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats in the European Parliament , I would like to declare unambiguously that we recognise the right of all EU Member States to make their own laws , and thus we do not want to criticise either Hungary or , in particular , the citizens of Hungary .
Our comments and concerns are not directed towards a criticism of Hungary and Hungarian citizens , but we firmly believe that the defence of fundamental rights , civic freedoms , our shared European values , and peace , security and decent coexistence is a sufficient reason for us to hold this discussion today .
We also hope that the discussion and presentation of our questions and concerns can lead to improvement and to better preparation of the implementing legislation mentioned earlier .
Commissioner , just like you , we want to stick to the procedure ensuring that this entire process is conducted correctly , and we await the final opinion of the Venice Commission , although it is now clear from the preliminary conclusions presented in the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs by the Secretary of the Venice Commission , Mr Markert , that the current Hungarian constitution is , in a number of points , controversial to say the least .
Weak points have been seen in the Hungarian constitution not only by the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs , but also by the Committee on Constitutional Affairs .
If we ignore the Romantic , almost monarchist ideas which pervade the spirit of the preamble , I would like to mention some areas we regard as being highly sensitive , in contrast to our fellow Members from Fidesz who are also Members of the European Parliament .
One example is the principle mentioned earlier for adopting the constitution .
It is not very normal in democratic countries for a consultation process to last only five weeks .
It is not normal for the opposition not to participate in it , and , despite the fact that Fidesz has the necessary majority , it has to be said that victors have a duty to show humility .
The restriction on the powers of the constitutional court has already been mentioned , and on behalf of our group , I would also like to mention the discriminatory nature of the constitution in relation to members of sexual minorities , as it fails to prohibit discrimination based on sexual orientation .
The protection of Hungarian minorities abroad , to which Article D applies directly , also applies to people of Hungarian ethnicity living in neighbouring countries .
Ladies and gentlemen , the mission of the European Union is surely for us to live together as nations and as states of the European Union in peace , cooperation and mutual respect .
How should we , from the countries directly affected , perceive this constitution ?
How can you expect us to accept it ?
Unlike you , we have always extended the hand of friendship to you , and we have always wanted decent coexistence , and we would therefore like the implementing regulations for your constitution to respect the sovereignty of neighbouring states in the region .
Madam President , it is untenable to say that the constitution of a Member State is a matter only for itself .
The Treaties , in Articles 6 and 7 , make it crystal clear not only that the Union and the Member States share certain values , but that the Commission has the duty to police respect for those values .
I wholly subscribe to what my colleague , Renate Weber , eloquently said : I do think it a bit rich for those of the same political persuasion as the ruling Fidesz party in Hungary to accuse critics of that constitution of being politically inspired .
Many of the provisions of this constitution are very partisan , such as the omission of protection of gay people from discrimination and the giving of extra votes to mothers .
But I want to give a good example of one flaw in the constitution that undermines the Treaty 's insistence on the rule of law .
This is the declaration that the 1949 constitution is invalid . Not just repealed , but invalid .
This creates great legal uncertainty as it leaves in limbo , and apparently invalid themselves , laws passed under that constitution including in respect of Hungary 's accession and EU membership .
This is one reason why the Commission should examine it for compliance with EU law and it could have a great effect on other Member States .
Madam President , the new Hungarian constitution demolishes the pillars of a democracy based on the rule of law and opens the way to autocracy .
This is a major setback on the road of transition .
The process of preparing and adopting the new constitution was hardly legitimate .
The preamble is exclusionary and reflects a distorted interpretation of history .
The main text represents an intrusion into private life , basic human and citizens ' rights are defined in a narrow way , social rights are substituted by state objectives .
Checks and balances are weakened , especially the independence of the judiciary .
The European Council , Parliament and Commission cannot ignore these violations of European values , because this may set a negative precedent for other illiberal regimes to follow .
Nevertheless , the democrats of Hungary do not expect the remedy to come from abroad .
Were it to happen that way , it would only reinforce the view of the Hungarian Prime Minister , who compared the EU to the Soviet Union .
The solution can come only from the Hungarian citizens , who will reject this constitution when they realise that an autocratic regime cannot provide high living standards and more freedom .
Twenty-one years ago , we were not required to fight for freedom .
Now we are .
In the meantime , Europe should keep its watchful eye on Hungary and encourage the Hungarian democrats to regain the initiative .
Madam President , I strongly disagree with all of those who have said that it is not respecting sovereignty if we debate and criticise a Member State 's constitution here , or that it would , as somebody has said , be a dangerous precedent and acting outside of European competence .
The constitutions of Member States have to be in accordance with European values , with our value community which we have defined .
There are at least two things I would like to mention which are not in line with that .
Others have mentioned others .
The first is that discrimination on grounds of sexual orientation is not included and that has to be included in the future .
Also , marriage and family values as defined there go beyond the reality of people living in Europe and in Hungary , and it is not the rule of diversity that we have .
One other thing relates to the so-called Green Ombudsman for the rights of future generations on environment and sustainability .
This post is now subordinated to the general Ombudsman , as other Ombudsmen have been , and so it is weakened .
This is also an area where competences are taken out of the sphere of regulations that were there before , and it makes clear that the issue of sustainability , environmental protection and the rights of future generations - another part of European values - which needs to be important , is no longer as important as it was before .
One last point : there was also an Ombudsman on data protection .
That post has been abolished totally , so transparency of information about the State , for example on public procurement , is not there anymore .
This is something that is heavily criticised by me and by my group .
( The speaker agreed to take a blue-card question under Rule 149 ( 8 ) )
( HU ) Mrs Lunacek , I would like to ask you whether you can list the Member States of the European Union whose constitution includes the institution of an ombudsman or commissioner for the rights of future generations .
How many Member States have such an institution as the one in Hungary that is actually functioning and is mentioned in the Hungarian constitution ?
Also , assuming you have read the current Hungarian constitution , the new Hungarian constitution adopted in April , can you name constitutions which contain more and farther reaching articles on environmental protection and future generations than the new Hungarian constitution ?
I challenge you to name them .
Madam President , my reply to Ms Gál is as follows .
The issue was not a comparison with other Member States ' constitutions .
The issue was : what is a European value ?
What is part of our fundamental rights ?
What is enshrined in the common values that I hope you share as well ?
With regard to the rights of future generations , environmental sustainability is something that is enshrined in the rights of our common European Union .
Some Member States have that and others might not have it , but the fact is that in the new constitution , the government of Hungary has abolished this symbolic Ombudsman .
There is now only one Ombudsman and the symbolic value , stated in writing , is no longer there .
You know how important symbols are in politics as well .
That means that you do not want to have this symbolic representation , either at the political or the Ombudsman level .
( The speaker agreed to take a blue-card question under Rule 149 ( 8 ) )
Madam President , maybe it was not understandable , but I shall make the question more simple .
Ms Lunacek , in your country - I know you are from Austria - is there a Green Ombudsman ?
In Hungary , there was a Green Ombudsman several years ago and there will be one , according to the new constitution .
Is there a Green Ombudsman in your country ?
Yes , or no ?
Madam President , I must say to Mr Szájer : sorry , that is not the problem .
Hungary had a Green ...
( Laughter )
OK , laugh if you want to .
I do not mind laughter , I like humour , but the issue is that , with the new constitution in Hungary , this Green Ombudsman has been abolished and he has been subordinated .
All the four Ombudsmen or Ombudswomen that existed have been subordinated to one general office of the Ombudsman .
The issue of sustainability of future generations is not as visible as it was before and that is the criticism I have .
My country does not have such a post .
Of course , as a Green , I would fight for that , but you have written a new constitution and this abolishes a symbolic and a political value that I guess was important to you , as you say now .
Why did you abolish it then ?
Why did you not keep it there so that everybody could see a Green Ombudsman who is in favour of the rights of future generations , environment and sustainability ?
You have not explained that , colleagues .
( IT ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I am truly astounded by the instrumental tone of this debate .
Thinking back also to the recent statements made by Mrs Lunacek , I will refrain from discussing , for example , the topic of discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation .
In my country 's constitution , there is no mention of this issue , and so when will the European Parliament be holding a debate on the Italian constitution ?
Moreover , it is rather strange because , in my country , the only party that wants to change the constitution is Mr Berlusconi 's centre-right party .
For 15 years , the response of the Left has been that we must not change the constitution or it will be the end of democracy .
Be careful then because , when we open a debate on what a constitutional text does or does not contain , perhaps we should first of all clear up a misunderstanding .
Do we really think that the fact that this constitution mentions the rights of the unborn child constitutes a risk for modernity ?
Do we really think that the fact that the Christian roots of a country are mentioned in this constitution constitutes a risk for identity ?
As far as I am concerned , I think we should all familiarise ourselves a little more with the text of the European constitution , which did not actually materialise but which had the motto ' United in diversity ' , and try to be a little more tolerant of the fact that everyone is different .
In other words , we have to understand that at the moment , a broad consensus in Hungary has highlighted the needs of a people , and in order to avoid those needs turning into nationalism , it must be supported by a strong Europe that recognises everyone 's rights and duties .
( HU ) Madam President , the Treaty on the European Union states that the European Union is based on respect for freedom , democracy , rule of law and human rights .
These values are shared by the Member States .
The Copenhagen Criteria are based on these values , which also form part of the accession conditions .
The European institutions are also responsible for ensuring that Member States comply with these principles after accession , as well .
Let me remind all of you of this responsibility and , in particular , the President of the Commission and the Commissioner who bear primary responsibility in this respect .
Neither the contents of the new Hungarian constitution nor the circumstances of its drafting comply with these basic principles .
Therefore , the questions related to this matter can be considered European , not national issues .
One single party adopted this constitution , without public or professional consultations , and its draftsmen have dubious democratic legitimacy .
The democratic opposition parties requested legal guarantees that the new constitution would be based on broad public consensus , and in the absence of this , they withdrew from the constitutional process .
The two main tasks of the constitution are to ensure human rights and proper functioning of the state .
However , the framework for the proper functioning of the state is problematic .
According to the new constitution , amendments to the tax system , the pension system and family support system must be adopted by a two-thirds majority .
This will impede the candidates of subsequent elections to promise changes concerning these matters , and will impede the voters in free election .
Furthermore , the constitution invests the Budget Council , a body that is not elected directly , with the power of veto over the decisions of Parliament concerning the budget , which , in turn , may result in the dissolution of Parliament and a call for new elections , thereby threatening stable governance .
The level of protection of human rights is decreased .
Human rights will be enforced less effectively , as the competence of the constitutional court is limited .
The most important acquis of the EU is that by its values , it has been able to channel conflicts which , in the past , could only be solved at the cost of considerable human suffering into a democratic framework based on the rule of law .
The EU offers to and demands from its Member States a clear framework for the rule of law , constitutional guarantees , institutional checks and balances , and negotiated solutions .
These values should be preserved .
Madam President , in this House , we have discussed media freedom being under pressure in Italy , Slovakia and Hungary .
We have discussed the violation of LGBT rights in Lithuania , Hungary , and Poland .
We have discussed the expulsion of and discrimination against Roma people in France and Italy , and there have been many other examples of debates about fundamental rights being under pressure in one Member State or another .
Every single time , I have heard the EPP say that this should not be party politics and that we should not single out Member States .
This is not about Member States , this is about fundamental rights .
Fundamental rights is not a matter of subsidiarity .
Fundamental rights is about the very foundations of the European Union .
In order to demonstrate this , I remind you that we ask candidate countries to adapt not only their laws but also their constitutions in order to be admitted as members of the European Union .
Clearly , colleagues , there are objective concerns that have been expressed not only by political parties but also by the Venice Commission , and , at the very least , there are ambiguities .
Instead of having this very acrimonious debate , we should try and clarify the issues .
One last practical suggestion to the Hungarian Government .
If you want to demonstrate your very strong commitment to the protection and promotion of LGBT rights , I would invite you to walk with Budapest Gay Pride on 18 June .
( DE ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , fundamental human rights are universal , which means that they are applicable in every situation .
I have been listening to the debate .
None of the speakers so far , including the critics , has quoted the constitution to indicate exactly what it is they do not like .
Mr López Aguilar says that he gets the impression that something has gone awry , while others are making insinuations about all the things that could go wrong with this constitution .
Not one person has actually quoted from the constitution itself .
That is precisely the problem that faces us in this discussion : where are the actual accusations ?
When I consider how the Hungarians will react to this debate and to the accusations being bandied about by some of my fellow Members without any support from direct quotations , then I can well imagine that some will find the way that the Hungarians and their country 's development are being discussed here to be extremely arrogant .
As Europeans , we should take care to avoid leaving ourselves open to such accusations .
I would like to state that many of those in positions of responsibility in Hungary today are the people who took to the streets to fight against communism and for liberty .
It is simply unacceptable that accusations should be continuously made against these people and that the impression should be created that they are experiencing problems with freedom .
This has nothing to do with party politics ; it is simply a fact .
Having complained that no quotes have been used during this debate , I would now like to quote from the new Hungarian constitution : ' We are proud of the fact that our country has been part of Christian Europe for 1 000 years and we are aware of the role of Christianity in sustaining our nation ' .
I am pleased to find such sentiments in a constitution .
This may not please all Members of this House .
I am pleased that this reference to Christianity has been included and I would also have liked to have seen it included in the Treaty of Lisbon and in the European constitution .
My position , as a representative of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) is that this is a good thing .
Madam President , we are not simply discussing domestic problems in the European Parliament .
European values are being questioned in the new Hungarian constitution .
Therefore , we have to discuss it and have to do so now .
There is still time before the adoption of the generic laws .
I hope everyone agrees that the constitution has to be balanced , close to the citizens , based on generally accepted values and principles , and should be party neutral .
Sadly , the Hungarian constitution does not fulfil these criteria .
Even the adoption of the document is questionable .
There was no , or very little , social consultation .
The text is only supported by one political party and it is opposed by major constitutional experts .
The new constitution raises questions on an international level .
For example , there is a lack of reference to EU law in the closing provisions .
We note clear differences , and comparing the text to the Charter of Fundamental Rights , the text shows inconsistencies and differences in values and principles .
The principle of good governance does not prevail in the document either .
The constitution fails to provide an EU-conforming , modern , administrative structure .
The aforementioned generic laws are very dangerous .
They make governing the country almost impossible for any future government .
We have the impression , as one of our colleagues has put it , that the government is like a football team trying to change the rules and the referee during a game .
This is not the way to treat political opponents and this is certainly not how democracy works in the 21st century in Europe .
( DE ) Madam President , I have a lot of sympathy with the position of the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) in other areas .
We work closely together on economic issues .
However , in this particular case , we must make it clear that we should not play party politics here .
Above all , we must emphasise that it is scandalous to criticise the constitution of a Member State in this forum , whichever Member State that may be .

There are Member States , and here I am looking at Mr Busuttil , among others , since he brought up the issue so forcefully , who seek the support of the European Union when they experience problems ; it is an expression of European solidarity that we should provide help when , for example , Malta experiences a problem with refugees .
However , solidarity must be based on shared values , and all of the groups within this House are responsible for sustaining such values .
Although the Charter of Fundamental Rights may only be binding on European legislation and its implementation , Articles 2 , 6 and 7 of the Treaties are binding on all Member States .
A two-thirds majority was cemented into the Hungarian constitution , so that , realistically speaking , any future Hungarian Government will be unable to amend any of the country 's laws .
This goes against the principle of parliamentary democracy .
This limiting of the powers of the constitutional court is something quite unique and threatens the principle of the separation of powers .
We cannot discount the possibility that there is a breach of international law in relation to criminal proceedings .
There is so much I could say , but I certainly wish to state the following : it is not just the right of the EU and the European Commission to make their voice heard in this case ; it is also their duty .
In the past - even long before the European Union existed - Europe too often held back on criticising abuses in Member States .
My country , along with others , has experience of this .
When the politicians remain silent , sooner or later the people will make themselves heard and then we need to ask ourselves whether it is too late and whether we have failed .
( The speaker agreed to take a blue-card question under Rule 149 ( 8 ) )
( HU ) Mr Alvaro , this is true , just one sentence .
We agree .
This criticism is shameful .
My question is this : on what grounds do you base your opinion that a fundamental law adopted by a two-thirds majority cannot be changed in a democratic country ?
It could be changed so far .
It can be changed in other countries as well .
Please be specific .
Which exactly are the common values , common European values , that the Hungarian constitution excludes , rejects , or comes into conflict with ?
Because what you are saying is too general .
( DE ) Madam President , many thanks for your question .
I accept the criticism that I have dealt in generalities in the minute 's speaking time allocated to me .
However , I can provide more concrete examples .
European values are one thing ; however , European values also mean , for example , that a Member State should operate on the rule of law , which entails issues such as the separation of powers and the democratic principle .
When , for example , a constitutional court has no jurisdiction in budgetary and taxation matters , this constitutes a restriction in the separation of powers and is unquestionably a dubious situation .
Accordingly , I believe that we can discuss such issues .
With regard to the other questions , such as the two-thirds majority , I must ask to what extent this is compatible with parliamentary democracy if future governments no longer have any room to manoeuvre .
It is certainly open to question whether life imprisonment without any right of appeal or judicial review by the supreme court is compatible with the principles of democracy and the rule of law upheld in the European Union .
These are questions that need answers and I believe that the Commission must investigate .
( The speaker agreed to take a blue-card question under Rule 149 ( 8 ) )

( HU ) Mr Alvaro , I would like to ask you whether you are aware that the Hungarian constitution previously in force specified 27 laws that could only be modified by a two-thirds majority , while the new constitution specifies only 26 .
What is the problem here ?
A recent scholarly analysis came up with this number ; it is not my own calculation .
( DE ) Madam President , I believe that people will forgive me if I answer a question based on a subjective opinion with a subjective opinion of my own .
No , I do not think it is the most modern .
( The speaker agreed to take a blue-card question under Rule 149 ( 8 ) )

( DE ) Madam President , Mr Alvaro , you have just demonstrated how to extend your speaking time by accepting numerous questions .
However , I would like to ask you whether you are aware that the provisions for the Hungarian constitutional court - I am not sure whether you have read the Hungarian constitution in its entirety - are almost identical to those that apply to the constitutional court in Germany .
Therefore , I wanted to ask you whether the German constitutional court is just as undemocratic and worthy of criticism as the Hungarian constitutional court ?
I would like to hear your answer to this question .

( DE ) Madam President , Mr Weber , as you have just stated that it is only identical in certain sections , it is quite clear that there are also sections where it may be open to question whether the fact that the Hungarian constitution circumscribes the jurisdiction of the constitutional court in tax and budgetary issues is compatible with the principle of the separation of powers .
If you were now to tell me that the German constitutional court could not decide on tax issues , for example , following a judgment by the German Federal Court of Justice , or if budget law could not be examined by the German constitutional court for example , by way of a constitutional dispute between government institutions , such as a party in the German Bundestag , then I would agree with you .
However , the German constitution does permit this , while also allowing a case to be taken to the German constitutional court in such questions .
( The speaker agreed to take a blue-card question under Rule 149 ( 8 ) )
Madam President , I would like to refer to something that was mentioned before ; the rights of future generations .
It looks very unique in the Hungarian constitution , something that is being enshrined in the Hungarian constitution , and recognised seemingly also here .
This raises a question I would like to ask about the basic right of those eventual members of future generations - to be born .
Is caring about future human beings a European value - or not ?
Maybe not European , only Hungarian ?
Then Europe should look to Hungary with gratitude for reminding it of some fundamentals .
( DE ) Madam President , I hold Mr Landsbergis in high esteem .
However , I am unable to find a question in his speech .
If this was not a question , then I will use the time to make a statement .
As far as I am aware , no constitution defines the law for future generations .
That is not the issue at stake .
What we are dealing with is human dignity - this is a principle found in the German constitution , as well as others - and the Hungarian constitution is no different in this regard .
I cannot see a contradiction here .
The question is whether this is to be restricted or defined in future .
However , as I said before , I failed to understand your question completely .
Sustainability , the protection of future generations , the desire for a healthy natural environment and the protection of quality of life - all of these are principles that , if I am not mistaken , can be found in the constitutions of all Member States , and that have been upheld in many supreme court judgments .
I believe that this principle was never questioned by you , even during your time as President .

( HU ) Madam President , I would like to reassure my fellow Members and Mr Alvaro that Hungary is a state where the rule of law still prevails .
I would like to reassure Mrs in ' t Veld , Mrs Göncz and Mrs Benova that Hungary still respects fundamental rights , human rights and the values of the Union .
Hungarian laws and the constitution adopted in April comply with the laws and basic values of the European Union .
Hungary is maintaining all her international legal obligations and commitments and , in fact , this is clearly stated in the text of the constitution , and if it were not the case , then the Commission would take it to the Court of Justice in Luxembourg to challenge it in a formal procedure ; but we all know in this Chamber that this is not the case .
Fellow Members , the question of what is included in the constitution of a country and what is dealt with at a different legislative level by a certain Member State is something that is quite clearly a matter of national sovereignty .
In a democracy based on popular representation , it is up to the MPs elected in free elections to decide which areas should be dealt with at a constitutional level , and which areas should be dealt with at a general legislative level .
What I do not understand about this debate is that up until now , we have been taught that laws that can be modified by a two-thirds majority are there to provide a guarantee that they cannot be abused .
We need a two-thirds majority constitution because this is a rule that provides guarantees .
Now we hear that many raise objections against the very two-thirds majority that they had previously seen as a guarantee .
I personally feel that you are incapable of accepting the rules of the game of democracy .
In addition , as my colleagues have already pointed out , the new Hungarian constitution refers to the Charter of Fundamental Rights , which is a new constitutional element , and considers the minorities of Hungary as an integral part of the Hungarian political community .
The Hungarian Parliamentary Commissioner for Future Generations said that it elevates environmental protection and responsibility for future generations to an outstanding level .
The way we speak about this constitution , we could be talking about any other European constitution .
You always talk about difference , and emphasise that if something reflects a different value , it does not mean that it is better or worse .
It is simply different , and as a Hungarian , I would be grateful if you could respect this in the spirit of unity in diversity .
( The speaker agreed to take a blue-card question under Rule 149 ( 8 ) )
( SK ) Madam President , today I received an invitation to the exhibition ' Bridges Between Nations ' , an event organised by your colleague .
In this invitation , he used the motto of the founder of the EU , Jean Monnet , who said that the Union was built by people .
Mrs Gál , constitutions and bridges must also be built by people .
I would like to ask you why the coalition in Hungary does not want the opposition to participate in the process of drawing up the constitution .
( HU ) The opposition had the opportunity to participate in the work of Parliament .
The opposition decided not to participate in this work and we respect their decision .
Instead , as we can see , they wish to carry out a debate here , which is something that the Hungarian public does not really understand .
( The speaker agreed to take a blue-card question under Rule 149 ( 8 ) )
( DE ) Madam President , no , in fact this is basically quite simple .
Having heard from others that other Member States should put their own house in order and examine their constitutions , perhaps Mrs Gál could quote an article from the constitution of one of the Member States of the European Union that she would categorise as an example of an area where a state needs to ' put its own house in order ' .
After all , it was Mrs Gál who explicitly stated that that is what other Member States should do .
In other words , where is the specific criticism of the constitution of another Member State that needs to be addressed ?
Once we have this information , we can , of course , get down to discussions .
( HU ) It is not stated at a constitutional level that everyone should set their own houses in order .
Mr Alvaro , I said to you as well , as a Liberal MEP , that those who respect and emphasise the right to being different in all areas should be prepared to accept that being different can appear in the spirit , in the choice of values and the structures of the constitutions .
This is what I wanted to say .
This does not mean that we do not respect the basic values of the EU , or we do not comply fully with the requirements set out in European law or international law .
( The speaker agreed to take a blue-card question under Rule 149 ( 8 ) )
( HU ) Mrs Gál , I would like to give an answer as to why the previous rule stating that amendments to the constitution could only be accepted with the support of a four-fifths majority of MPs had to be changed .
This rule , which had been accepted by a parliamentary majority that obtained 72 % of the votes between 1994 and 1998 to protect the rights of political minorities and the opposition , was abolished by Fidesz .
What was the reason for this ?
The opposition did not participate in the work in the absence of this guarantee ; it was not a case of being deprived of this right , as this rule had been changed .
Commissioner Reding , I would like to draw your attention to this .

( HU ) Mr Tabajdi , I have not been a Member of the Hungarian Parliament since 1990 , but my colleagues , who were Members , or even party group leaders and speakers of the House at the time , claim that there was no such rule in force .
This is not true .
I think you should carry out this debate in the Hungarian Parliament ; this is completely outside the scope of the debates in the European Parliament .
( SK ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the new Hungarian constitution really is perhaps the most reactionary constitution in Europe .
That is one side of the issue , but the other side is that it is also dangerous on an international level .
Some honourable Members here have said that this is a sovereign matter for Hungary .
That is true , but this constitution violates the sovereignty of other states .
Commissioner , this is a matter of the utmost importance .
It undermines the peace settlement of Europe .
It undermines borders between states .
It openly takes advantage of minorities in neighbouring countries for extreme nationalist ends .
It is saturated with the spirit of Greater Hungary .
In the context of granting citizenship on a purely ethnic basis , regardless of residence , employment or family ties , it opens a Pandora 's Box of extreme nationalism such as we have not seen since the end of the Second World War .
That is not all .
It makes it possible to grant voting rights to Hungarians permanently living in neighbouring countries .
Can you imagine Hungarian political parties mounting an election campaign in another country ?
In short , the new Hungarian constitution will lead to the total destabilisation of Central Europe .
It brings the spirit of the Balkan wars to Central Europe .
The Speaker of the Hungarian Parliament , László Kövér , recently said in connection with the Gabčíkovo-Nagymaros dam that military intervention was required from the Hungarian side , and that the Paris Peace Treaties did not apply to Slovakia , and he also questioned Slovakia 's borders in the context of the spirit of this constitution .
I think it is time for both the European Union and European Parliament to declare a decisive ' no ' to this dangerous nationalistic policy , while there is still time .
( FR ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , this is a fascinating debate , and yet I should like to say , perhaps rather bluntly , that we should not confuse the issue .
This afternoon , I have the impression that we are moving away somewhat from political hypocrisy because it is not a question of criticising the constitution of a Member State of the European Union such as Hungary which , of course , is in sole charge , with its people , of its sovereignty .
However , in this Parliament , it is a question , and in my case , a concern which relates to the EU legal system , and consequently an issue that affects the degree to which we share our common values , and to which we share how Europe has been built , by States and by the fundamental texts of the Member States and other national founding texts .
However , there are contradictions concerning non-discrimination , the respect for minorities , problems of pluralism , and concerning opposition , which appear to be challenged .
Therefore , ladies and gentlemen , if everything is straightforward , as some of the speakers here this afternoon appear to be saying , let the executive college ascertain whether the Hungarian text is compatible and legally compliant with the foundations of our EU platform , and things will be clear .
The credibility of the EU legal system , and consequently of the European Union , depends on it .
Madam President , this is a passionate , exhilarating if somewhat controversial debate , but nevertheless , I am certainly enjoying this expression of democracy .
It has to be said that we are entitled to discuss this matter because Hungary is part of the European Union .
But Hungary is also entitled to have a constitution and certainly this is far better than the old constitution of 1949 brought in by the Communists .
It is a genuine effort to reflect modern values within the European context .
While people will argue with some elements of it , it has to be stated that a constitution can always be amended by way of referendum and , if we find at European Union level that some aspects of it are not in keeping with European law and values , that can be done and taken on board .
It has to be said as well that this constitution was passed on 18 April with 262 votes for and 44 against and that is an expression of democracy .
People have objected to some aspects of it , for instance , to the references to Christianity and to God , but this is nothing new .
These are found in the German , Polish and Irish constitutions .
As a Christian-Democrat , I am absolutely delighted that there is a reference to God and Christianity , because it is a fundamental part of our culture and our history and I think it is far better to have it included than excluded and creating a godless society .
People have also objected to granting citizenship to people outside of Hungary , but in Ireland , we have had passport facility for people who are officially living in Northern Ireland , which is in the United Kingdom .
This has helped the situation more than it has detracted from it and we now have a better relationship with the United Kingdom than ever before , expressed by the visit of Queen Elizabeth two weeks ago .
People have objected to the definition of marriage , the definition of life and so forth but , as I have said , if there are flaws , they can be addressed in a referendum .
Finally , they are to be commended for including a limit to the extent of state debt , which is very important .
If we had had that in our constitution in Ireland , we might not be in the mess we are now financially .
So there is an awful lot of good in it and I think that if we are thinking of having a new constitution , we can learn a lot from what Hungary has done .
Madam President , there are a number of problems with this constitution , but I want to focus on one key issue , which is that the proposed constitution does not give any protection from discrimination on grounds of sexual orientation .
The only type of marriage that would be recognised would be one between a man and a woman .
We have had a long fight across Europe for LGBT rights , and we cannot allow Hungary to take this retrograde step .
Gay rights are protected by the EU Charter of Fundamental Rights .
Not only that , but married couples of the same sex should be able to move freely around Europe and have their partnership legally recognised wherever they are .
Yes , it is for Hungary to decide the Hungarian constitution .
However , each Member State has the responsibility to respect the European Community that they are part of .
The protection of LGBT people is fundamental to the European Union , and Hungary cannot disregard that .
( SK ) Madam President , today 's Europe is based on values that unite us and that enable us to cooperate and respect one another .
I would also like to emphasise that every state has the right to adopt its own constitution through democratically elected representatives .
The new Hungarian constitution , however , opens up issues that are sensitive for its neighbours and which affect them .
I am talking , for example , about Article 23 .
This foresees the possibility of members of the Hungarian minority in neighbouring states acquiring the right to vote , on condition that they obtain Hungarian citizenship .
It is here that the problem lies .
The unusual criteria established for acquiring Hungarian citizenship , in other words , without a natural link to Hungary , creates the possibility of political links coming into existence between a state and citizens who have no real link to that state .
I also see problems in the formulation of Section D. There is talk here of a single Hungarian nation , of collective rights , of support for their self-rule in other countries on the principle of ethnicity , on the responsibility of Hungary for all Hungarians .
Thus , in paragraph 4 , there is room for possible extra-territorial impacts of this constitution .
The Slovak Government is striving for a peaceful , businesslike discussion of these issues on a bilateral level .
It meets with rejection , however , from Hungary .
Since the constitution has not yet come into force , I therefore think that this is the right time to discuss it and to explain what the negative impacts might be .
I would like to say one more thing .
In our current policy on EU expansion , we are trying to emphasise the settling of neighbourly relations between the future states on the basis of our European values .
Ladies and gentlemen , imagine what the reaction of the Union would be if Serbia , for example , decided today to grant citizenship en masse to citizens of Bosnia and Herzegovina , or if Albania granted citizenship to citizens of Macedonia .
I would like to say one more time that only in a situation where there is mutual respect for values and cooperation can we talk about continuing the joint development of the European Union in the future .
( HU ) Madam President , I have asked for the floor three times already and I am glad you managed to give me the floor upon my third request .
First , I would like to make a correction .
There was a question about whether the constitution contained that particular fourth-fifths majority or not .
It was included in the Standing Orders of Parliament , but it was abolished at the proposal of Fidesz .
What I would like to ask Mr Kukan is that when Mr Markert was here from the Venice Commission and the two-thirds majority was mentioned - which keeps coming up here as well - he confirmed that the two-thirds majority does exist .
In such cases , self-restraint would be a fundamental expectation , but he can see no sign of it .
So my question to Mr Kukan is whether he has already discussed with the Fidesz members sitting in the European Parliament the issues he has raised .
Does he see any signs of willingness to make changes to these points in the constitution ?
Madam President , is the question for me ?
My sincere answer is : I cannot answer your question .
( FR ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the new Hungarian constitution drafted by the Orbán government is not lacking in rather striking articles , as my fellow Members have pointed out .
The chapter on private life appears to be the high point of a constitution that is based , as we have noted , exclusively on Christian religious references and traditional family values .
It would appear that this text also allows the right to abortion in Hungary to be restricted by stating , and I quote , ' that the life of the foetus will be protected from the time of conception ' .
The Hungarian Government has backed up its words by action in this area by launching an anti-abortion communication campaign which would still , apparently , appear to be using funds from the European PROGRESS programme ( Community Programme for Employment and Social Solidarity ) .
At a time when the European Union is holding up progress and gender equality as common fundamental values , it is somewhat surprising that these European funds should be involved in a campaign of this nature .
I should therefore like to take the opportunity of this debate to question the Commission on the validation of the funding for this campaign by the PROGRESS programme .
( The speaker agreed to take a blue-card question under Rule 149 ( 8 ) )
( HU ) Mrs Guillaume , I would like to ask you a question .
In your opinion , how have the regulations concerning the concept of abortion and the rules pertaining to abortion in the new constitution changed compared with the previous constitution ?
( FR ) Madam President , I should like to encourage a response from the Commission about the programme in question .
I have already put the question to the Commission , and I am awaiting a response to learn whether it has indeed been verified that these funds have indeed been used for this campaign .
( RO ) Madam President , I would like to draw your attention in particular to the provisions of the revised constitution relating to the collective rights of the ethnic Hungarian minority living abroad and to the explicit declaration , in this case , of the principle of extraterritoriality , both of which blatantly breach OSCE standards and the repeated assessments made by the Venice Commission in similar cases .
I am referring to Article d for Mr Weber 's benefit .
This is unacceptable and I should remind you that it is already having an impact .
Last week , Mr Tőkés , Vice-President of the European Parliament , hosted the official inauguration of an office representing the Székely Region , which does not exist in Romania , in the Hungarian House of Regions .
I strongly believe , Commissioner , that the Venice Commission 's report will confirm that these breaches have taken place .
I would ask you the following then : what will the European Commission want and be able to do about this ?
Finally , I want to ask the following question , especially to the German and French MEPs among you , here in Strasbourg , which is the symbol of the historical reconciliation between Germany and France , and which our European Union has been built on : can you allow the demons of nationalism to be let loose in Europe without destroying our European Union project ?
( The speaker agreed to take a blue-card question under Rule 149 ( 8 ) )


( HU ) Mr Boştinaru , I have two questions that I would like to ask : do Romanian laws allow the granting of citizenship to individuals of Romanian nationality even if they do not live in the territory of Romania ?
This is my first question .
My second question is this : is there a law that stipulates that those Romanian citizens who do not live in the territory of Romania can take part in the elections to the National Assembly and the Senate ?
( RO ) Fellow Member , I would like to remind you that I referred solely to European standards and principles which are universally recognised and not to any legal or constitutional provisions in Romania .
However , I would also like to answer you by saying that there is no legal act in Romania which stipulates the principle of extraterritoriality and collective rights .
I referred to this when I mentioned the dispute with the European Commission 's assessments .
When an infringement of these values is noted in any EU Member State , it is the European Union 's task to give a robust response , no matter what that state is called .
This is my answer .
( IT ) Madam President , the new Hungarian constitution limits the possibility of intervention by supervisory bodies such as the constitutional court , and increases the powers of the executive , thereby bringing into question the normal system of checks and balances .
Social rights have been negated , the state only providing subsidies to the needy if they agree to do community work .
Finally , the right to self-defence has been sanctioned and weapons may be kept in the home even without a licence .
The right to abortion has been banned and highly discriminatory laws against homosexuals have been introduced .
All of this goes against Directive 2000 / 78 / EC , which establishes a general framework for the fight against discrimination .
I therefore ask the Commissioner what action she intends to take , in view of the fact that the fundamental rights in the new Hungarian constitution are hardly compatible with those of the European Union and the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union .
( NL ) Madam President , I am happy to see Commissioner Reding attending this debate on how best to defend European values ​ ​ of democracy .
We felt her absence during the previous debates on the Hungarian media law , when the same values were at stake .
As for the constitution , every nation has the right to elect representatives to its own government .
The government has a responsibility to stand up for the interests of its people , all of its people .
In the case of Hungary , the majority party , Fidesz , is making the decisions about the content of a new constitution .
By amending the constitution in that way , without really involving other parties or civil society organisations , it is undermining the democratic process , killing off dynamism and threatening to impose the exclusive right of a single party .
The majority at the expense of the minority .
A true democracy is tested and judged on how that country treats its minorities .
One minority , in particular , the LGBT community , will be especially affected by a constitution which , in the 21st century , is harking back to antiquated ways of life .
This is going back in time , not moving with the times .
We expect better of our EU Presidency .
( The speaker agreed to take a blue-card question under Rule 149 ( 8 ) )
( HU ) Ladies and gentlemen , I apologise for taking the floor so many times , but I was personally involved in the drafting of this constitution , and I find it greatly disturbing to hear misapprehensions , whether deliberate , or unintentional .
This is exactly why I would like to ask Mrs Bozkurt the following , after she claimed that there was no consultation on this issue : Did you know that 917 000 Hungarian citizens returned the 12-question questionnaire through which Hungary and the Hungarian Government consulted with its citizens about the important issues in the constitution ?
Directly with the Hungarian citizens ; in fact , 10 % of the entire population took part in the consultation .
Do you happen to know any European constitution that was preceded by consultations on such a wide scale ?
( NL ) Madam President , these things are constantly being played down .
However , can you explain why there has been so much protest here , why members from all kinds of groups are saying that this is wrong ?
Why are we having this debate then ?
I do not think that we would be having this debate if everything had gone well .
Can you indicate what the party affiliation of the people who sent those 17 000 forms was ?
Who did you pass them on to ?
I would like to hear some answers from you about that .
( HU ) Madam President , Mrs Bozkurt , to answer your question , everyone received this letter in which they could express their opinions .
Thank you for this opportunity for a debate , because this way I can tell you what an immense pleasure the birth of the Hungarian constitution has given me .
It is a painful fact that the 20 years that have elapsed since the fall of communism were not enough to create a new constitution .
We have brought this transitional era to a close now and established a new constitution based on national consensus .
Our new constitution is the collection of our shared values ; it starts with our most beautiful national prayer which also emphasises the importance of our common European values , and it finally places the appreciation of our Christian roots and family - our key values - where it belongs .
It is more than reassuring that in the new constitution , the Hungarian state takes responsibility for its citizens both within and outside its borders , does not allow state debt to run out of control , and , among other things , it declares parents ' responsibility for their children .
( HU ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I am pleased to take the floor at the end of the debate , because sadly , I have to say that at the end of the day , I have not heard any specific criticisms from you .
Secondly , we , MEPs , cannot have a say in a matter of national competence .
However , now that I was given the floor , I would rather not criticise , but make a recommendation on behalf of 80 million people living with disabilities .
The Hungarian constitution is the only European constitution that includes special provisions and assistance for people with disabilities .
So I would suggest you include similar provisions in your respective countries ' constitution .
Thank you for your attention .

( SK ) Madam President , the unprecedented declaration by the second highest representative of the Hungarian Republic , the Speaker of Parliament , Mr Kövér , who has called the Paris Treaty and the borders into question , only confirms the level of revisionism being applied under the Hungarian policy .
It is unfortunate that the government of Iveta Radičová in Slovakia , under the pretext of non-confrontationalism , is concealing its own inability to respond to dual citizenship , to the constitution of the Hungarian Republic , to voting rights for Hungarians living in neighbouring countries and to the statements of the Speaker of the Hungarian Parliament .
I am concerned about the ineptitude of our government , but the silence of the European institutions is also striking , as if they did not want to see this violation of European law by the country holding the Presidency .
I hope that the representatives of the European institutions will listen carefully and monitor the situation in Hungary , and that they will make an uncompromising statement very soon on the undermining of the borders and the Paris Peace Treaty , and on a Hungarian constitution which enshrines support for the collective rights of Hungarian minorities and the creation of collective self-governing areas .
( HU ) Madam President , Commissioner Reding , I am addressing you .
It is obvious that the Hungarian constitution in itself would not have generated such a wide European debate , but unfortunately , Hungary is back on the agenda again after six months , when we looked at the media law .
In fact , it is not the constitution itself , but the anti-democratic practices that have taken root in Hungary : judges , policemen , and people paying into private pension funds are deprived of their acquired rights .
Commissioner , what is the underlying reason for divesting the constitutional court and the ombudsmen of their acquired rights ?
They are threatening the independence of the courts ; they have already snatched the independence of the media .
These are all extremely important and extremely dangerous elements .
Commissioner , I would like to hand over to you the 30-page criticism of the Venice Commission .
This body formulated extremely serious criticisms and I really hope that the European Commission and you in particular , will finally take its duty seriously , because you should be the guardian of the European Treaties .
Please , do your job !
( SL ) Madam President , the Hungarian Presidency surprised us at the very beginning with an unusual gift , a map of Greater Hungary , a map of a dream which can obviously only become a reality in a united , democratic Europe , and which does not invoke the past .
Today 's debate is evidence that nationalism , and excessive nationalism at that , is one of the causes of division .
In the region that I come from , we have had a great many problems in recent decades because of nationalism .
I ask the Hungarian members of Parliament and the representatives of Hungarian authorities to abandon nationalistic games and playing around with peace treaties which remain unrealised and which they perceive as unjust .
Otherwise , the Treaty of Trianon will come to represent for all of us something that is not good .
Madam President , I would just like to ask for a little clarification from colleagues on that side of the House , because in the debate , you have firmly insisted on the right of every Member State to pass laws as it deems fit , as long as it has a democratic majority , and that those laws should be recognised by other countries .
Could I perhaps ask Mr Szájer to reply , on behalf of the EPP Group , whether that means that , from now on , Hungary and the other countries represented will also recognise the Dutch marriage law that allows same-sex couples to get married ?
( PL ) Madam President , this debate reminds me of another debate , held several months ago , on the media laws in Hungary .
Both that debate and this one are merely a pretext for attacking Hungary .
European political correctness cannot bear the fact that there is a country in which conservatism is triumphing , that there is a country in Europe where national interests are being effectively protected , and that there is a country in Europe which is returning to real values .
This is an attack on the Hungarian Government for having successfully rescued the country after half a century of bankrupt Communist governments and their political offspring .
Now it is the turn of the constitution .
While European political correctness is forcefully dissociating itself from its Christian roots , the Hungarians have dared to take pride in enshrining them in their constitution .
While Brussels is promoting cosmopolitanism , Budapest is emphasising its heroic national past .
Hungarians are focusing on national identity , their own state and common sense .
The world is finally back to rights .
Communism is described as a tyrant , and marriage is at last a union between a woman and a man .
I hope that future generations of Hungarians will be proud of this fine constitution .
( HU ) Madam President , in today 's debate , it seems that the Venice Commission has become a kind of European super Supreme Court .
The same Venice Commission formulated serious criticisms , justified criticisms against the Slovak language law that is still in force , and I have not heard any of my fellow Slovak Members ever refer to that language law .
My fellow Member , Mr Boştinaru is not in the Chamber anymore , so he cannot reply , but I would like to answer Mr Szájer that I , as a Romanian citizen , do know that Romanian citizens living outside the territory of Romania can vote and can have passports , and , similarly to the Slovak constitution , many European constitutions lay down the rights of their citizens living outside their borders .
I do not see anything objectionable in this .
What I would rather contemplate is why Hungary feels the need to include this in the constitution - it is because Hungarians living outside the borders are still discriminated in countries where the Hungarian constitution is vehemently criticised .

Madam President , I think I put a very concrete and clear question to Mr Szájer .
I hope he would like to reply .
We are using the catch-the-eye procedure , so the blue-card procedure is not permitted .
( HU ) Madam President , as a Slovakian citizen , I would like to express my opinion on what is happening here today .
I belong to those who were not given mass Hungarian citizenship , because this will be granted to those who lodged their application individually .
The reason why I asked to take the floor is the belligerent tone that some colleagues have adopted .
I am extremely worried about the fact that the Hungarian constitution is assessed as if it were an attack against peaceful cohabitation in Europe .
I feel that because of completely misinterpreted or poorly translated texts - for example , the right to vote , which is not included in the constitution - we are having these speeches made in an extremely bad mood and striking a very belligerent tone , which are not appropriate in the European Parliament .
( HU ) Madam President , the Socialist initiative can be described as having three main characteristics : it breaks the law , it is cowardly , and bears the characteristics of show trials .
It breaks the law because the European Parliament has no licence or competence whatsoever to examine the Hungarian constitution .
It is clear from the letter of Mr Barroso and the statement of Mrs Reding that this is within national sovereignty .
It is cowardly because if the Socialists had found anything to contest , they would have turned to the European Court in Luxembourg and would not be debating here .
They have not done so , because they know exactly that they would lose the Court case .
And finally , both the procedure and the initiative bear the characteristics of show trials because there is only one thing in the background : Fidesz winning the elections by a two-thirds majority last year .
The Socialists - apparently not only the Hungarian , but also the European Socialists - have not been able to swallow the decision of the Hungarian citizens , so they take every opportunity to attack the Hungarian Government .
( PL ) Madam President , it has to be said that the hypocrisy and double standards in this debate and in the criticism of the Hungarian constitution are striking .
On the one hand , accusations have been levelled at the constitution because it does not refer to God and Christianity , and because it offers no protection for what are known as homosexual marriages .
Yet such accusations could easily be made regarding a great many European constitutions , including the Polish constitution , for example , which also contains such provisions , or does not contain them in the latter case .
This is exactly as it should be , for this is a domestic matter for Poland to deal with , as laid down in the EU Treaty .
We should not violate our own Treaty on European Union .
The drafting of the constitution has been accused of being undemocratic , yet people are ignoring the fact that the vast majority of Hungarians supported this constitution .
This hypocrisy is also apparent from the way in which those protesting so loudly today against Hungary and its Prime Minister , Mr Orbán , were silent when the previous socialist government in Hungary in practice brought its country to the brink of bankruptcy , using force to silence the opposition when it protested at democratic rallies and gatherings .
This is not a matter in which we should get involved .
( HU ) Mr János Áder , just a ten-second correction of what you have just said .
The European Court of Human Rights is not in Luxembourg .
It is located in Strasbourg .
( DE ) Madam President , Mrs Győri , Mrs Reding , I fail to see the point of this debate .
I would have framed some of the points in the Hungarian constitution differently .
There are also some points in my own German constitution that I do not fully agree with , likewise the French constitution .
However , this has nothing to do with this House , because it is not responsible for such issues .
That is the crucial point .
That is , unless is it specifically established that some provision is in breach of European law .
If someone does not like a particular element in a national constitution , this has nothing to do with this House , because this is a matter of national identity and jurisdiction .
Just as the Commission forced changes in Hungary 's media laws because some points were unacceptable , so it or the European Court of Justice will take action if laws are passed when implementing the constitution that breach European law .
It is even possible to take a case to the European Court of Justice .
It is for this reason that I believe what we are witnessing here is a bit of political theatre .
We do not have the right to interfere with the Hungarian constitution .
Perhaps I would have done certain things differently , but it is Hungary 's right to do things as it sees fit .
( HU ) Madam President , we have witnessed an unprecedented event here , in the European Parliament .
The constitution of a Member State , one of the most important components of national sovereignty , has been attacked here by certain MEPs .
You had better be aware that those who have blatantly infringed national sovereignty not only cause damage to Hungary , but to all of Europe .
This case established a precedent that weakens genuine supporters of Europe and strengthens Eurosceptics .
This is irresponsible behaviour .
At the same time , what we have heard from the Commission is reassuring .
It seemed to be self-evident , yet I am happy that the point was made at this plenary session .
The European Commission has no intentions or right to interfere with the constitutional affairs of Member States .
After all this , it is high time the left wing stops its provocative political campaign based on misrepresentations against the Hungarian Government .
The new Hungarian constitution is an important instrument for clearing away the ruins left by eight years of corrupt and inept Socialist governance .
Fidesz was given a two-thirds majority mandate to do this job .
The left wing simply has to accept that this decision cannot be changed either in Brussels , or in Strasbourg .

( DE ) Madam President , Mr Brok , I found your remarks somewhat irritating , which is why I asked to speak .
Naturally , the European Union has competences that enable it to establish the compatibility of national law with European law .
As you said yourself , anything that breaches the European Treaties can also be clarified in a court of law .
So , why should this House be prevented from debating such a situation ?
Is it not , in fact , absolutely necessary for this House to debate this issue ?
I believe that we are witnessing a trend whereby national constitutions are seen as an area where there is no room for political debate among European democracies .
If we live in a European democracy , then of course , the core components of our constitutions must be mutually agreed and must be compatible with the international treaties that we have all signed .
These include , for example , the Convention on Human Rights , as well as the Treaties of the European Union , and I believe that we should be able to debate this issue in this Chamber .
Vice-President of the Commission . - Madam President , I had asked to have a clear line from the European Parliament .
Well , there was no clear line from the European Parliament .
I heard a lot of diverging opinions , which in itself shows how complex this matter is .
So let me underline once more that the Commission respects the Lisbon Treaty and does not intervene in the sovereignty of nation states .
On behalf of President Barroso , I would like to underline once more that the Commission does not make political judgments on the fundamental constitutional and institutional choices that a Member State makes .
The adoption of a new constitution in a Member State is a matter for its people and for its institutions .
As I have already underlined , we could become competent when the constitution is translated into legislative , administrative or judicial practice .
I can assure Parliament that we would not hesitate for a moment to intervene in such a case if the Treaty or the Charter was violated or if Union law was not respected .
Turning to Ms Guillaume 's question on Union law : when Union law is at stake , I have never shied away from action .
The question raised by Ms Guillaume concerns an awareness-raising campaign on the work-life balance , which was supported by the Progress programme .
This is part of the campaign consisting of promotion material showing a foetus with the words ' Let me live ' , with the Commission 's logo .
I made it very clear : this campaign is not in line with the Progress programme and it is not in line with the project proposal submitted to the Commission services by the Hungarian authorities .
Therefore , the Commission asked for this part of the campaign to be stopped without further delay and for all existing posters to be removed .
If this is not done , we will start procedures to terminate the ground agreement and draw necessary consequences , including financial ones .
That is how we answer when European law is at stake .
Constitutions are not within our competence .
President-in-Office of the Council . - Madam President , first of all , I would like to thank this House for the particular attention it has paid to my government 's activities in the last semester .
The Hungarian Presidency is strongly convinced that the newly adopted - not revised - Hungarian constitution is fully in line with the basic values and principles on which the Union is founded .
Since the beginning of our Presidency , we have dedicated all our energy and have been tireless in our efforts in promoting the common European agenda .
I am especially pleased that not even the critics , who were mentioned during today 's debate , have questioned the firmness and the sincerity of my government 's commitment .
Madam President , on a point of order - and I tried to make this point halfway through the debate , but you cut me off - I would suggest that you look back over this debate and see how you allocated blue card questions and catch-the-eye requests .
I can sum it up : two blue card requests from me were ignored , while requests were approved from Mr Alvaro ( twice ) , from Ms Göncz ( three times ) and from Mr Tavares ( once ) .
You were unable to genuinely balance the way these were distributed .
I would ask you to take a look at this next time so as to achieve a balance .
I assure you , Mrs Sargentini , we have gone over the allotted time of 45 minutes .
All the Members have had an opportunity to speak .
I allowed them to speak for at least 15 seconds and even a minute in some cases , and the balance between the political groups has been fully respected .
However , you are entitled to check and , of course , to make a complaint .
The debate is closed .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
The Hungarian constitution was adopted on 18 April using a process which has pushed democracy to its limits .
It will come into force early next year .
Although we do not have the necessary powers to dictate to one Member State what the content of its fundamental law should be , we cannot act with indifference to this anti-democratic abuse .
This is a case which must sound a warning bell for all Member States and governments , regardless of their political persuasion .
What is even more serious is that the Hungarian Government is using the EU Presidency not to contribute to the construction of a united Europe , but to support the resurgence of a nationalism which we thought had been forgotten .
As far as states like Romania and Slovakia are concerned , the content of the constitution may create a framework conducive to dangerous situations , based on collective rights for ethnic Hungarians and the principle of extraterritoriality .
Furthermore , the Hungarian Government has shown its support for setting up an office for the Székely Region in Brussels , which is a major affront to Romanians and Romania 's territorial integrity .
I believe that the European Parliament has the right to discuss the legislative solutions enshrined in the constitutions of its Member States .
We live in one Europe , and the citizens of our countries have a right to live in any Member State without any barriers .
However , we must remember that the European nations have a sovereign right to enact fundamental laws .
Different countries and different nationalities have been shaped by different experiences .
Hungarians also have the right to adopt a constitution which makes no mention of an ombudsman or a personal data representative .
When I hear MEPs talking about the Hungarian Parliament violating fundamental European principles , I cannot help but feel that I do not share the principles to which you refer .
Most of all , I would like to congratulate Hungary on its new constitution .
The fact that the overwhelming majority of Hungarians support the new legislation is particularly impressive , and proves that the Hungarian nation has moved completely away from the tradition of Communist constitutions , within which the previous constitution had been drafted .
Hungary is a Member State of the European Union , and follows the rules of the club correctly .
In case someone thinks otherwise , the club has corresponding rules on how to proceed .
If they happen to be right , then please lodge an action for breach of duty against us .
This is the procedure in the case of every other country as well , and we , Hungarians , do not request to be exempted from this procedure .
We defend our point of view in a fair debate that is based on truth , but we do not wish to take part in a political witch hunt .
Whilst clearing away the ruins left by your Hungarian Socialist colleagues , we are mobilising tremendous energies to make Hungary a democratic , European , and free country based on the constitutional mandate we received from the Hungarian citizens in free elections .
This is the reason why we adopted the new constitution that will finally replace the communist constitution of 1949 , which evoked bad memories and was the symbol of tyranny for Hungarians .
We are a nation that loves freedom and democracy .
Our constitution , which has protected the right to resist tyranny since the famous Golden Bull , the Hungarian Magna Carta of 1222 , included religious tolerance by virtue of the Declaration of Torda for the first time in Europe , was among the first to guarantee equality before law in 1848 , and has one of the oldest parliamentary traditions in Europe , is a thousand years old .
We do not need to be lectured about democracy by those who have plenty of homework to do in their own countries .
The European Union is built on fundamental principles such as the equality between men and women .
However , by approving a new constitution that states that the foetus must be protected from the moment of conception , Hungary , a Member State , has trampled on these values by allowing the right to abortion once more to be brought into question .
I have also learnt that the Hungarian Government has launched a publicity campaign against the right to abortion , funded , and therefore apparently sanctioned , by the European Union .
I would like to draw attention at this point to the fact that the right to abortion is a fundamental right for which thousands of women have fought and continue to fight in Europe , often at the risk of their lives , that it is supported by this Parliament and by the Hungarian citizens , and that it is recognised by 23 Member States out of 27 .
In addition to disassociating itself from a policy of this nature that goes against the fundamental rights of women , the European Commission must do its utmost to ensure that the Hungarian Government puts a stop to all campaigns seeking to call into question the right to abortion .
This is an issue of protecting our common values .
European Arrest Warrant ( debate )
The next item is the oral questions to the Council and the Commission on the European Arrest Warrant .
author . - ( DE ) Madam President , today we find ourselves debating the issue of the European Arrest Warrant .
It is high time that this discussion was brought to the table .
We have submitted a question through the groups tabling a debate on the reform of the European Arrest Warrant and its application , and are asking the Commission and Council to respond with proposals .
The European Arrest Warrant was trumpeted as the perfect example of mutual recognition in the area of justice and policing .
When the European Arrest Warrant was passed as a framework decision , the European Parliament always made it perfectly clear that , on the one hand , the conditions for applying the European Arrest Warrant are relatively strict , so that it should apply only to really serious crimes , that it should be applied in a proportionate way , and that the procedural standards in the European Union should be harmonised at the same time .
None of these requirements has really been met in full .
In many specific cases , the Arrest Warrant is not applied in a proportionate way , as we can see in the reports now available to us .
Thus , we need to adjust procedures , both in practice and in legislation .
Thanks to the work of Vice-President Reding , after ten years , we are finally making progress in harmonising procedural standards .
However , it is essential that we should make numerous further advances , including in relation to the conditions under which prisoners are held and the question of individual standards of legal protection .
In future , our sole concern should not just be the cooperation between the police and judicial authorities as regards mutual recognition ; we must also look at the establishment of procedural standards .
Nonetheless , the European Arrest Warrant must be amended today , as its application is obviously incompatible with the standards we have called for , particularly in terms of the checking of proportionality in individual cases .
Madam President , the European Arrest Warrant has proved to be a very useful instrument in seeking justice beyond national borders .
It has helped us open up national borders by sending a clear message to criminals that they may no longer flee to another country to avoid prosecution .
It is therefore important that the European Arrest Warrant is seen as a useful instrument that has reaped good results .
However , it also has its downsides , such as when it is issued for crimes which are considered too minor for its justification .
I do not expect a European Arrest Warrant to be issued because someone is caught stealing two car tyres in another country , as has happened in the past .
The punishment does not fit the crime and leads to a lack of trust in an important and useful instrument .
Therefore , we need to look at the defects in the system and in its application , without destroying the usefulness of this warrant .
It is for this reason that we are putting forward this Parliamentary question to the Commission to help us understand how the warrant was put into use these past few years .
Such information will help us decide whether we need to update it so as to safeguard its correct application .
author . - Madam President , the Liberal Group in the European Parliament has always been supportive of the European Arrest Warrant because of its importance in the fight against serious cross-border crime .
However , simultaneously , my group has always pointed out that the European Arrest Warrant system would be incomplete without advancing procedural defence rights in Europe .
We have constantly criticised the Council for not progressing that agenda on the basis of the Commission 's comprehensive proposal .
Now we are finally changing the situation on defence rights , and I applaud Vice-President Reding for her commitment to this programme under the road map .
The question is : will this be enough to compensate for the failings of the European Arrest Warrant ?
I think not .
We also have to do something about the way the European Arrest Warrant system operates .
However , let us just note the successes : between 2005 and 2009 , the arrest warrant has secured the extradition of almost 12 000 drug smugglers , child sex offenders , rapists and others .
They include Hussain Osman , one of the 2005 London bombers .
No Londoner could be ungrateful to the European Arrest Warrant in the light of that .
He came back within six weeks , from Italy .
However , in the UK at least , and we will hear this later , the European Arrest Warrant has become a favourite stick with which the Eurosceptics batter the reputation of the EU .
Their cause has been helped by several notorious cases of breaches of human rights .
In fact , the UK receives the second highest number of requests for surrender after Germany .
Both the Commission and defence rights organisations like Fair Trials International - I declare an interest , I am a patron - and Justice , on whose council I sit , have pinpointed failings in the arrest warrant .
Problems with it being used for minor offences , the lack of legal representation in the issuing state , long pre-trial detention periods , the lack of bail for people who are not nationals of the issuing state , and bad detention conditions are all cited with reason .
The Commission does not think that we need to recast the European Arrest Warrant .
I think we need to reconsider that .
Firstly , we need to have a much sounder basis for the requirement for a proportionality check , so that minor offences are not covered .
Secondly , we need to have an explicit human rights check in the executing state .
That needs to be made explicit , and not implicit .
Thirdly , it needs to be recognised when it is not reasonable to execute a European Arrest Warrant , so that someone is not followed by alerts in the Schengen Information System around Europe even though their surrender has been refused once on valid grounds .
We also need to do something about the bail situation , not least by implementing the framework decision on supervision orders .
There do need to be changes to the European Arrest Warrant , but fundamentally it has been a success .
Those who question it need to ask themselves whether they would be satisfied with criminals spending years beyond the reach of the courts and beyond the reach of justice , because traditional extradition takes too long and has too much red tape .
author . - ( DE ) Madam President , in the debate on the Hungarian constitution , we heard more than once the criticism that it was a political debate .
I am completely taken aback by that , because having political debates is one of the things that Parliament is expressly there to do ; and I therefore want to start this topic by setting out the political framework too .
Crime , and organised crime in particular , has never been held back by borders or border controls .
It therefore makes no sense to rebuild borders in Europe and to restrict the way our populations are growing together .
On the contrary : what we need is the consistent further development of cooperation between our Member States and cross-border cooperation by the police and justice authorities .
In this area , the European Arrest Warrant has repeatedly proven itself to be an important and successful instrument .
At the same time , however , this instrument will fall into disrepute if European Arrest Warrants are used for , say , stolen bicycles , or merely in order to carry out questioning .
I regret to say that we have also found that it is being used when perhaps it has been decided not to execute an arrest warrant because there is evidence to show that it was unjustly issued and this is then not respected by the issuing Member State - resulting in the unfortunate situation in which the citizens concerned are repeatedly arrested whenever they cross a border .
That does nothing to help build confidence in European legal systems .
Why is this happening ?
Does the text of the directive leave too much leeway ?
Is it a matter of incorrect implementation in the Member States or inadequate information ?
We need to clarify these points , the Member States need to make improvements where necessary , and the Commission must take action to prevent such misuse .
That is the only way to prevent a successful instrument being permanently damaged and confidence in these measures being lost .
Moreover , all these experiences show how important it is that we finally make some progress on the road map for procedural rights .
In the interests of legal certainty for everyone involved , we need to have the same rights across Europe for those accused of offences and there must be mandatory information on these rights .
I call on the Commission to exert pressure to counter possible opposition on all these points ; I am sure it can count on the support of Parliament in this .
( The speaker agreed to take a blue-card question under Rule 149 ( 8 ) )
Madam President , Ms Sippel described the European Arrest Warrant as a baby .
Is it not in fact much more of a Frankenstein 's monster ?
Should she not accept that ?
author . - ( DE ) I am not sure whether I should answer your question , as it is more of a polemic comment .
However , the figures show that the European Arrest Warrant is an appropriate instrument for fighting crime in the unified space of Europe .
Crime is not national ; crime is international and crosses borders .
That is why we need to cooperate across borders .
We need to deal with the teething problems of the European Arrest Warrant and stop it being misused .
As an instrument , however , it is indispensable .
author . - Madam President , since 2004 , I have warned that the European Arrest Warrant ( EAW ) could be used as an instrument of oppression against political dissidents .
This is what is happening now in the case of Julian Assange .
There are many irregularities in the Swedish case against him .
Mr Assange has not yet been charged with any specific offence .
A previous investigation against him , for what the Swedes designate as ' minor rape ' , was dropped by a senior prosecutor in Stockholm almost four months before the EAW was issued .
The reinstated investigation leading to the EAW saw a failure of the prosecutor to interview witnesses that could clear Mr Assange .
Independent legal opinion in England has said that the allegations against Mr Assange would not constitute rape under English law .
The complainant 's lawyer in Sweden has reportedly stated that the ladies themselves cannot tell if the acts in question constituted rapes , because they are not lawyers .
Nevertheless , the tick box on the EAW marked rape contains no definition or explanation of what constitutes the crime .
Mr Assange remained in Sweden for five weeks to answer the allegations , but he was not questioned as the investigation was unduly delayed .
Mr Assange arrived in Sweden less than a month after WikiLeaks leaked the Afghanistan war logs and announced it had many more revelations to come .
Senior figures in the USA have called for Mr Assange to be assassinated or kidnapped , and for the US Government to act as if it were at war with WikiLeaks , which they describe as a terrorist organisation .
All this coincides with the convenient issuing of a European Arrest Warrant against him .
Sweden has a close relationship with the USA in terms of intelligence sharing and cooperation , calling into question Sweden 's perceived neutrality .
Why would the USA want Mr Assange to be extradited to Sweden ?
The Americans are still building a case against him and do not know what they can charge him with , if anything .
Without a charge , the USA cannot extradite him from the UK , but they need him locked up somewhere while they work it out , preventing him from returning to Australia .
The European Arrest Warrant offers the perfect expedient .
As I have said many times in this Chamber , under the European Arrest Warrant , extradition - or rather judicial surrender , to use the correct term - is now merely a bureaucratic formality .
There are simply no real safeguards .
Having said all that , my question to the Council and the Commission is not : is the EAW being abused for political purposes ?
It is : can it be abused ?
If the Council and Commission are honest , they will have to admit that it can .
Will they please do so now ?
In my opinion , the evidence shows that it is most certainly happening in the case of Julian Assange .
Madam President , the text of the oral questions might seem abstract and theoretical , but the European Arrest Warrant nevertheless concerns the fates of individuals , human rights and fundamental freedoms .
In the Netherlands , much attention has been focused on the fate of Cor Disselkoen .
In 1997 , this Dutch entrepreneur was charged with breaching the Polish taxation rules .
He spent two months in prison for this , in appalling conditions .
Having paid a very large amount of money as bail , he was released and for twelve years he heard nothing more about this case .
However , last year , Poland suddenly demanded this entrepreneur 's extradition .
On this occasion , Poland made use of the European Arrest Warrant .
Ten days ago , he was transferred to Poland .
Mr Disselkoen 's lawyer says he was held there in a prison which was just as filthy and overcrowded as the one in which he was held in 1997 .
Contrary to all the rules , the consultation between Disselkoen and his lawyer was recorded with a video camera .
In addition , four new charges were suddenly added to his sheet .
The judge even insinuated that these could lead to a new arrest warrant .
Disselkoen has once again paid a large amount of money as bail and is back in the Netherlands , but his case shows that the European Arrest Warrant may lead to degrading situations .
In its report , the Commission has demonstrated that it is aware of the problems and that it is concerned about them .
That is why my group is pinning its hopes on the Commissioner .
Commissioner , can you personally offer any explanation of how the proportionality requirements should be interpreted and arrange for this to be taken over by the Council ?
Can you make sure that people will actually be entitled to challenge an arrest warrant in both the Member State which has issued the warrant and the Member State which is carrying it out ?
Do you agree that it ought to be possible to consistently refuse to carry out arrest warrants on behalf of countries where conditions in prisons and houses of detention remain inhumane , that the EAW will be subjected to a human rights assessment and that Cor Disselkoen need not fear even more misery ?
author . - Madam President , no one can deny the positive impact the European Arrest Warrant has had on cross-border crime .
It has so far contributed to the extradition of almost 12 000 drug smugglers , child sex offenders , rapists and terrorists , and has avoided lengthy extradition procedures in the process .
The speed of this tool has been invaluable , given the freedom to cross borders and increases in cross-border crime .
However , what this tool was never intended for was to investigate and punish petty crimes such as the theft of a pig , stealing a chocolate bar or exceeding a bank overdraft limit .
What you see today is a rare occurrence here .
Nearly all political groups and all nationalities collected here are saying that now is the time to review , re-evaluate and , if necessary , amend .
Proportionality , protection and redress are the key to reforming this tool .
We are now currently working on the European Investigation Order , a partner to the European Arrest Warrant .
It is essential that we do not make the same mistakes again .
We must draft this new legislation with a clear working memory as to the flaws and obstacles of the European Arrest Warrant .
There have been simply too many examples of substandard conditions for prisoners , too many misplaced warrants and too great a lack of redress for those who have been victims of errors .
I fear that we are moving forwards with the EIO whilst its very foundations , and the European Arrest Warrant on which it is based , are decidedly shaky .
We need to rebuild the trust in , and value of , this tool and reserve it for only the most serious of crimes , whilst guaranteeing and maintaining the highest of standards in its use .
( The speaker agreed to take a blue-card question under Rule 149 ( 8 ) )

Madam President , I would like to ask Mr Kirkhope this question because he agrees that the European Arrest Warrant needs review and re-evaluation - my view would be a lot stronger than that , but never mind .
He mentioned the European Investigation Order and I believe he was saying that this could be a step too far .
But is he aware that , in his own government , one of the first acts of the Home Secretary , Theresa May , when coming into office was to opt into the European Investigation Order , which means we now cannot opt out and will be stuck with whatever comes through the legislative sausage machine , because this will be subject to qualified majority voting and the final outcome is something we cannot determine ?
Is this another case of Tory double-speak , where they speak out against the acts of the European Union here but endorse them back home in our own parliament ?
Mr President , the position regarding the UK Government with regard to both the European Arrest Warrant and the European Investigation Order is that clearly they feel they have an obligation - quite rightly - to do what is best for the UK in relation to cross-border crime .
We have been the victims of an enormous amount of crime , and terrorism in particular , as the honourable gentleman is aware .
I am sure that he would share with me our determination to stamp out this crime , and working together across borders is the best way to achieve it .
Of course , the European Investigation Order needs careful implementation .
But merely opting into it and to the concept of it , as has been done by the government , is not , of course , the final shout .
What we need to see here is the detail of this order ; we need to implement it effectively and make it work well alongside the Arrest Warrant .
But the fact that we have opted in is a good indication that we are determined to deal with cross-border crime .
I trust the honourable gentleman shares our wishes in that regard .
President-in-Office of the Council . - Madam President , the European Arrest Warrant has become one of the most successful instruments on mutual recognition adopted within the European Union .
Therefore , I am very thankful to you for having initiated this debate .
The Council has devoted a great deal of attention and energy to this issue , not least through a mutual peer evaluation of the practical application of this instrument which has been carried out in all Member States over a period of three years .
The advantages of the European Arrest Warrant by far outweigh any possible inconveniences .
Thanks to the EAW , the Union has managed to reduce surrender times considerably , in many cases from one or two years to only one or two months .
The previous extradition system was cumbersome and no longer fit for purpose in the modern world of open borders and serious and organised cross-border crimes .
On the issue of proportionality , whilst there have been some cases of minor importance for which a European Arrest Warrant was issued , it is ultimately a matter for the issuing authority in each Member State to decide for which offences it wants to launch the proceedings .
This is a result of the fact that , unlike extradition , the European Arrest Warrant is a fully judicial system .
A European Arrest Warrant is always based on a judicial decision in the issuing state and the decision on whether or not to issue an EAW is for the national judicial authority .
If there is a proportionality problem , it is not caused by the instrument or by the EAW framework decision ; it is rather the result of the criminal justice policies in individual Member States .
The Council has been quite clear that in cases where preventive detention is inappropriate , the European Arrest Warrant should not be used .
The Council has also called on the instrument 's practitioners to consider and seek advice on the use of alternatives to the European Arrest Warrant .
Taking into account the overall efficiency of criminal proceedings , these alternatives could include using the less coercive instruments of mutual legal assistance where possible , using video-conferencing for suspects , convoking someone for appearance before a judge by means of a summons , using the Schengen Information System to establish the place of residence of a suspect , or the use of the framework decision on the mutual recognition of financial penalties .
However , such assessments should always be made by the issuing authority .
The European Arrest Warrants are issued in relation to prosecutions or final convictions in the issuing state .
These judicial decisions are based on the material available to the judge or prosecutor in the issuing state .
Furthermore , we should not ignore the victims .
In most cases , the victims of the offence are in the issuing state , not in the executing state , so by delaying the trial and examination of the case , the rights of victims are also being undermined .
Justice delayed is justice denied , not only for suspects but also for victims .
It is also in the interest of the victims to have a speedy trial so that their rights are respected .
The Council intends to adopt a road map proposed by the Hungarian Presidency to strengthen these rights .
The solution to the proportionality principle cannot therefore be that we change the fundamentals of the well-functioning European Arrest Warrant system , which has radically improved the prior extradition system .
Regarding the rights of the defence , I would like first to remark that , unlike extradition , the European Arrest Warrant is a fully judicial system which , in itself , is already a major guarantee .
A European Arrest Warrant is always based on a judicial decision in the issuing state and can be executed in the executing state only through a judicial decision .
The person will always be able to fully exercise his defence rights in the issuing Member State where the trial on the merits of the case takes place .
This is fully in compliance with the case-law of the European Court of Human Rights in Strasbourg .
That does not imply that the person against whom a European Arrest Warrant has been issued is not , and should not , be able to exercise any rights in the executing state .
Directive 2010 / 64 of 20 October 2010 provides for the right to interpretation and translation in criminal proceedings and also applies in the execution of the European Arrest Warrant .
Furthermore , we welcome the fact that a recent Commission proposal for a directive of the European Parliament and of the Council on the right to information in criminal proceedings provides for the right to written information in European Arrest Warrant proceedings .
Concerns have been expressed that a negative decision on a European Arrest Warrant does not automatically lead to a deletion of the corresponding alert in the Schengen Information System .
However , the SIS alert is a means of transmission of the European Arrest Warrant .
Ultimately , it is only the issuing authority that has entered an alert that can withdraw it .
In cases where a Member State refuses , following judicial proceedings , to execute a European Arrest Warrant , the person in question will be released .
If the refusal to execute the European Arrest Warrant is final , it is clear that the person can no longer be arrested in that Member State as a result of the instrument .
However , any refusal to execute a European Arrest Warrant does not invalidate it .
It remains a valid title for the arrest of the person concerned in the issuing Member State and indeed in any other Member State .
This has nothing to do with the European Arrest Warrant system as such and is , for example , also the case under the extradition system .
Finally , regarding prison conditions , these may , of course , be open to improvement in some cases , but this is not a topic which is specific to the implementation of the European Arrest Warrant .
It is the responsibility of the authorities of individual Member States to ensure that prison conditions are up to standard , regardless of whether persons have been surrendered from other Member States or not .
Vice-President of the Commission . - Madam President , you might know that the Commission adopted a report on the implementation of the Arrest Warrant on 11 April this year .
This report focuses on the fundamental aspects of the operation of the Arrest Warrant , highlighting for the first time since it became operational in January 2004 not only its successes but also its shortcomings .
A lot has already been said about the successes .
Let me just underline that between 2005 and 2009 , almost 55 000 European Arrest Warrants were issued , about 12 000 were executed , and during that period , roughly 60 % of the requested persons consented to their surrender , on average within 14 to 17 days .
The average surrender time for those who did not consent was 48 days and this contrasts very favourable with the pre-European Arrest Warrant position of a one year average for the extradition of requested persons and has undoubtedly reinforced the free movement of persons .
That is why , and I think that everybody in this House agrees , the Arrest Warrant is an important tool to catch criminals and to render our criminal justice systems more effective .
It has been instrumental in smashing paedophile rings , and catching murderers and terrorists , and that is what it is there for .
However , and this is a recent movement , we see that the number of Arrest Warrants issued has risen dramatically since 2007 .
In some cases , it is being used in a less than proportionate manner to extradite suspects of often petty crime : stealing a bike or a piglet .
This is unnecessary and may damage the legitimacy of this powerful EU mutual recognition tool .
That is the reason why the Commission asks for action .
First , the Commission calls on the EU Member States to exercise a proportionality test when they call for an Arrest Warrant , and to fill the gaps where their legislation fails to fully comply with the framework decision setting up the Arrest Warrant .
We also ask the Member States to ensure that judicial practitioners , such as prosecutors , do not issue Arrest Warrants for minor offences .
Therefore , we will set out in a Handbook on the Arrest Warrant the lines to take at that level .
We will also come forward with proposals before the end of 2011 to step up training on the Arrest Warrant for police authorities , judicial authorities and legal practitioners in order to ensure consistency and effectiveness in the way it is applied and raise awareness of the new EU safeguards for procedural rights .
Speaking about safeguards for procedural rights , the report also reflects on the overarching importance of fundamental rights and mutual trust in the Member States ' judicial systems .
That is why the Commission has started to set up procedural rights for persons who are taken into custody .
Firstly , minimum rules on the right to interpretation and translation , which were adopted already in 2010 .
Secondly the right to information about rights - the letter of rights - which is going to reach an agreement very soon .
Not later than today , the Commission adopted the third proposal on procedural rights , the proposal to ensure access to a lawyer and the right to have a third person notified when a person is deprived of his or her liberty .
It will include a provision for access to a lawyer both in the issuing and the executing States in European Arrest Warrant cases .
All these procedural rights apply to the Arrest Warrant .
These measures are designed to obviate the possibility that evidence is being obtained in breach of the fundamental rights of suspects .
I would also like to answer the specific question which has been raised by the authors .
The Commission is not aware of any evidence that the request from Sweden to the United Kingdom for the surrender of Mr Assange to face allegations of sexual offences indicates that the European Arrest Warrant system is being used for other than its purpose .
Surrender under the Council Framework Decision creating the European Arrest Warrant is an entirely judicial procedure where the governments have absolutely no possibility of interfering in the process .
In the specific case mentioned by Parliament , the procedure has been handled by the UK and Swedish judicial authorities without intervention of governments .
As for the other question concerning possible extradition to the United States , I would like to underline that we are not aware of any request so far in respect of potential extradition to the United States .
But if there were a request , this could only happen with the consent of the surrendering Member State , the UK in that case .
Because pursuant to Article 28 of the Council Framework Decision , a person who has been surrendered pursuant to a European Arrest Warrant shall not be extradited to a third State without the consent of the competent authority of the Member State which surrendered the person .
This is just to underline the legal basis of the question but , of course , the whole question is a ' what if ' question , because nothing concrete is on the table .
Mr President , in my view , the arrest warrant is a fundamental tool in the fight against organised crime , terrorism and other forms of crime .
It is a proven tool and , according to the Decision , the cornerstone of cooperation and the first concrete example of the principal of mutual recognition in the sphere of criminal law .
Of course it is a very useful tool but we must not fail to mention that it also has weaknesses .
The weaknesses are perfectly identified , as Commissioner Reding has also said , not only in the Commission 's report of April 2011 , but also in its reports of 2005 and 2006 .
Those weaknesses , which stem fundamentally from two basic and essential premises , can and , naturally , must be corrected .
The arrest warrant has two components : issue and refusal or surrender , as appropriate .
The figures show that it is a useful tool , with 54 000 arrest warrants having been issued and 12 000 executed .
Turning to the question of what corrections need to be made , what we need are greater and better procedural guarantees around issue , refusal and surrender .
The issue of proportionality or the lack thereof in the use of the arrest warrant is critical , a key issue .
For that reason , it gives me great pleasure to hear Commissioner Reding say that Member States will be required to exercise a proportionality test and to take care not to issue arrest warrants for minor offences .
Incidentally , Mr President , during the course of these questions , one particular item has slipped in , namely , that every arrest warrant costs the Public Treasury EUR 25 000 .
This is something that was said by an Irish judge .
I say to that judge that I do not believe it and that he should demonstrate on what basis such a calculation was made .
Consequently , I believe that the arrest warrant should continue in force in revitalised form , with better procedural guarantees .
( The speaker agreed to take a blue-card question under Rule 149 ( 8 ) )

Mr President , is Mr Díaz de Mera aware that a fast-track extradition treaty was signed between the UK and Spain in 2003 , long before the European Arrest Warrant , and would the speaker perhaps consider that this is a better blueprint for dealing with serious crime , rather than the European Arrest Warrant with all the problems of which we are now hearing ?
( ES ) No , Mr Dartmouth .
I believe that the European Arrest Warrant is a more useful and more versatile tool for combating all the forms of crime to which we have referred .
Commissioner Reding has already told you , and I emphasise the fact , that an extradition order can take up to a year whereas a European Arrest Warrant , on the other hand , must be substantiated within 40 days .
That is why I believe that the latter is a much more versatile and much more useful procedure for fighting crime , wrongdoing and terrorism .
on behalf of the S & D Group . - Mr President , the situation for our group is very clear .
We heard on the one hand from the Council that , if a European Arrest Warrant is executed properly and effectively and not in the many trivial cases we have seen , its advantages outweigh those disadvantages .
The Commissioner set out what is a credible report - a serious report - which tells us that if we can deal with trivial cases and disproportionality and with the procedural guarantees , then the European Arrest Warrant can still be a valuable way of catching serious , organised criminals .
We should not forget the 12 000 figure - I feel very strongly about the fact that in my constituency of London , we caught the attempted bombers of July 2005 .
When we understand the serious and symbolic effect of these cases , the European Arrest Warrant can and should work .
The oral question we have today for our group is very simple .
We are now in the area of moving from the reports to the action , and we have a situation where we have two hard cases .
One is the lack of proportionality .
This will not be solved overnight , and I commend the Commissioner ( I am talking about judicial training ) for ensuring that we fix the issue of trivial cases dominating and creating a credibility problem for the European Arrest Warrant .
But that also requires the Council ( I am not referring just to Hungary , I am talking about the Member States ) to help us in pushing forward the procedural guarantees , and the issue of unacceptable pre-trial detention periods for many citizens in my own country .
These are the situations which create the problems for a tool which could be effective if used properly .
But the hardest case is going to be creating an even playing field in relation to procedural defence rights .
This is why within my group , which has [ called for ] the letter of rights , we take seriously both the quality and speed of the legislation which we need to ensure that the European Arrest Warrant can be the effective tool that it should be for catching serious , organised criminals , and that its credibility must not be diminished by the many trivial cases and uneven playing field that we currently see .
This is the position we want to see for our group , and we believe the commitment is here .
But we must pay close attention , particularly to the Member States when they ask for the European Arrest Warrant to be effective , but , on the other hand , do not carry out the actions to help us get the legislation to create that even playing field .
( The speaker agreed to take a blue-card question under Rule 149 ( 8 ) )
on behalf of the EFD Group . - Mr President , Claude Moraes talked about the lack of proportionality , etc .
We can all agree on that , but the one thing - the elephant in the room - that nobody has talked about this afternoon is the fact that the court cannot look at the prima facie evidence against the accused person and exercise any discretion about whether they should be extradited or not .
We have many constituents affected by this .
The most notable case is Andrew Symeou .
I sat through the appeal court hearings and heard the judges .
It was obvious from the look on their faces that they realised there was no real evidence against this boy ; the evidence was contradictory , the statements appeared to have been concocted by the police , and in no way should he have been extradited .
How would you address that problem and the fact that the courts cannot take into account the prima facie evidence , or lack of it , against an accused person ?
Mr President , for an arrest warrant , there has to be prima facie evidence .
You cannot execute an arrest warrant without the judiciary understanding what the simple facts of the case are .
In the Andrew Symeou case , the underlying problems , I say to Gerard Batten , were procedural problems : the detention periods and court system after the arrest warrant was executed .
You talk about the appeal procedure .
It was the period after the execution of the arrest warrant which was problematic , and which we are trying to fix today in this debate .
Mr President , the previous debate was passionate and also fascinating and this one is much more consensual .
I get the impression that no one is questioning the effectiveness of extradition , of the European Arrest Warrant , the reduction in the length of proceedings and therefore , in a nutshell , the fight against crime .
However , the way the mandate has been used has also led , as we have all said , to abuses and abusive practices : abusive practices when it is used for petty crime , and here I am not talking about the myriad farcical instances of thefts of bicycles , piglets and the like , and rather more serious abusive practices when there are disproportionate detentions , when innocent people are jailed and when the right to appeal these decisions is abused .
Some years ago , the group to which I belong defended the need to introduce safeguards on the use of the European Arrest Warrant and I am pleased to have heard you , Commissioner , this afternoon , mention improvements to the procedure through the creation of guides for the Member States as well as guides for detainees .
I welcome this because I think that the European Arrest Warrant is very well understood by our fellow citizens , and is a crucial test in showing just what Europe is capable of in order to consolidate justice in Europe .
Mr President , the European Union Member States need effective tools for the fight against crime , particularly organised crime , which is the most serious kind .
In this regard , it should be said that the European Arrest Warrant responds to a need , particularly in view of the fact that it is not only honest citizens who mostly take advantage of the freedom to move around the European Union , but also criminals , who do not by any means exercise their rights for tourism or business purposes , but for criminal activities , or to avoid being brought to justice in their own country or in the country in which they committed the crime .
The existence and operation of this instrument is therefore to be welcomed , but we should also welcome the fact that it is being monitored .
As well as merits , every new legal institution has certain flaws which are worth identifying , and it is also worth thinking about how to remedy them .
In this instance , I think that it is worth considering whether restrictions should be introduced concerning use of the EAW for the most trivial crimes , for example , those punishable by up to two years in prison .
This should be the subject of serious consideration .
( The speaker agreed to take a blue-card question under Rule 149 ( 8 ) )
Mr President , I think I am right in saying that Mr Ziobro is from Poland .
I agreed with his last remark as I heard it in translation .
It is often said that Poland is one example of a country where there is no threshold test for the issuing of arrest warrants , either domestically or for European Arrest Warrants .
Has a reform in your criminal justice system been considered so that prosecutors have some discretion as to whether to issue an arrest warrant and do not have to pursue every single complaint ?
In that way , the famous small offences like the stolen piglet would not be so much of a problem .
We very much appreciate all the Poles who are in the UK , especially in London , most of whom of course are not criminals .
But , because there are lots of Poles in the UK , most of whom are very welcome , we get lots of arrest warrants from Poland .
( PL ) Mr President , I should like to thank Mrs Ludford very much for her question .
We are indeed aware of the problem to which you have been so kind as to draw my attention .
Polish courts take a very rigorous approach to these regulations , and also apply them to what can sometimes seem to be trivial matters .
In view of the fact that many of our fellow countrymen live in London , for example , warrants are sometimes issued in questionable cases of this kind .
In my opinion , it would therefore be reasonable for the Commission to consider introducing more general solutions , which would potentially also apply to other countries , in order to ensure that it would not be possible for the warrant to be issued for entirely trivial matters of this kind , for example , two-year imprisonments , and instead only for the serious punishments for which it was put in place .
Mr President , I am very grateful to Mrs Ludford for asking that question , because it was on the tip of my tongue as well .
Last week , I attended the proceedings in Poland against Mr Cor Disselkoen - his name has been mentioned already today .
He is a Dutch national who was extradited to Poland on the basis of a European Arrest Warrant for an affair dating back to the mid-1990s .
In the few days that he was behind bars - because , eventually , the Dutch and the Polish judges came to an arrangement - in those few days , the guard there stole the medications which he takes for his heart condition .
The problem is not only how the European Arrest Warrant is carried out , but also that prison conditions in various countries in Europe are such that you really cannot carry on sending people there any more .
The judge in the country to which the request is addressed should also have the discretion to say : ' I will not extradite people to a country in which prison facilities are inhumane and , as a judge , I will uphold Article 3 of the European Convention on Human Rights ' .
I agree with the Council that countries should be discreet about cases in respect of which they issue such a request , but countries should also have the freedom to say : ' That is such a minor offence , I am not going to extradite people for that ' .
Therefore , it is very important for Poland to change the way it administers justice .
( The speaker agreed to take a blue-card question under Rule 149 ( 8 ) )
( BG ) I assume that you are talking about the same case which was mentioned a short time ago .
The fellow Member spoke about it and I then wanted to ask him a question , but was not given the floor .
When you are talking about such specific cases , please mention the names of the people whose rights have been violated so that we can hear them .
This is why I will now ask you to give the name of this person who is being talked about , because we must name people whose rights have been violated .
( NL ) I make no secret of that , Mr Stoyanov .
His name was mentioned earlier , as well , although it is possible that your interpreter did not pass it on .
His name is Mr Cor Disselkoen .
I also have a case concerning Mr Hörchner , another Dutch national .
I have now mentioned Mr Disselkoen 's name and he is not at all embarrassed about that , because he is eager for the European Arrest Warrant to be changed and will be happy to talk about it in public .
Mr President , a great deal could be said about the European Arrest Warrant and the application of it by the Member States , some of which has already been said by my fellow Members .
I want to focus on a specific and important aspect : full respect for human and procedural rights .
Suspects and defendants have rights both as people and as parties to proceedings .
However , often they are disregarded .
Detention on remand and the detention conditions referred to by Mr de Jong are typical examples .
The main reason for this is because it is taken as given that human rights enjoy the same respect throughout Europe .
However , this clearly is not the case , because certain rights are interpreted differently from one Member State to another , such as the right to silence , or simply because certain procedures differ , such as the period of detention on remand .
What do you intend to do about this Commissioner ?
Will you propose specific measures , such as the introduction of a special provision on human rights which will allow judges to examine the content of cases , as happens in the United Kingdom and Ireland , or will they continue to simply rubber stamp judgments handed down in other Member States ?
Will you make provision for the suspect or defendant to be heard , so that the judge can decide whether or not he should be sent back to the country in which he is wanted , in order to prevent abuse , such as extradition for political opinions ?
Do you intend to propose such changes within the framework of the road map on procedural rights or by amending legislation on the European Arrest Warrant ?
Mr President , in the Anglo-American world , the primary purpose of the law is to protect people from random arrest and arbitrary imprisonment .
The law in continental Europe , in particular , the former Eastern bloc , simply does not have that priority and it is ridiculous to pretend otherwise .
Under the European Arrest Warrant , everybody in Britain can be extradited - under Bulgarian law , for example - and there is not much a British judge can do about it .
To make matters worse , the British Government has opted into the European Investigation Order , which is a further attack on the liberties of the British people .
The Liberal Democrats , who sponsor all this , call themselves the party of civil liberties .
This is piffle !
The Liberal Democrats ' commitment to civil liberties comes to a grinding halt at Calais .
( The speaker agreed to take a blue-card question under Rule 149 ( 8 ) )
( Microphone off until near end of first sentence ) ...
Liberal Democrat .
Is the Earl of Dartmouth aware that it was the Liberal Democrats , with support from the Conservatives in the Upper Chamber of the British Parliament , who managed to insert in the 2003 Extradition Act which implemented the European Arrest Warrant a power for a judge to refuse a surrender under a European Arrest Warrant if fundamental rights of that person would be breached .
I am looking towards Mr Kirkhope , because his and my party cooperated on that .
UKIP just shouts impotently from the sidelines while we get on and do the business of making sure that fundamental rights are protected .
You should be putting your emphasis on persuading the courts to invoke Article 21 of the 2003 Extradition Act .
I was there in the House of Lords and I helped move that amendment .
Nothing of what you have said has invalidated the measured criticisms of what we and others are saying now .
I would also say that you are entirely mistaken if you think that better translation rights are any sort of cure at all for this flawed piece of legislation which is ruining people 's lives .
Mr President , the arrest warrant hearings have very little in common with extradition hearings that preceded the 2003 Act .
Even at the main hearing , the court does not consider the evidence but only 10 so-called legal bars to surrender .
Lack of evidence is no bar to extradition .
Even people accused of behaviour that is not an offence in the extraditing country can be surrendered under the European Arrest Warrant if the offence is one for which there is no requirement for dual criminality .
Whilst most of these are serious violent , sexual or dishonesty offences , the list also includes the nebulous thought-crime offences beloved in so many continental countries , so that the arrested person could be sent for trial , or rather automatic conviction , to one of those wretched places .
The fact that such warrants are issued for the purpose of prosecuting a person on the grounds of his political opinions ought to constitute a legal bar to surrender , but I suspect that some political opinions would be less equal than others .
We were sold the European Arrest Warrant on a promise that it would be used to send terrorists to justice , but the miscarriages of justice in the case of Garry Mann , Deborah Dark , Edmond Arapi , Andrew Symeou and many others , had no terrorist elements at all .
Worst of all have been the cases of people being extradited for questioning without a charge having been made .
We must reinstate the requirement that a court will extradite a person only when there is compelling evidence that a serious offence under the extraditing country 's laws has been committed .
( RO ) Mr President , the European Arrest Warrant is an effective instrument for combating and controlling cross-border crime at EU level .
It has proved effective in speeding up the transfer between EU countries of people suspected of committing serious crimes , including terrorism and organised crime .
However , all too frequently , there have been cases where this instrument has been used to deal with minor crimes .
Cases which were extremely unequal in severity were given equal treatment .
Warrants have been issued when their use was both unnecessary and disproportionate .
This has led not only to unjust situations for defendants , but has also created an unjustified burden on the resources of the state executing the warrant .
The disproportionate use of this key instrument for fighting cross-border crime helps undermine confidence in it .
This will make some states carry out a proportionality check based on their own rules when they decide to execute a European Arrest Warrant .
This will result in it being applied inconsistently and unevenly and , therefore , in a lack of trust in the concept of mutual recognition .
The right to legal aid must be guaranteed in both the state issuing the warrant and the one executing it so that the right to defence is applied in an appropriate manner .
This is why we wanted to ask the Commission and Council these questions .
We need to have a guarantee that the standards of criminal justice and the prison conditions in the European Union do not result in a lack of confidence among the judicial systems in Member States .
In conclusion , I , too , would like to thank Commissioner Reding for all the actions she has taken to strengthen the procedural rights in criminal proceedings .
( ES ) Mr President , Commissioner Reding , the fact is that the abuse of fundamental rights is one of the most significant weaknesses , as we have been saying here all afternoon .
However , it is not even going to be possible to safeguard these procedural rights , which we have already debated and which we are going to discuss as part of the package of procedural rights .
It will be impossible to resolve certain problems regarding prisons or preventive detention periods , for example , because they are not covered by the procedural rights package .
They clearly fall under the powers of the Member States .
On the issue of proportionality and minor crimes , however , I would like to tell you , Commissioner Reding , that none of the crimes I have heard mentioned this afternoon - thefts of ties , piglets and bicycles - are covered by the arrest warrant .
The 32 crimes included only relate to organised crime , unless piglets or ties are being stolen by armed and organised criminal gangs .
In other words , you can make fun with examples that we do not even know about right now , because the problem , fundamentally , is that we do not have any common statistical instrument with which to really tackle this issue .
( The President cut off the speaker )
( FI ) Mr President , the Hungarian representative said here that the problem is not this instrument - the European Arrest Warrant - itself , but that it relates to each Member State 's criminal justice policy .
Well , now she is putting her headphones on .
Yes , well , to my mind , this is actually a case of being economical with the truth , because now we have to admit that the European Arrest Warrant was a problem from the beginning , since we acted as if all Member States would implement certain legal norms and minimum standards for criminal proceedings .
The truth is , of course , that we have only just started to establish them now , with the entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon .
I would like to point out that the European Court of Human Rights has already stated that in asylum cases , no one can be sent back to Greece , for example , because the conditions in prisons there are so poor .
I wonder when it will happen that you cannot extradite someone on the basis of the European Arrest Warrant because the conditions in the prisons in the country requesting extradition are so dreadful .
In my opinion , the Commission should be prepared for that .
( PT ) Mr President , the European Union is an experiment made up of experiments : the euro area , this very Parliament in which we find ourselves , the Schengen area and a number of other instruments are all experiments .
The problem is that politicians are very often less humble than scientists .
Scientists are the first to acknowledge it when an experiment has not gone as they had hoped .
In the case of the European Arrest Warrant ( EAW ) , we now know that this has problems and has caused doubts .
Commissioner Reding should be credited with having had the honesty to confirm that this warrant has had problems and causes doubts , and that there are proportionality tests , which must be passed when warrants are issued and which should not be applied automatically without a judge having a slower , more measured look at them .
Therefore , the solution should not be to abolish the EAW , which is clearly useful .
We want a rapist or murderer to be unable to cross a border and be free .
However , the EAW should be complemented with effective instruments for protecting defendants , with the presence of a lawyer and the right to translation , which Baroness Ludford has already tackled in her report , but also , and very crucially , the assessment of detention conditions in European prisons .
Moreover , let us not fool ourselves or be under any illusion : being detained in a prison in country A or country B is not the same thing as being imprisoned in Europe .
It is very important that these conditions be assessed and that there be very determined work by the European Commission to assess detention conditions , so that they can be harmonised and so that , in this way , the EAW can be applied with more confidence .
( BG ) Mr President , I have previously heard the arguments put forward by the critics of the European Arrest Warrant from the mouths of my fellow Members from the nationalist movements as well .
However , our arguments were presented then as being Eurosceptic , as if we were some kind of enemy of progress .
As a result , this warrant came into force .
However , this evening I heard something else awful coming from the lips of Mrs Győri .
What she actually said was that the effectiveness of the arrest warrant has justified the instances of rights violations .
Mrs Győri , I am familiar with a principle in criminal law which states : ' Better 10 guilty men go free than to convict a single innocent ' .
However , from the perspective of disproportionate response , it is normal for police officers to use whatever is put in their hands and they will take every opportunity they are afforded .
There is only one answer to the old question ' Who will guard the guards themselves ? ' : ' The law guards the guards ' .
We as legislators , with the Commission as initiator , Parliament and the Council as colegislators , must do our utmost to ensure that the law really does guard the guards .
( IT ) Mr President , the European Arrest Warrant is undoubtedly a fundamental tool in the fight against terrorism and organised crime .
I think that there is an understanding and agreement on this on the part of everyone who has spoken , including the Presidency and the Commission .
At the same time , it is confirmation of how police and judicial cooperation in a cross-border approach to crime can achieve important objectives .
Waiting times have been resolved , and the costs will now have to be verified - and this needs to be looked into further .
Trust between the Member States is crucial in this process , which is undoubtedly positive .
In the meantime , however , it is important to ensure that the instrument is applied uniformly in all the Member States , with a real distinction between serious crimes , for which it is intended and sanctioned , and non-serious crimes .
It may be helpful - and here I am addressing Commissioner Reding - to involve the European Public Prosecutor 's Office , which , once up and running , could verify and assess in some way these judgments by the Member States ' judicial authorities , who will undoubtedly need to receive further training .
It is true that detention conditions are not the same in all the Member States , but we are confident that next week , the Commission will issue the communication and Green Paper on basic detention conditions , which should list additional action to be taken .
Therefore , with proper use of the arrest warrant , proportionality , strict application of the instrument , better exchange of information and training on European issues for magistrates , we are sure that uniform application of this important instrument can be achieved in full .
( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , we can see that the application of the European Arrest Warrant raises the issue of detention which is very unevenly applied from one Member State to another .
Some States show demonstrable laxity when it comes to respecting fundamental rights in a prison environment .
Furthermore , amongst the 600 000 prisoners in the European Union , increasing numbers are detained in a Member State other than their own , due , precisely , to the European Arrest Warrant .
Consequently , they do not enjoy the fundamental rights guaranteed by their state of origin .
In circumstances such as these , there is no point in hurling abuse at each other ; action must be taken .
That is why , last January , my colleague , Mr Lambrinidis and I submitted a written statement calling for the harmonisation of detention standards throughout the European Union , and the introduction of independent national inspection mechanisms .
I hope , Commissioner , that in the Green Papers that you will propose , you will bear this issue in mind , and that there will soon be a common platform of minimum rights which applies to all Member States .
( DE ) Mr President , Mrs Györi , Commissioner Reding , as has already been made abundantly clear by the previous speakers , in recent years , the European Arrest Warrant has proven itself to be a useful instrument for fighting crime .
Criminals in Europe are no longer free to exploit our open borders in the way that they might otherwise have been able to .
Despite the innumerable successes that have taken place , however , the past seven years have also shown that the system is not yet perfect and that it is not being used in the way originally intended .
You drew attention to some of these weaknesses in your recent report .
For example , there is no right to legal representation , prison conditions are , in some cases , disgraceful and very often the investigations take an extremely long time .
The fundamental point , which has also already been mentioned several times , is the failure of issuing states to apply consistent or indeed any consideration of whether the measure is proportionate .
This matter is particularly close to my heart because the real intention of the European Arrest Warrant is frequently being undermined by the systematic issue of arrest warrants , often for minor offences .
In Poland , for example - as has also been mentioned previously - where the largest number of European Arrest Warrants are issued , the judicial authorities simply do not have the power to stop national proceedings because the system has become automatic .
I do not believe that this is what was intended .
Before a European Arrest Warrant is issued , therefore , consideration should be given to how serious the offence is , what the expected penalty is and whether there is a simpler way of dealing with the matter .
Finally , perhaps a cost / benefit analysis should also be carried out so that minor offences are not prosecuted at great expense .
As I see it , consistency also means adapting the existing rules to reality .
In this respect , I should be interested to learn what steps you are thinking of taking in this area .
( EL ) Mr President , I have listened very carefully to the comments made by my fellow Members .
I shall start with our common assumption that combating crime is not just a national issue ; it is also a European issue .
The European Arrest Warrant marked an important step forwards in combating crime , by helping to create a European area of justice and to combat cross-border crime and terrorism .
It also strengthens the free movement of persons within the Union , which we debated at great length recently in connection with the Schengen Agreement , by ensuring that opening the borders will not turn out to be for the benefit of those seeking to evade justice .
Of course , voices are also being raised in protest - and I , too , endorse what was said by Mr Voss and other members - about its often unsatisfactory and disproportionate application at national level .
We also debated cost and proportionality and everything that needs to be applied in order to strengthen the arrest warrant .
However , I would remind the House - this is something that we faced in Greece recently in important cases - that , even now , there are people being prosecuted for serious crimes of fraud and corruption in a Member State of the Union who disappear or manage to get off and escape arrest by making use of the different procedural provisions and different regulations in the various national laws .
Consequently , I think that there can be no doubt as to the value of the European Arrest Warrant .
To close , I should like to stress that you are right , Commissioner , when you say that we need to make maximum possible use of Interpol and information available from the Schengen system .
We need the closest possible harmonisation between the Member States so that , ultimately , we have a harmonised , modern policy which is up to the job , as the times demand .
( PL ) Mr President , the aim of the European Arrest Warrant is to enforce the law and ensure the security of citizens in the European Union .
Freedom of movement for individuals must not make it easier for criminals to avoid being held accountable for criminal acts committed on the territory of another Member State .
There have , however , been alarming reports concerning use of the warrant , such as the recent Commission report and Commissioner Reding 's statement , in which she said that the Member States should ensure that the warrant is used correctly , and that it should not be issued mechanically or automatically for relatively minor offences .
This statement bears testimony to the potential for misuse of the arrest warrant by the judiciary .
Therefore , although I am entirely in favour of striving to ensure the maximum level of security for EU citizens , I would call on the Commission to monitor use of the warrant and to take steps aimed at preventing irregularities during use of this procedure by courts .
Mr President , I had the honour to be the rapporteur in this House when the European Arrest Warrant was approved in 2001 and 2002 .
Colleagues who were in the House at the time will recall that we urged the Commission and the Council to build more civil liberties safeguards into the legislation , and we secured from the Commission a commitment to a draft directive on the rights of defendants in criminal legal proceedings .
Not all of the safeguards we called for were inserted , and the draft directive on defendants ' rights sat for many years in the Council 's in-tray .
The results of these omissions are at the root of this debate today .
In 2002 , Parliament had no powers of codecision in these matters .
Nonetheless , we believed that , on balance , the arrest warrant was the right move .
As many speakers have said in this debate , the arrest warrant is a hugely valuable tool in the fight against cross-border crime .
It has brought justice to many victims .
Where problems have arisen , they have come from poor implementation into national law , from frivolous use of the warrant for petty crimes and from unacceptable conditions of detention .
All of these can , must and are being dealt with .
I salute the authors of the oral questions today , with the exception of one who opposes all judicial cooperation , for speeding up the process of improving it .
Mr President , I , too , personally believe this whole debate needs a dose of common sense now .
I still believe that some sort of European Arrest Warrant is a necessary tool to fight crime and terrorism across the Union , particularly given the huge free movement of people now moving between Member States , including - sadly - criminals .
I also believe that the number of errors or miscarriages is relatively small - but still too many .
We must now not throw the baby out with the bathwater , which is what some of the colleagues in this House would like .
We need to seriously review the workings of the arrest warrant to include only a limited list of serious crimes - always satisfying the condition of double criminality - as being the only ones justiciable under the European Arrest Warrant .
We must also respect fundamental human rights and include safeguards like habeas corpus .
The large majority of UK-surrendered individuals were actually , as it turned out , migrants from other States of the European Union charged with crimes - normally major crimes , not petty crimes .
It is ironic that UKIP , which was opposed to their right to come to the UK in the first place , is now trying to make it extremely difficult and expensive for the British taxpayer to send them back to their countries to face justice .
( DE ) Mr President , in recent years , European Arrest Warrants have been issued for trivial offences , such as the theft of two car tyres or the theft of a piglet .
It is no longer being used to fight terrorism and serious crime , as was originally intended .
As far as I am concerned , the European Arrest Warrant is a clear contradiction of the principle of subsidiarity .
It overrides the most important function of citizenship - which is the protection that citizenship affords - and the Member States are obliged to surrender their own citizens .
Since the countries of the Union have very differing legal systems , they are obliged to surrender people even if the act is not an offence in the surrendering country .
For me , the European Arrest Warrant symbolises the concept of a European state and citizenship of the European Union at the expense of the sovereignty of the Member States and at the expense of citizens ' rights .
( IT ) Mr President , Commissioner , the European Arrest Warrant ( EAW ) is the first instrument implemented in the European Union that puts into practice the principle of mutual recognition of criminal judgments .
That instrument is fundamentally important now and should remain so , especially for fighting mafia groups and organised crime .
In the report on organised crime , for which I am the rapporteur in the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs , we are proposing a series of considerations and requests concerning the European Arrest Warrant .
One of the main requests is for the EAW to be strengthened and better enforced by the Member States , bearing in mind the requirements and the specific nature of the fight against organised crime .
I therefore ask the Commission how it intends to proceed and whether it intends to submit a proposal to remove the Member States ' discretion in the transposition of Articles 3 and 4 of the framework decision , concerning the grounds for mandatory non-execution and optional non-execution .
With regard to the grounds for optional non-execution , I also ask whether it may not be appropriate to restrict them in the case of offences typically attributable to organised crime , including the offence of association with a mafia organisation , for which double criminality should not apply anyway .
Vice-President of the Commission . - Mr President , there is general agreement in this House that the European Arrest Warrant is a positive tool and has served the European Union well and acted as a security .
The negative elements are in the implementation .
Those negative elements have to be eliminated .
The proposals which the Commission has put on the table for this purpose are the proportionality test , where we have to look at the seriousness of the offence , the length of the sentence which this offence would carry , and the cost / benefit of executing such an arrest warrant .
In order to make this proportionality test easier , the Commission will present an amended handbook as a guideline for the application of the proportionality test .
Training , which is very high on the agenda for the coming weeks , months and years , will be very important because we have to train judges , prosecutors and lawyers in the application of our European rules .
The minimum standards for suspects and accused persons , which are under implementation , are very important because they also apply to the European Arrest Warrant .
I agree with all those parliamentarians who have underlined the problem of prison conditions in Europe .
I would like to tell them that next week , the Commission will adopt a Green Paper on detention .
National governments are responsible for detention issues and prison management , but the Commission 's role is to make sure that judicial cooperation works and fundamental rights of all citizens are upheld .
That is why the Green Paper will kick off a public consultation , which will run until 30 November and will help to explore more closely the links between detention issues and mutual trust in Europe 's area of justice .
Everybody in this House knows that detention conditions have a direct impact on the smooth functioning of the mutual recognition of judicial decisions and are the basis for cooperation between judges in the EU .
But the system is impeded if judges refuse - sometimes rightly so - to extradite accused persons because the detention conditions in the requesting country are substandard .
We all know about prison overcrowding and the allegations of poor treatment of detainees .
These factors undermine the trust that is necessary for judicial cooperation .
The time that a person can spend in detention before being tried in court and during court proceedings varies a lot between Member States .
We have a lot of work ahead of us , and I know I can count on Parliament .
I hope I can also count on the Member States .
President-in-Office of the Council . - Mr President , thank you very much for this debate .
It is clear that an overwhelming majority says that it is good that we have a cooperation system for our judiciaries , the European Arrest Warrant .
The system works .
It is not perfect .
It should be improved further .
We are , of course , open to more efficient use and better implementation .
I agree that mistakes , arrests of innocent people , etc . , should be avoided .
Better implementation is , I think , in the interests of us all .
I would be more specific on two outstanding issues which were raised several times during the debate .
First , on proportionality : just to make it clear , a European Arrest Warrant can be issued to prosecute offences which are punishable by at least 12 months ' imprisonment , or to execute a sentence to at least 4 months ' imprisonment .
This has been standard extradition practice for at least 50 years .
It is enough to mention the 1957 Council of Europe Convention on Extradition .
In the fourth round of mutual evaluations on the practical implementation of the European Arrest Warrant in all Member States , it was found that only in a few countries were there examples of issuing European Arrest Warrants for relatively minor offences .
It seems that , in those few countries , the practice was to issue a European Arrest Warrant every time a national arrest order was issued .
In general terms , I believe that we should only use the costly system of the European Arrest Warrant for more serious offences .
I think that those who mentioned this were right .
Concerning prison conditions : the Member States are under a general obligation to ensure that prison conditions are in accordance with the basic tenets of human dignity and do not violate the prohibition of inhuman and degrading treatment laid down in Article 3 of the European Convention on Human Rights .
If people are detained in violation of their basic human rights , they can take action before domestic courts and , later , before the European Court of Human Rights .
It is doubtful whether Article 85 of the Treaty provides a legal basis for legislative action at EU level on prison conditions as such .
However , we are , of course , awaiting the Green Paper which the Commissioner has just mentioned with great interest .
The debate is closed .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
Seven years after the entry into force ( on 1 January 2004 ) of the Council framework decision of 13 June 2002 on the European Arrest Warrant ( EAW ) and the surrender procedures between Member States , the Commission has published some statistical data collected in the Member States between 2005 and 2009 .
Before the introduction of the warrant , the average time taken to extradite a wanted person was one year , whereas in these four years in which the EAW has been applied , it has been shown that approximately 50 % of wanted persons agreed to their surrender after about 15 days .
It is essential to take stock of the implementation and operation of the EAW now that doubt is being cast on whether the Schengen Information System is working properly and whether it should be suspended .
We should not forget that the effectiveness of the EAW in the fight against cross-border crime , organised crime and terrorism depends on the principle of mutual recognition between Member States , which is the basis for having a real European judicial area and also for the Schengen area to work properly .
It would be a backward step to put this situation in jeopardy ; instead , we should concentrate on improving the transposition of the framework decision , especially in terms of protecting fundamental rights .
The European Arrest Warrant ( EAW ) was brought in by a 2002 decision and has , to date , been shown to be an effective tool in the fight against cross-border crime , organised crime and terrorism , as was , in fact , stressed by the Commission in a recent report .
However , there are imperfections in the functioning of the system : there is a possibility that its reputation and effectiveness may be undermined by news of its use for interrogations instead of charges and prosecutions in cases of petty crime .
It is thus pertinent and urgent that the Council take steps to guarantee that the disproportionate use of the EAW is limited in practice .
Furthermore , it is advisable to ensure that procedural rights are actually respected : that is , that individuals wanted under the auspices of an EAW have a genuine right to legal aid at their disposal , both in the Member State that issues the warrant and in the Member State where it is implemented .
It must also be ensured that criminal justice standards and prison conditions in the European Union do not give rise to the Member States legal systems mistrusting each other .
This is the only way we will be able to talk about genuine effectiveness and the true success of this instrument at European level .
EU-Russia summit ( debate )
The next item is the statement by the Commission , on behalf of the Vice-President of the Commission / High Representative of the Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy , on the EU-Russia Summit .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , honourable Members , I am grateful for this opportunity to discuss with you the next European Union-Russia Summit which will start tomorrow in Nizhny Novgorod .
The European Union will be represented by the Presidents of the European Council and the Commission .
High Representative and Vice-President Ashton will attend , as will Commissioner De Gucht .
The summit has been carefully prepared by the External Action Service working in close cooperation with the Commission and the two Presidents , preparations built on the debates held in the European Council and the Council , on Russia as a Strategic Partner in late 2010 and in January 2011 , on the results of the previous EU-Russia Summit , and the visit by the Russian Government to the Commission in February .
Overall , our relations have improved over the last two years .
We have concluded bilateral negotiations on Russian WTO accession , agreed on the approach towards a possible future visa-waiver regime , and agreed the Partnership for Modernisation , which is now in its implementation phase .
Work is also ongoing in the regular framework of the Four Common Spaces and all its technical dialogues .
Our interaction is quite intense .
Let me remind you that Russia is the only external partner with whom the European Union holds two annual summits .
The visit by Prime Minister Putin and an unprecedentedly large Russian Government delegation to the Commission on 24 February was a clear sign of Russian determination to seek closer relations and cooperation .
Nevertheless , many significant bilateral issues remain unresolved .
Of particular concern is the situation regarding democratic development and human rights in Russia .
In the context of upcoming Duma and Presidential elections , the standards of the electoral process will receive particular attention .
Now I would like to turn your attention to our main objectives for the summit , which are as follows :
First : the European Union will strive to encourage Russia to resolve the last remaining outstanding multilateral issues to facilitate WTO accession before the end of 2011 , building on the EU-Russia bilateral agreement reached in 2004 and last December .
Russia can still achieve WTO accession before the end of 2011 if it can take the necessary decisions to resolve the handful of outstanding issues at multilateral level .
The summit cannot replace negotiations in Geneva , but it can urge Russia to take constructive action .
Second : the European Union will impress upon Russia that more progress needs to be made on agreeing substantial trade and investment provisions , including on energy , in the new EU-Russia Agreement in order to provide a solid legal basis for deepened economic cooperation in the years to come .
We do not rule out bringing the issue of Russia 's unjustified ban on European Union vegetable imports to summit level , although we hope that scientific evidence will allow a quick solution at an expert level .
Third : we shall maintain top-level support for the Partnership for Modernisation as an important vehicle for Russian commitments to reforms .
Fourth : we will promote human rights and the rule of law in Russia , and
Fifth , we will encourage Russia to deepen cooperation in our common neighbourhood and continue the dialogue on other topical international issues like the Middle East , for example , or North Africa .
In fact , progress on Moldova / Transnistria will serve as an important test case for closer foreign policy cooperation .
Finally , we should also use the summit to reconfirm our political commitment to make progress on crisis management cooperation - provided our decision-making autonomy is in no way affected .
Energy also figures prominently in our dealings with Moscow .
We will emphasise the need for further reforms in the Russian electricity and gas sector with a view to establishing a level playing field .
We will also underline the need to cooperate on fighting climate change .
To pursue our goals of highest standards on nuclear safety , we interact with Russia both at the bilateral level and in multilateral fora such as the International Atomic Energy Agency and the G8 .
We will repeat our invitation to Russia to engage in negotiations on a comprehensive Euratom-Russia agreement which should promote the highest standards for nuclear safety .
With regard to the Fukushima accident , the European Union will push for equivalence of approaches regarding stress tests for both existing and planned nuclear power plants .
Last , but certainly not least , we have engaged in a clear process on visa-free travel .
The European Union has prepared and agreed in March its proposal for the list of common steps towards the possible establishment of a visa-free travel regime , and we have indeed started negotiations in April .
Since then , a Permanent Partnership Council on Justice and Home Affairs has been held and clear progress has been made .
But negotiations on our common steps at expert level are , to date , not finished .
We must be clear at the summit that there are no political short-cuts .
As far as Russia is concerned , its main objectives for the summit can be expected to focus on visas , the WTO , energy - including nuclear safety - and security cooperation .
Russia might come back to the idea of a new Political and Security Committee at ministerial level .
We believe that necessary cooperation structures are in place ; what we need is political will to make progress on substance .
Thank you for your attention and I look forward to your comments .
Mr President , Commissioner , thank you for the good cooperation you have shown in the drafting of the resolution .
I will not say anything more about the points which the Commissioner has mentioned because they are covered in the resolution .
As far as the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) is concerned , the final declaration of the summit next week must be more than just fine words .
Russia is our great neighbour ; Russia is an important partner .
We are mutually dependent and the level of that dependence is great , so now we are expecting real agreements that will lead to results .
What are our priorities ?
First of all , the Partnership Agreement .
We need to set the negotiations in motion .
I expect that the EU will persuade President Medvedev to grant his negotiating team full powers to undertake specific commitments .
It is high time that we got things moving again on the trade and investment dossier .
The negotiations on the energy chapter are also behind schedule .
We need agreements on a solid and transparent energy partnership and one which is based on rules .
I would also like to hear where we stand on the human rights paragraph .
For us , for Parliament , this is a vital part of the partnership .
I see the modernisation pact as a complementary issue , in the same way that the common areas are .
This is a secondary matter , but it would help if we got the WTO rules through .
That would help to establish a level playing field while facilitating the investment climate .
President Medvedev is personally involved in improving the rule of law , but this is not enough , as you have just said yourself .
We need to be certain that , in the upcoming elections , Russia is going to live up to the obligations it has undertaken under the Council of Europe and the OSCE .
The elections will be the acid test .
That , then , also means that new parties must be allowed to register .
Russia should feel honoured that election observers have been called in well in advance .
Lastly , the import ban on European vegetables ( ... )
( The President cut off the speaker )
Mr President , Commissioner , Russia is undoubtedly a very important partner for the European Union , but - as the Commissioner has already said - a very difficult one .
I hope that the negotiations will not take too long .
Unfortunately , however , they will not be completed as fast as Mrs Oomen-Ruijten imagines .
During the process , we need to have a dialogue both with the official elected representatives and with the representatives of civil society , who are often closer to us on matters of democracy and human rights .
The idea of a Partnership for Modernisation between the European Union and Russia is a good one .
However , Russia also needs to play its part .
We need more democracy and less corruption .
We still hear many investors complaining of legal uncertainty , particularly as regards taxes .
Above all - as the Commissioner has already mentioned - we need to prepare speedily for Russia 's accession to the World Trade Organisation ( WTO ) and WTO membership .
In the area of energy policy , we need Russia to be obliged to acknowledge the principles of a transparent and fair energy policy .
There is a lot that Russia can do itself , particularly as regards energy efficiency , where there remain many shortcomings .
Also as regards energy , I would like to bring up something that concerns its neighbour - indeed our common neighbour - Ukraine .
Right now , Russia is once again attempting to use the issue of energy and energy prices as a political weapon .
We must absolutely reject that .
We are committed to the freedom of Ukraine to decide in which markets it wishes to be present and where it wishes to operate .
We do , after all , want to have trade relations and a trade agreement with Ukraine .
Russia should not put pressure on Ukraine in this area by giving it the option of either joining the customs union with Kazakhstan and Belarus or paying a high energy price .
That is something we reject .
Again , as regards neighbours , we also expect Russia to adhere to the agreements in the treaties in respect of Georgia and to withdraw its troops back to those areas where they were present before the conflict .
We also hope that Russia will make a positive contribution to resolving the Nagorno-Karabakh conflict .
On both sides , here it is not a matter of supplying arms , but rather of peaceful mediation between the two sides .
The Commissioner has already mentioned the importance of visa liberalisation .
It is particularly important for relations between individuals that people enjoy as much freedom of movement as possible between Russia and the European Union .
I hope that we will soon make some progress on this .
One crucial issue , however , will be how the next elections are held .
Russia needs to be aware that the world , and the democratic world in Europe in particular , will be watching closely to see how these elections are carried out ; whether the parties are registered correctly and fairly ; and also whether certain individuals or certain parties are excluded from the elections at the outset .
That is something that should be made clear to Russia at the summit .
We want to see proper , fair elections in Russia too .
Russia still has a lot of catching up to do in terms of its economy .
However , Russia is ready for democracy .
We want to see democracy in Russia , just as much as the citizens of Russia want this themselves .
That is our desire and our vision .
Russia needs to realise that democracy will be good for Russia too .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Mr President , we hope that further progress will be made at the summit in Nizhny Novgorod with regard to a new and comprehensive Partnership and Cooperation Agreement .
Both the EU and Russia must keep in mind that a true partnership can only be a straightforward relationship .
On behalf of the ALDE Group , I would like to invite the representatives of the EU to address all the concerns raised by the European Parliament with their Russian counterparts .
The European Union will face major difficulties in relations with Russia unless the two partners rely on the same values and principles .
If the Kremlin moves even further away from democracy and the rule of law , Russia will lose all legitimacy as a partner to the EU .
For example , the Kremlin has prevented a number of political parties from registering for the State Duma elections on procedural grounds , and the list is likely to be extended to include the People 's Freedom Party led by Mikhail Kasyanov , Vladimir Milov , Boris Nemtsov and Vladimir Ryzhkov .
The surging suppression of the opposition must be brought up at the summit and the opposition parties must be allowed to register .
Ladies and gentlemen , Russia is not China .
Russia is a member of the Council of Europe and the OSCE ; therefore , she must uphold her international commitments and obligations .
Furthermore , Russia must abide by her own constitution .
Russia has to respect the sovereignty and territorial integrity of its neighbours .
We insist that she stops pressuring Ukraine - as my colleague said just now - for example , as Prime Minister Putin did yesterday when he met the Prime Minister of Ukraine , pressing them to join the customs union with Russia , Belarus and Kazakhstan .
We cannot accept this .
We expect Russia to withdraw its troops immediately from Georgia to the pre-conflict positions .
Lastly , the ALDE Group is very disappointed that , on the eve of the summit , Russia has imposed a disproportional import ban on vegetables from the EU .
on behalf of the ECR Group . - Mr President , Russia is an important partner for the EU in many respects .
As a permanent member of the UN Security Council , Russia exercises a potentially decisive influence on international affairs , from our relations with North Korea to its involvement in the UN quartet .
I also welcome recent calls by President Medvedev for the Libyan tyrant , Muammar Gaddafi , to leave power .
I also hope that the Kremlin will align itself with the rest of the international community on stopping Iranian nuclear proliferation .
I also accept that Russia has economic interests in the former Soviet republics , some of which are now - thankfully - gravitating away from Moscow towards the EU .
However , the EU should continue to insist that it will support and engage with these now-independent countries such as Ukraine , and make sure that the door is left open to them in terms of Euro-Atlantic aspirations .
In this regard , I hope that the Vice-President / High Representative will raise the issue of Georgia , parts of whose territory remain annexed and occupied illegally by Russian soldiers , and help also to put pressure on Russia to solve the Transnistria question in Moldova .
I also accept that the Commission is now making the suggestion that the EU-Russia Summit should be annual rather than every six months , which is a good idea and the way forward .
Russia is not a mature liberal democracy .
Neither is it a country which enjoys an independent judiciary .
But whether we like it or not , we still have to engage with the bear .
Mr President , Commissioner Füle , while , at first glance , it may seem understandable for Russia to protect itself in order to prevent the spread of Enterohaemorrhagic Escherichia coli ( EHEC ) infection into its territory , a complete ban on imports of European vegetables is not what we expect of a country that aspires to join the World Trade Organisation ( WTO ) .
That is also something we will have to talk about in Nizhny Novgorod .
More important , however , are the political germs , or seeds , that are actually present - the weak beginnings of democracy and the rule of law .
On these aspects , we should do everything we can within the context of the Partnership for Modernisation to help their roots to spread across Russia and develop .
President Medvedev has acknowledged that economical and technical modernisation cannot be achieved without a fundamental modernisation of society .
Yet so far , we have seen little in the way of action to accompany these fine words .
The representatives of the EU should therefore make it abundantly clear to President Medvedev that the forthcoming elections to the Duma are a test of the credibility of his reform policy .
Genuine and proper elections form part of the foundations of democracy .
Anyone who wants pluralism and political competition should ensure that the election standards declared by the Council of Europe are adhered to and should allow long-term election observation by the Organisation for Security and Cooperation in Europe ( OSCE ) at the earliest stage .
Fair elections start with allowing the registration of parties .
Regrettably , early indications suggest that the Russian leadership has learnt nothing from the ruling by the European Court of Human Rights that there were no grounds for dissolving the Republican Party and apparently does not wish to allow the newly established People 's Freedom Party to be registered .
More Kremlin-backed parties and an All-Russia People 's Front initiated by Prime Minister Putin are merely leading us down a political blind alley .
This semblance of competition has led the country into political apathy and devalued the Duma .
President Medvedev could bring about a breakthrough here and end his Presidency with at least one demonstrable success .

In the particular cases of Mr Khodorkovsky and Mr Magnitsky , rather than waiting for a ruling from Strasbourg , the judicial arbitrariness should be brought to an end .
The review of these cases by the Fedotov commission is a good first step .
Its results and conclusions should be published as soon as possible .
The future participation of the Civil Society Forum established recently in Prague should be an important topic for discussion during the talks and negotiations between the EU and Russia .
After all , events in North Africa demonstrate that for effective reform , you need an active civil society .
The Russian Government should therefore work to bring this about in its own country and endeavour to achieve a partnership for modernisation with civil society .
Mr President , Commissioner , I have been searching in vain for an answer to the question of why we are debating a resolution on the summit with Russia on the eve of the summit itself and voting on it on the day the summit takes place in Nizhny Novgorod .
Moreover , the topic was not even included on the agenda of the plenary at the beginning of last week .
This all smacks of bad planning , and it is now a formality , in my opinion .
Moreover , instead of striving , through a principled process , for a new agreement on relations with Russia , which we recognise as an important partner , we are notoriously repeating proclamations and demands which clearly have no hope of succeeding .
We should , first and foremost , build on the issues where progress can be achieved .
An example is the progress over agreements on the planned easing and possible final removal of the mutual visa arrangements with Russia .
Instead of this , we are criticising the position of Russia in the case of imports of vegetables from the EU .
How does our own behaviour appear , however , from outside the Union ?
When looking for the source of the deadly bacteria , and in the absence of hard evidence , we accuse each other , restrict imports and exports of commodities and claim compensation .
We can surely draw our own conclusions as to the level of confidence we are inspiring , and not just in Russia .
Mr President , the dialogue between the European Union and Russia must be expanded as much as possible in various areas , from the economy to human rights , because there are no alternatives to dialogue .
Europe and Russia are , in fact , interdependent , both economically and politically .
I am thinking of unresolved international issues such as energy security , the Maghreb , Iran 's nuclear capability , terrorism , the Caucasus , Nagorno-Karabakh , climate change and others .
Russia is a strategic partner for Europe , not least because of the synergies that may be built in future .
As already happens to some extent , Moscow can supply us with mineral and energy resources as well as collaborate on military security and the fight against terrorism and organised crime Europe can contribute with financial resources , scientific and technological capabilities and our long-standing experience in the field of democracy and human rights .
Russia 's future is linked to Europe 's and must be developed with perseverance , without complacency and despite the many difficulties that currently exist .
In that respect , the conclusion of the strategic partnership agreement between the European Union and Russia is of great importance for our common future .
( HU ) Mr President , in connection with the upcoming summit , I would like to draw the negotiating delegation 's attention to two things .
Firstly , I would like to encourage them to reconsider the importance of Russian energy imports and , secondly , to extend the Partnership Agreement in a way that EU representatives could participate as observers in the elections to be held in December this year and in the Presidential elections to be held in March 2013 .
As we can see , energy imports from Russia are likely to increase , bearing in mind that many European nuclear power plants will be closed down after carrying out the stress tests .
So we are , once again , beginning to be concerned that we will again be more dependent on Russia in the future .
However , I would like to remind you that the coin has another side .
Russia is just as dependent on the European Union , because they sell most of their products to us .
If we do not buy their energy products , then the Russian economy will encounter serious stability problems in the future .
( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , Russia and the European Union are partners because of their mutual interests and because of their geographical location .
This is the case whether we like it or not .
We must make this partnership a positive and constructive one .
That is why we need to make progress on the Partnership Agreement and on visa facilitation , to add substance to the Partnership for Modernisation , in order to work towards this .
We need to realise , however , that this gives rise to obligations on both sides , including in respect of membership of the World Trade Organisation ( WTO ) , in that you cannot just continue doing as you like ; rather , these agreed contractual or international rules are binding on everyone and there is no place for arbitrariness in reciprocal dealings .
This also precludes using energy as a political weapon , for example .
These mutual interests must be handled positively and constructively , and where external policy is concerned , this naturally also means that Russia must take on some responsibility .
At the moment , there is the case of Syria in the United Nations Security Council .
In such cases , Russia must make a constructive contribution to the creation of a peaceful international community .
This also means , however , accepting the sovereign rights of neighbouring states and their decisions as regards entering into the alliances that they wish to enter into .
Moreover , Russia must make a positive contribution in the case of ' frozen conflicts ' and must now bring to an end the unlawful circumstances in Abkhazia and South Ossetia .
We have a shared responsibility in the global world .
It is clear that Russia and the European Union have substantial mutual interests in this global order , and in defining these interests , we must ensure that Russia recognises that democracy and the rule of law are also crucial for internal development .
A degree of conditionality is called for not just in relations with us alone ; a country in which there is no rule of law is also not a good place to invest , because there is no legal certainty .
A country without democracy and the rule of law cannot really make progress in the long term for the benefit of its own citizens .
Let us hope that the Partnership for Modernisation and other matters will help us to find a common and positive way forward here .
( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would just like to mention two points because Mr Swoboda has already mentioned a number of points on behalf of our group .
Russia is indeed at an important crossroads .
Its internal political situation will be determined by the elections to the Duma in December and the question of who will continue the modernisation embarked upon as president from 2012 .
One can also put a positive slant on this .
There could be no better opportunity to strengthen international confidence in Russia 's development .
This is conditional upon there being fair elections , fair opportunities for registration and access to the media for the candidates , to ensure at least an element of equal opportunity .
My second point concerns the Partnership for Modernisation between the EU and Russia .
This opens up new opportunities for effective cooperation .
We should therefore not miss the opportunity to support Russia vigorously in this modernisation - not just by investing in the modernisation of the economy , but also in its society .
Governments put things down on paper and , as we all know , you can say what you like on paper .
Citizens , however , become very restless if what is stated on paper is not implemented .
Civil participation and the involvement of civil society , entrepreneurs , researchers , young people and artists are essential to a self-determined society of solidarity .
We can only successfully support such modernisation , however , if people can come together easily in order to learn from each other and exchange experiences .
For these reasons , the EU and Russia should finally reach agreement on the common steps that need to be taken to achieve visa-free travel and how these can be implemented , in order to achieve results as quickly as possible .
We have been talking about people in the Kaliningrad region and thinking about facilitation .
A month ago , this House decided that visa facilitation should be allowed for cultural purposes .
We have been talking about whether perhaps particular consideration should be given to young people here .
These are all good suggestions to get the ball rolling , but they are no substitute for an overall solution .
I would therefore urge the Commission to step up the pace .
You can count on our support in any case , including as regards some of the more hesitant certain Member States .
( Applause )
( DE ) Madam President , it is hardly conceivable that our relations with Russia are based on an agreement dating from 1994 .
We have not succeeded in resolving anything new since then .
We alternate between cooperation and confrontation with Russia .
Where the neighbourhood is concerned , we deplore the war with Georgia , the pressure brought to bear on Ukraine , the recognition of President Lukashenko in Belarus and the split in the Republic of Moldova as a result of the conflict in Transnistria .
At the same time , our cooperation with Russia in the Security Council on the issue of Libya or on Iran 's nuclear programme is pleasing .
As regards Russia itself , the new paradigm is what is known as the Partnership for Modernisation .
Yet what is modernity without democracy ?
In the list of priorities that you have just given , Commissioner Füle , human rights came after cucumbers and the rule of law after tomatoes .
Is that the best we can expect in this area ?
Do we expect nothing more of Russia 's democratisation ?
I believe that as Parliament , we must make it clear that we do expect something ; for example , fair elections - there must be progress there .
There is , though , one thing that I would like to say quite clearly : such progress is often to be achieved at expert level .
Two summits a year is too much .
Let us have one summit , as we do with America .
We have enough exchange with Russia in the specialist areas .
Otherwise , we will have summits with no real content , and that would not be good either .
( PL ) Madam President , in my opinion , the most significant aspects of relations with Russia are energy policy and human rights .
Russia is pursuing a strategic goal of bringing individual countries under its control by exploiting the issue of gas when conducting foreign policy .
Just in the last few days , the Russian authorities have used blackmail to put pressure on Ukraine , making changes in gas prices dependent on the country joining the Russian customs union or a merger between Gazprom and Naftogaz .
The above actions quite obviously put an end to discussions on the creation of an EU-Ukraine free trade area .
Long-term agreements on gas supplies are also a way of influencing the policies of EU Member States .
We should therefore commend the position of the European Commission , which has acknowledged that the agreement concluded by the Polish Government does not comply with EU law .
Prices for Russian gas in Central Europe are already almost twice as high as those offered to Western European countries .
Russia 's discrediting of shale gas extraction projects is causing additional alarm .
The human rights problem is most apparent in the Khodorkovsky case .
There can be no question that this issue must be raised during the summit , in view of the ruling handed down by the European Court of Human Rights on the unlawfulness of the arrest and detention of the Russian businessman .
Madam President , I would like to remind Commissioner Füle of his very well-appreciated communication on the European Neighbourhood Policy ; and I can hear , Commissioner , that you basically concede that we should apply the same principle to Russia as well , even if Russia is not a part of the Eastern Neighbourhood .
But we should indeed call for what you have termed deep democracy , and we have to work seriously to support civil society in Russia .
I would like to highlight some points in the joint resolution that the European Parliament will adopt tomorrow .
We underline the need to maintain close contacts and support programmes for the development of civil society in Russia .
I would like to inform you , Commissioner , that today there is very worrying news from Nizhny Novgorod , where the summit will be just starting .
I have been informed by civil society organisations there that pre-emptive measures have been taken by the law enforcement agencies .
Attempts have been made to question people who could communicate with the EU representatives , and this is completely unacceptable .
Even people who work on children 's rights have been warned not to go to Nizhny Novgorod .
The credit cards of the main local organiser of the civil society event - which is , by the way , the first ever linked to an EU-Russia Summit - have been blocked ( for technical reasons , of course ) , and her car licence plates have mysteriously disappeared .
Commissioner , I ask that you make sure that the EU representatives at the summit in Nizhny Novgorod will give recognition and support to the civil society organisations .
To this end , I , together with my colleague , Mr Schulz , the Vice-Chair of the Joint EU-Russia Parliamentary Committee , have sent a letter to President Barroso , Vice-President / High Representative Ashton and President Von Rompuy .
( EL ) Madam President , firstly , may I wish you every success at tomorrow 's summit , the agenda of which includes global governance , the global economy , the accession of Russia to the WTO and international issues , including developments in North Africa and the Middle East .
Russia is the EU 's third biggest trading partner .
EU exports to Russia total EUR 65.6 billion .
According to official statistics , the Russian economy is growing at a rate of 4 % , despite the economic climate , and this is forecast to continue for a long time .
Its accession to the World Trade Organisation will create numerous opportunities in economic relations between the European Union and Russia .
At the same time , however , it will bring about innovative changes in energy , nuclear energy and international security .
( DE ) Madam President , Commissioner , we are aware that Russia is of significance to the EU , not just where economic matters are concerned , but also as a strategic partner .
The ban on imports of EU vegetables that has been imposed by Moscow is undoubtedly problematic in the run-up to the negotiations on Russia 's accession to the World Trade Organisation ( WTO ) , and we should make sure that Russia does not come into conflict with the WTO rules in future .
There are also problems , however , in the area of the still unimplemented agreement from 2006 in respect of EU airlines .
Relations between the EU and Russia are further strained by the planned US missile defences in Romania .
If the EU is serious about its strategies for improving relations with Russia , then it must firstly resolve these problems and secondly , give consideration to Russian sensitivities relating to an historical sphere of influence that undoubtedly exists , or which exists as far as Russia is concerned .
That is the only way we will make any progress .
( PL ) Madam President , the partnership between the European Union and Russia entails responsibility , including towards third countries .
I would like to draw the Commission 's attention to the paragraph of the resolution which calls on Russia not to use the supply of energy resources as a tool for influencing its neighbours ' policies .
This is what has happened in the case of Ukraine , where Mr Putin , the Russian Prime Minister , said quite openly during his last meeting with Mr Azarov , the Ukrainian Prime Minister , that lower prices would only be offered and the gas contract renegotiated if Ukraine entered into a customs union with Russia , Belarus and Kazakhstan , which would mean abandoning its European plans and aspirations .
This is nothing short of blackmail .
If the contract is not renegotiated , gas prices on the Russia-Ukraine border may reach EUR 500 per 1 000 m3 .
Ukraine is already paying the highest prices in Europe for Russian gas , although it is closest to the sources of this gas .
This situation may result in a very serious economic and social crisis in Ukraine .
I would like to make it clear that the European Union has obligations towards Ukraine , given that we are currently successfully negotiating the country 's entry into a free trade area or the creation of such an area , and will , in the near future , engage in relations with it as an ally of the European Union .
I would call on the Commission to demand quite plainly that Russia ceases all such practices and puts a stop to them .
Madam President , yet another EU-Russia Summit is taking place this week .
Major changes have occurred in the world since the last one .
Let me mention among them , firstly , the Arab revolutions , a process of deep transformation which affects virtually the whole Arab world .
The disaster at the Fukushima nuclear power plant reshaped the future of nuclear power , especially with regard to safety .
Climate change has brought more and more dangerous consequences .
Osama is dead but terrorism is alive and has targeted innocent people all over the world .
The list of events is long and all of them concern both the EU and Russia , two neighbouring global players with predominantly similar or complementary long-term interests .
Their relations can only be further developed if they are based on mutual respect , openness and transparency .
Any hidden agenda has the potential to distort , if not destroy , these relations .
The EU and Parliament have always been clear about the expectations of European citizens .
Now , with regard to the upcoming summit , I would like to highlight four issues .
First of all , the summit should bring decisive progress on all the remaining obstacles related to Russia 's accession to the WTO .
This important step will create better opportunities for the business communities on both sides and will further liberalise trade and economic relations globally .
In this respect , the application of protectionist measures is counterproductive and we hope they will not be hidden behind overplayed health threats , which is , in our opinion , the recent case with the ban on imports of vegetables from the EU .
We hope that the road map for visa-free travelling announced in May will accelerate further visa facilitation and will bring closer the moment when the visa regime between the EU and Russia will be fully liberalised .
To this end , Parliament expects that some politically sensitive issues will be properly addressed by the Russian authorities , in particular , by stopping the issuing of Russian passports to the residents of South Ossetia and Abkhazia .
I would like to see a more constructive engagement of Russia in our efforts to support democratisation , economic and social progress and stability in the six countries in the Eastern Partnership .
The last two years have clearly shown that this EU initiative is not aimed at competition , but rather at cooperation with Russia , since the stable and self-confident common neighbourhood is in the interests of both the EU and Russia .
In this respect , we urge Russia to intensify its efforts in facilitating the peaceful resolution of the conflicts in Transnistria and in the more and more worrying Nagorno-Karabakh region .
Finally , I would like to mention that the EU and Russia should fully cooperate in the revision and elaboration of higher standards for nuclear power safety , following the events in Japan .
We expect that higher standards are kept , not only in the newly built , but also in the already operational , nuclear power plants .
I hope that this issue can be part of the discussions in Nizhny Novgorod .
Madam President , Canada 's Prime Minister , Pierre Trudeau , likened sharing a border with the USA to sharing a bed with an elephant .
Our Union must share its bed with a bear .
We must continue to try to develop relations in the context of the four common spaces and on the basis of last year 's Partnership for Modernisation .
As the Commissioner said , the last two years have seen improvements . The agreement on a gas advisory forum and the improved early warning mechanism are among these .
Progress this month in solving the Transnistria conflict would be another positive step .
However , as Baroness Ashton said last month after the Khodorkovsky / Lebedev judgment , and as the European Court on Human Rights has concluded on many occasions , real progress requires respect for democracy and human rights and a stable and fair legal framework for business , which are too often absent in Russia .
A structured civil society dialogue would help ; common action to fight climate change would help to build trust .
But the Russian bear still has a sore head and I advise the Commission to carry to Nizhny Novgorod not only a jar of honey but also a large net .
( CS ) Madam President , Commissioner , as you are surely aware , Russia is a self-confident state and the Russians are a self-confident nation .
The relationship between the EU and Russia must take the form of a genuine partnership , and not just a feigned partnership .
Since we have excellent relations with the countries of the Eastern Partnership , relations between the EU and Russia must be at least on the same level .
I am therefore delighted that , in your speech , you did not forget to mention the importance of abolishing the visa requirement with Russia , as relations between partners must be built on trust and openness .
We should tell Russia clearly and seriously what the timetable is for abolishing visas , and what conditions must therefore be fulfilled .
Commissioner , I would like to thank you for remembering , when preparing the joint EU-Russia Summit , all of the agendas that are important for the partnership between the EU and Russia .
( NL ) Madam President , first of all , a very urgent issue .
I trust that this EU-Russia Summit will firmly address the very harmful and utterly disproportionate import ban on our European vegetables .
The market gardening sector expects this ban to be lifted and deserves to see that happen .
Commissioner Füle , can you confirm that the EU delegation will fully commit itself to resolving this situation in Nizhny Novgorod ?
This is a very important question and one that I get asked a lot in my country at the moment when I talk about the EU-Russia Summit .
I wanted to say a few words , in particular , about the problematic accession of Russia to the WTO .
Just one more brief question .
Georgia has , in fact , played a key role here .
Georgia has de facto the right of veto .
President Saakashvili is raising the stakes .
What he wants are transparent borders - he basically wants Abkhazia and South Ossetia back - and he has , of course , also put the import ban on Georgian wines and mineral water on the agenda .
However , Russia does not seem to be budging at all .
In brief , is it not the case that we have deadlock on our hands here ?
It very much looks like it .
Besides , the Russian economy , which is mainly driven by oil and gas , does not really need accession to the WTO .
( LT ) Madam President , I call on the heads of the EU institutions not to forget human rights at the EU-Russia Summit that begins tomorrow .
It is clear that respect for human rights is a valuable basis , without which a strategic partnership and the modernisation of EU-Russian relations would be impossible .
The specific case we need to discuss is the ruling by Moscow city court on 24 May to reject the appeal made by Mikhail Khodorkovsky and Platon Lebedev against the new seven year sentence .
In the 21st century , a shameful trial is taking place before our very eyes , and the sentences are not written in court .
This is happening in a country linked to the EU by a so-called strategic partnership .
The ruling by the Moscow court once again revealed serious flaws in Russia 's court system and strengthened the opinion that it punishes those in Russia who have political ambitions , but whose opinions do not coincide with those of the Kremlin .
The ruling made on 31 May by the European Court of Human Rights and violations in Russia of the European Convention on Human Rights are facts that must also be discussed .
We , the European Parliament should say clearly that , if Russia 's President , Dmitri Medvedev , wants to come to the European Parliament , he should appear here together with prisoner of conscience , Mikhail Khodorkovsky , and this would be the most effective strategy and tactic for the modernisation of Russia .
President Medvedev and prisoner of conscience , Mikhail Khodorkovsky , together in the European Parliament - that would be a sight worth not only the attention of the world 's media , but also the heartfelt support of democratic society .
( LT ) Madam President , this summit is special because it takes place against the backdrop of the forthcoming elections in Russia .
We expect Brussels to send Russia a strong signal about the elections respecting democratic standards , which would safeguard diversity of opinion in the Duma .
The question of nuclear safety is particularly relevant following Fukushima .
I am pleased that the Member of the Commission mentioned that this issue will be raised at the summit and that there will be a call for the highest international safety standards in nuclear power plants already operating and those that are planned , in both Russia , and of course , the European Union .
I feel that EU and Russian relations with Belarus should also be discussed .
A convergence of positions would help to open the prison gates for those who recently stood in the Belarusian elections and would stop blatant human rights abuses .
I very much support those fellow Members who said that we need to translate words into deeds in the area of visa facilitation , and not just with Russia , but all of the European Union 's eastern neighbours .
As it assumes the EU Presidency , Poland has already found roads to a more fruitful dialogue with Russia , so that we can expect concrete steps to be taken in EU-Russia relations in the coming six months .
( PL ) Our most serious failings in relations between the EU and Russia are inconsistency , weakness and a lack of awareness of our own power .
The Nord Stream issue is typical in this respect .
First , we make energy solidarity one of Europe 's leading principles in the Treaty of Lisbon , and then the EU agrees to the Nord Stream project , which is harmful to Poland and the other new Member States in geopolitical terms .
We should therefore stand our ground when discussing each of the issues on the forthcoming agenda as outlined by the Commissioner .
Russia must observe certain rules as regards the WTO .
They should first allow Georgian wine onto their market before dreaming of WTO membership .
As far as visas are concerned , Russia must be told that the visa regime will be liberalised for countries participating in the Eastern Partnership first , and for Russia only afterwards .
The Kaliningrad Oblast may represent an exception to this rule .
As regards the energy sector , Russia must be told that we are opposed to the repeated blackmailing of Ukraine , and that we are opposed to the measures taken by Russian agencies of influence , attempting to belittle the extraction of shale gas in Poland and in Europe .
This is a great opportunity to gain independence from Russia .
Madam President , Russia has proclaimed a modernisation programme and some observers are speaking about a new perestroika .
So far , unfortunately , there is no real progress .
Analysts conclude that the priority of the current Russian élites is to keep the present system in place , trying not to allow external relations to have any impact on the domestic situation .
It is therefore up to the EU to make one issue very clear .
The success of the Partnership for Modernisation will be dependent on the Russian Government 's willingness and capacity to provide for a truly independent judiciary and to implement the basic principles of the rule of law , transparency and reciprocity .
If the EU will not address this crucial issue in a principled manner , hardly any progress can be expected .
Today 's International Herald Tribune writes : ' Russia can 't have a modern economy until it has a genuine rule of law ' .
The summit venue will be Nizhny Novgorod , in Soviet times , Gorky , where the key figure of Soviet conscience , Andrei Sakharov , was banished for many years .
I call upon the Commission and our negotiators to follow the spirit of Andrei Sakharov and to remember the message of Sakharov Prize winner , Sergei Kovalev , in this hemicycle two years ago .
Finally , the EU should stimulate and help Russia to come to terms with its totalitarian legacy .
After 20 years , even Mr Medvedev had to admit that one cannot ignore the terrible and criminal heritage of Russian power .
I recall the words of our colleague , Mr Swoboda , who yesterday asked for a full clearing up of Russian history , especially the atrocities of the Stalin era .
We can help Russia come to terms with its past .
( SK ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , Russia still requires a two-handed approach : on the one hand , firm demands for the fulfilment of democratic principles , but , at the same time , a rejection of Bush 's well-honed anti-Russian policy .
Russia certainly has no right to a sphere of influence .
All former Soviet republics have the right to decide freely where they wish to belong .
It surely has the right , however , to safety and international security .
Such a sense of security would certainly liberalise the internal situation in Russia .
It is necessary to draw Russia into global politics on the side of Europe , so that Russia can feel that it is an accepted partner in the creation of an international and democratic order .
The Partnership for Modernisation must fulfil not only the state-monopoly ideas of the Russian Government , but should create an area for untrammelled industrial and scientific activity , as Mr Fleckenstein said in his analysis here .
If we adopted a different approach to Russia along these lines , we might harbour the hidden hope that democratic processes would be liberated to a far greater extent in Russia , with a certainty and confidence that can then feed into European politics .
I am keeping my fingers crossed that this will emerge from the forthcoming talks .
( PL ) Madam President , on the eve of the EU-Russia Summit , and in the context of negotiations on a new Partnership and Cooperation Agreement , it is important for the EU not only to speak with one voice , but to show Russia its unity and solidarity in practice .
Energy solidarity is enshrined in the Treaty of Lisbon , but Russia does not accept this principle , with the Nord Stream project being an obvious example of this attitude .
We must not agree to attempts to isolate some of the EU 's new Member States using the dividing wedge of the energy sector , and this should be clearly emphasised during the summit .
We should also expect acknowledgement of the European ambitions of Georgia , Moldova and Ukraine , and that Russia will be called upon to stop putting political pressure on these countries .
Furthermore , we should remember that Russia is a unique democracy with a very high rate of corruption .
( LV ) Madam President , the new European Union-Russia partnership agreement must be concrete and legally binding in all areas of cooperation .
This is a justified demand because we cannot allow for the agreement to be a collection of general phrases .
The European Union and Russia are mutually dependent .
The European market is no less important to Russia than Russian gas is to us , and Russian economic modernisation plans are directly dependent on our technology and expertise .
That is why our cooperation should be closely linked to improvements in the fields of human rights and the rule of law .
The European Union is Russia 's largest trading partner and main investor ; that is why the new agreement must contain legally binding terms regarding investment .
It is important to insist on the elimination of unilateral and unreasonable trade barriers .
This relates to the Russia - Kazakhstan - Belarus customs union , as well as to the current embargo on European Union vegetables .
Russia cannot be allowed to continue using energy policy to implement its geopolitical interests , by discriminating against certain Member States , for example in the field of gas tariffs .
Commissioner , in continuing to work on the visa-free zone with Russia , we must also work on establishing a visa-free zone with the rest of our Eastern Partnership states .
At the summit , we must reiterate that the six-point agreement on Georgia has still not been implemented .
Taking into account the upcoming parliamentary and presidential elections , the restrictions placed on opposition members regarding registration for the elections and on appearing in the mass media must be removed .
We have already affirmed our willingness to be present in all phases of the election process , yet Russia must show willingness to accept long-term observers , as well as to actually implement fair elections .
In conclusion , I should like to emphasise that these critical remarks are not in any way directed against Russia or its people , but the opposite - they are directed against the current government , in order to improve the situation in Russia and make our cooperation more fruitful .
( RO ) Madam President , global warming , drug trafficking , the non-proliferation of weapons and energy security are common challenges requiring global solutions .
This is why we need to build a solid partnership with Russia based on mutual trust .
I would like to welcome the resumption of negotiations for an ambitious new partnership agreement in an attempt to overcome past tensions .
I think that Russia must be supported by the European Union in its efforts to join the WTO , as this will boost trade and economic relations between the two partners and encourage investment .
At the same time , during tomorrow 's summit , the High Representative must urge Russia to ratify the Energy Charter because proper energy cooperation cannot exist between the European Union and Russia unless the principles of transparency , reciprocity , competitiveness and non-discrimination are observed .
( PL ) Madam President , Commissioner , I expect that modernisation will be one of the issues discussed during the summit .
I would merely like to remind you that modernising Russia is not merely a matter of economic or energy issues , but also a matter of political modernisation and relations between the authorities and society .
I would ask you to raise this issue .
This also involves relations between Russia and its neighbours , and Russia 's ' sphere of influence ' .
Since you are conducting relations with Ukraine so very successfully , I would urge you to make it very clear that an association agreement between the European Union and Ukraine will also be beneficial to Russia , and that we are very alarmed at the manifestations of extremely forceful political pressure being brought to bear on Ukraine on the eve of the conclusion of negotiations , while these negotiations are in their final stages .
Please make this very clear to the Russian side on our behalf .
These are very important factors contributing to mutual trust between the European Union institutions and the Member States , on the one hand , and Russia , on the other .

( DE ) Madam President , firstly , may I say that I was astonished to hear a man such as Mr Mölzer , who is well educated in history , say that there are historical zones of Russian influence in Europe and that this includes parts of the European Union such as Romania .
The days of the Hitler-Stalin pact are long gone and in a democratic world , we should be practising a kind of European Monroe Doctrine ; in other words , that the fate and the policies of Europe are decided by Europeans .
That does not mean that we do not want a policy of good neighbourliness and dialogue .
Yet Nizhny Novgorod - the venue for our meeting - should also serve as a warning , because it reminds us of the famous story of the merchants of Nizhny Novgorod who believed that they could buy their freedom and their security and were then hanged .
We have to realise that we cannot buy security with money or by glossing over reality ; it is only obtainable through honest partnership .
We need a common foreign affairs and security policy .
We need energy independence and energy security and less dependence on Russian energy policy , which is still being used for foreign policy purposes .
We also need to speak clearly on human rights .
We cannot afford to compromise here .
Where Mikhail Khodorkovsky and Platon Lebedev are concerned , I would state that these individuals must at last be freed - otherwise the state visit by the Russian President to the European Parliament will take place under a huge cloud .
We want to have a partnership with a Russia that is in the process of democratising , but to do that , Russia must democratise - in reality and not just in our wishful thinking .
That is why I think Mr Swoboda is right : the forthcoming elections will be decisive .
Then we will see whether our partnership with the Russian people - of whom we are very fond - can be expanded into a genuine partnership with the Russian state .

( FI ) Madam President , as Mr Posselt also said , Europe needs Russia and Russia needs Europe .
Cooperation between Europe and Russia is important for promoting political , social and economic stability , not just in Europe but worldwide .
It is regrettable that the Partnership and Cooperation Agreement between the EU and Russia does not meet today 's needs for cooperation .
We should make the strategic partnership closer , deeper and broader .
The basis for all EU-Russia relations in future , however , needs to be the promotion of peace and security and support for democratic values and political and economic freedom .
The Partnership for Modernisation should be deepened and made more focused , but mere political dialogue between diplomats is simply not enough .
We must do everything we can to make it easier for people to meet and increase cooperation in the areas of science , art , culture , education and enterprise .
( PL ) Madam President , there will no doubt be a great many issues covered during the EU-Russia Summit , but one of the most important is anticipated to be the issue of energy security .
For several months , Russia has been conducting a very intensive campaign aimed at obtaining exemptions for its gas infrastructure from the rules set out in the third energy package , or , in other words , the rules of our anti-monopoly law , which prohibit the simultaneous and parallel control of energy resources and transmission networks .
Mr Shmatko , the Russian Energy Minister , Mr Kramer , CEO of the South Stream project , and Mr Miller , CEO of Gazprom , have made visits to Brussels in connection with this matter .
This is a major campaign .
The European Union 's position on this matter must be set out very clearly to Russia , namely , that we do not intend to grant reduced tariffs to Russia ; instead , what matters to us is that the gas market in Central Europe becomes more competitive and less monopolised .
Commissioner , I would ask you to tell us plainly whether the European Commission is prepared to make statements to this effect during the summit .
( PL ) Madam President , in the run-up to the forthcoming summit , we really can say that the European Union lacks a single coherent strategy as regards Russia , and that the current policy of pragmatic cooperation based on a strategy of small steps may very easily fall apart during whatever crisis occurs next , as was the case in 2008 during the war with Georgia , or in 2009 after gas supplies were cut off .
In the context of the latter event , it is very important to emphasise the definition of the word ' diversification ' , which in Europe is often synonymous with the construction of a large number of different gas pipelines from Russia .
Diversification is taken to mean the construction of the South and Nord Stream gas pipelines , for example .
Meanwhile , the European Union should concentrate on guaranteeing gas supplies from non-Russian sources : it should do more to promote the Nabucco pipeline from Azerbaijan , and it should invest in gas terminals and research into extracting shale gas .
It is also very important that pressure continues to be put upon the Russian authorities at various levels to improve the human rights situation in Russia .
Apart from discussion in the framework of the EU-Russia summits , we should ensure that the consultations which take place twice yearly with European Union representatives and diplomats from the Russian Ministry of Foreign Affairs are decisively stepped up .
( PL ) Madam President , I believe that the Russian authorities should be told that we expect them to behave responsibly .
Russia is potentially a very important partner for the European Union , for example , when it comes to finding a solution to certain frozen conflicts in Europe which remain unresolved .
I believe that the Russian authorities should be told that although vegetables and gas are important , they must stop supporting Transnistrian separatists , that we expect them to stop supplying weapons to Azerbaijan and Armenia , since this poses a great risk for the future of this region , and that we also expect Russia to fulfil its obligations under the agreement on Georgia concluded in 2008 .
We expect that Russian forces will be withdrawn from Abkhazia and South Ossetia , and we expect that Russia will respect Georgia 's right to consider and decide its own future .

( PL ) Madam President , although I agree with Mr Lisek 's statements on Georgia , and not forgetting what many MEPs have said about Ukraine , it seems to me that at tomorrow 's summit , we must also spare a few words - or a great many words - for Belarus .
I would ask everyone to remember that we have been dealing for many months with a very far-reaching political crisis there , and that for at least several months , we have been dealing with a far-reaching economic crisis .
We are also dealing with a situation in which Russia is putting pressure on Belarus , probably a great deal more forcefully and effectively than it currently is on Ukraine .
Russia is effectively attempting to take over the entire economy , or rather strategic sectors of the economy , by taking advantage of the dramatic situation in which the Belarusian economy finds itself .
I have one request .
If Russia decides to provide aid , and we know that it has decided to provide aid to Belarus , the European Union should ensure that Russia makes this aid dependent on the observance of human rights .
These are common values that we apparently share with Russia , a fact which is often repeated by the Russians , and so they should help us to introduce these values in Belarus .
Otherwise , by funding the Lukashenko regime , we will be responsible for it .
( SK ) Madam President , we always have a number of problematic issues on hand for negotiations with Russia , such as the standard of civil rights , the nonsensical ban on imports of vegetables from the EU , the anti-missile shield located in the EU , or the problematic involvement of Russia in many former Soviet republics .
I do not want to say that we should avoid talking about these difficult topics , but I firmly believe that we should not limit ourselves to them .
We should also bring new ideas for mutually beneficial cooperation .
European producers need new opportunities to sell their products .
Russia is an enormous trade area , with ever increasing purchasing power .
It is therefore necessary to work more intensively to eliminate the obstacles that are holding back trade cooperation , and also jointly to support projects such as the extension of the broad-gauge railway line running from the Pacific to the heart of the EU .
Projects such as this can create new impulses for cooperation , the implementation of which will bring benefits not only to Europe , but also to Ukraine , Russia and many Asian countries .
( PL ) Madam President , talks are being held between the European Union and Russia on the future of the energy sector , but from what I understand , a new group is currently being set up , which will debate the third energy package in the context of gas security .
I would like to call on Commissioner Füle , and on Commissioner Oettinger , to provide the European Parliament with information regarding the progress of the talks and the outcome of this group 's negotiations .
We would also like a list of the members of the negotiating group .
I learnt from a representative of a Russian energy concern that the company would be participating in these negotiations .
I would like to know whether this is true , and whether the representatives of large companies will take part in negotiations on the Russian side .
Compliance with competition law in the field of energy , without the granting of any exemptions , is also a very important matter for the European Parliament .
During the recent presentations of South Stream investment plans in Brussels , it was apparent that Russia and Gazprom want privileges and a special status .
We cannot agree to this .
Madam President , I see Parliament 's resolution as Europe 's hand extended to the Russia of today which needs , despite all its baseless pride and inherited arrogance , a really friendly advice and action plan .
As the Human Rights Consultations advising President Medvedev have called for an essential renovation of the national house from basement to roof , our Parliament is coming not with empty appeasement but with constructive provision of cooperation .
The greatest chance appears there if Russia is open and striving to build an open society , not one that is closed in backward Stalinism .
Unfortunately , Russia 's pressure on the rest of the G8 to accept the occupied territories of Georgia in the WTO system on the side of Russia does not testify to their really good will .
If it is true that the West has consented to this , it is unfortunately thus showing its weakness just before the Nizhny Novgorod Summit .
( DE ) Madam President , Russia is no doubt an important partner for the European Union , but a very difficult one .
Accession to the World Trade Organisation ( WTO ) is undoubtedly of great importance to Russia .
However , I would like to call explicitly for a democratic process at both a political level and at the level of civil society .
It is absolutely essential that human rights are respected and observed .
( RO ) Madam President , the EU-Russia Summit is taking place against the background of regional developments which influence this partnership .
Reform of the European Neighbourhood Policy may help resolve the conflict in Transnistria .
Indeed , Russia has shown an interest in setting up a joint political committee .
However , the structure and deadline for setting up this body are due to be discussed .
The food crisis which is affecting Europe at the moment has brought trade with Russia to a halt .
New negotiations on current sanitary regulations could improve this situation .
Russia 's membership of the WTO will have a long-term impact on economic relations with the EU .
This is why all the relevant agreements need to be revised .
The energy issue is another topic of interest , as a result of launching the AGRI project .
This would offer an alternative source to that provided by the Nabucco project .
Madam President , it is good that the European Union should strive to have the best possible relations with all its neighbours , and indeed with all countries around the world .
Sometimes , that can be difficult - particularly , I suppose , when it comes to Russia , because it has a very chequered history .
Even since the fall of the Iron Curtain over 20 years ago , its behaviour towards some countries , particularly neighbours such as Georgia , certainly cannot be admired .
Obviously , any negotiations with Russia have to be underpinned by a recognition of the important values of respect for human rights and respect for neighbours .
Nevertheless , they do offer a great opportunity for tackling global issues like climate change and also , of course , a great opportunity to develop both our economies .
Russia is a rising country and a developing country in terms of wealth .
Certainly , if the fundamentals are right , there are great opportunities both for the European Union and for Russia in the long term .
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , today 's exchange of views was indeed very useful for adding a final touch to our summit preparations and you can rest assured that I will convey the key messages to the High Representative and Vice-President Ashton who will debrief the Presidents and Commissioner Karel De Gucht .
I have heard many of you calling for continuing engagement with Russia , calling for the relationship and coordination with the Russian Federation to be further developed , but I also heard calls for more democracy and less corruption .
I also heard a call for no harassment , which was reported in Nizhny Novgorod , although I respect the role of the Russian Federation in ensuring security for the summit .
We have seen that we have convergent views on many subjects .
We agree on the key importance of our relations with Russia both bilaterally and in multilateral contexts , whether regional or global .
We agree that it is a multifaceted relationship in which economic , social and environmental issues , human rights and rule of law , security aspects and political cooperation are all of paramount importance .
We should not expect a resolution of all pending problems at this summit - and yes , we will raise the issue of vegetables .
But we should aim to make significant progress in a number of areas .
Let me comment on some of these areas .
First : elections .
The Russian authorities are well aware that the European Union will be following the 2011 and 2012 electoral processes very closely .
Should there be irregularities in the upcoming elections , these issues would have to be addressed .
Right now , we are calling on Russia to respect obligations it has undertaken in the context of the Council of Europe , the United Nations and the OSCE regarding free and fair elections , and to cooperate well with ODIHR to ensure appropriate monitoring .
We will place a special emphasis on the issue of the registration of new parties and access to the electoral process .
Second : I took note of Parliament 's concerns with regard to the human rights situation in Russia ; we share most of them and these issues will be raised with the Russian President at the summit .
The main forum for addressing human rights and rule-of-law issues is the European Union-Russia human rights consultations .
This is an important instrument and its potential should be fully used .
Unfortunately , this is not yet the case and the European Union will therefore stress the need to have an honest and useful dialogue for which a review of the consultations ' modalities is necessary .
Third : the Partnership for Modernisation .
I fully agree with the honourable Members that the Partnership for Modernisation should be broadly based .
The coordinators will present in Nizhny Novgorod the second programme report on the implementation of the partnership and , as you will see , the rule of law is at the very core of this initiative and we have concrete projects in this area .
Point four : Russia is the neighbour of our neighbours , and I think Nizhny Novgorod would be an excellent opportunity to refer to the recently adopted ENP review document and , with reference to this document , to make sure that we are transparent in our policy vis-à-vis the neighbours we share with Russia .
This is an opportunity - based inter alia on that transparency - to make our point that caring about the well-being of the neighbours we share is a win-win process .
I think it will also be a good opportunity , based on some new ideas in that ENP review , to talk about a strengthened cooperation to address the protracted conflicts in our neighbourhood .
Point five : the question of energy cooperation will be addressed at the summit .
We need transparent , fair and competitive energy relations and we will raise our concerns with the Russian President .
We will emphasise the need for further reforms , as I stressed in my opening remarks , in the Russian electricity and gas sector with a view to establishing a level playing field .
Madam President , honourable Members , the European Union and Russia are partners .
Partners should talk to each other frequently , they should try to achieve consensus where possible , but should not hesitate to openly address more problematic aspects .
We have talked about some of these problematic aspects today .
They should be addressed at the summit and , wherever possible , we should look for solutions or at least improvement .
I have already mentioned the ENP review .
I strongly believe that one of the added values of that reviewed Neighbourhood Policy is that the universally applicable values and principles reflected there are not only applicable to small and medium-sized neighbouring countries .
I have received six motions for resolution tabled in accordance with Rule 110 ( 2 ) of the Rules of Procedure .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow ( 9 June 2011 ) .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
I am pleased to be one of those signing this resolution , which reaffirms the importance of respect for democracy and human rights in relations between the European Union and Russia .
Starting with the Russia-EU dialogue on human rights and continuing with the summits , I think that a systematic and honest approach is required in cases where the standards for a fair trial are not respected or human rights activists or journalists are persecuted and prevented from doing their job .
Furthermore , clear reference criteria need to be introduced regarding Russia 's respect for democratic standards , which will help deepen relations with the EU .
Lastly , we must not forget either the support which needs to be given in developing civil society , as the guarantor of a democracy which will not only stick to procedures but be truly inclusive as well .
Sudan and South Sudan ( motions for resolutions tabled ) : see Minutes
Agenda of the next sitting
Composition of committees : see Minutes
Closure of the sitting
Opening of the sitting
Decisions concerning certain documents : see Minutes
Application of EIA Directive in Austria ( debate )
The first item is the oral question to the Commission by Erminia Mazzoni , on behalf of the Committee on Petitions , on the application of the EIA Directive in Austria ( Ο-000084 / 2011 - Β7-0314 / 2011 ) .
Madam President , I have a point of order under Rule 96 by prearrangement with the President , whom I would ask to write to the Formula One Teams Association - including Lotus in my own constituency - which made clear in a letter yesterday that it objected to a rearranged Bahrain Grand Prix on logistical grounds .
I would ask the President , in that letter , to remind those teams that there is a fine tradition of sportspeople withdrawing from events on human rights grounds - from Muhammad Ali and Vietnam to cricketers refusing to go to South Africa under apartheid and athletes to the Moscow Olympics .
I would also ask the President to make it clear on behalf of the European Parliament that should any of the teams withdraw on human rights grounds , they would have the support of this Parliament , and that the bloodied name of Bahrain should not stand , this year , alongside the proud European names of the Nürburgring , Monza , Monaco and Silverstone .
We have noted your point , Mr Howitt , and we shall pass it on .
( SV ) Madam President , I am rapporteur for the report on transitional arrangements for bilateral investment agreements after the Treaty of Lisbon and , following thorough consideration of Parliament 's vote and the Council 's proposal , I would like to step down as rapporteur for this report , as the position of both the Council and Parliament so one-sidedly favours the interests of investors and does not take account of the need for transparency .
Furthermore , the old Member States are not taking into account the need of the new Member States for new agreements , and investors ' rights are not balanced in any way by environmental , social and other legal requirements .
I therefore do not feel able to defend Parliament 's position , nor do I feel able to lead these negotiations to a successful outcome .
I therefore ask to be allowed to transfer the task of rapporteur to the committee chair .
That is a procedural point and you should bring it before the competent committee .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I am speaking on behalf of Mrs Mazzoni , the chair of the Committee on Petitions , who is unfortunately unable to be with us .
No doubt there are more important petitions than this one .
This petition does not concern thirty thousand people , as in the case for some other petitions that are pending in this House .
The drivers behind this question as far as the Committee on Petitions is concerned are nature , which is a contentious matter locally , how the local economy is allowed to develop , and , above all - and I will come back to this subsequently - the uniform application of the law in the European Union .
Perhaps I might make another comment before going further .
The report on this case - on this ski lift project - shows that the local media delight in seeing someone or other on the ground .
It could be a lobbyist for nature , a lobbyist for business , the local authorities or the national government .
That is not appropriate in this case .
We went on a local fact-finding mission - Mrs Lichtenberger accompanied me - and the impression that the European Union can act as some kind of supreme court of appeal is entirely misplaced .
We have to rely to some extent on local authorities implementing the law properly .
This takes us to what is at the heart of the petition .
The petitioners assert that the local threshold for carrying out an environmental impact assessment ( EIA ) , which was 20 hectares at the time , was not adhered to ; that instead , the project was artificially subdivided into smaller parts and that in reality , the 20 hectare threshold was exceeded .
As an aside , a 10 hectare threshold has since been introduced in Austria .
Things have therefore changed somewhat in any case .
When we investigated locally , we concluded that the provisions concerning environmental impact assessments , as applicable in Austria , were complied with at the time - at least in essence .
One might argue over the odd square metre or other measurement , but in our view , the dispute does not concern vast areas .
Neither do we feel that consideration of individual aspects of the development would obviously lead to a different conclusion .
This applies , for example , to the issue of the lake created to provide water for artificial snow , the issue of parking facilities serving the project and other aspects .
However , we came to the view that we needed to look a little more into what was behind this case .
We questioned whether the way the national government had applied the law on the EIA was correct and in accordance with the spirit of our European regulations .
We then soon saw that to some extent , it was possible for the provisions to be applied in different ways - not just in Austria , but also in some other Member States , including my own country .
The question arises as to whether we should always allow projects to be sliced up locally .
The question arises as to whether we should allow projects to be divided into separate stages in time , if , in retrospect , one can say that actually it was all part of an overall plan and should have been looked at as a whole from the start .
There are also cases of projects being subdivided locally as far as their legal arrangement is concerned , which gives rise to the question of how much this is permitted by our European legislation - deliberately or otherwise - and whether things need to be tightened up in this respect .
One particular point stood out for us in respect of such facilities .
Can we really allow ski runs - new ski areas of 1 , 2 , 3 or 10 hectares which are added on to ski areas or which will be more heavily trafficked as a result of the expansion of existing ski facilities - to be completely disregarded in the calculations ?
My personal opinion is that , based on the European rules , all the areas to be used should be included in the overall project , hence our specific question to the Commission as to whether it does not feel that we need to tighten up the European regulations in this area .
Member of the Commission . - ( DE ) Madam President , honourable Members , Mr Potočnik and I are pleased that we have a parliament that has made the monitoring of environmental regulations a focal area of its work , as is the case in this instance .
The EIA Directive is of great value for the ecological development of the European Union .
For us , it is an important instrument for achieving sustainable development .
It states that projects that have a substantial impact on the environment must undergo an assessment in which all their direct , but also indirect , effects on the environment are evaluated .
These are types of projects in which the Member States have to decide , using threshold values , whether the results of this assessment mean that an EIA must be carried out .
The circumstances in your ski area belong to a class of projects in which Member States have long had to decide whether an EIA is necessary .
The Austrian legal provision was not really satisfactory in the past .
It concerned an area of 10 hectares or of 20 hectares or more .
After we received the petition , the Commission asked the Austrian Government how it had ensured that the directive was properly applied in this project .
Austria replied that it had not had to carry out an EIA because the threshold of 20 hectares had not been reached .
There was then official doubt on our part .
We pointed out that in determining the size of the area , and thus deciding on whether an EIA was necessary , an overall view should be taken rather than looking at the area in its narrower sense .
Austria then revised its law on EIAs , which I think is the most important result in this individual case .
In our legal opinion , it now complies in every respect with the requirements of the European EIA Directive .
The decision as to whether an EIA is necessary when a ski area is expanded now depends overall on the size of the enlargement in land area and whether it lies within a designated nature conservation area .
Moreover , earlier expansions are also now to be included in the appraisal .
The requirements of the EIA Directive are actually clearly and strictly stated in this respect .
Circumventing these merely by subdividing projects into stages , into sections or tranches , is not possible .
We place great importance on an overall analysis of the impact on nature .
The European Court of Justice has confirmed our interpretation of the law .
It has made it clear on more than one occasion that the aims of the EIA Directive cannot be circumvented by subdividing projects .
As far as the threshold area is concerned , taking into consideration only those surfaces on which building work is actually to be carried out is too narrow .
We are concerned not just with the building work , but also with its overall integration into the surrounding area .
In other words , when calculating whether the threshold area is reached , one must include areas in which no building works are actually taking place , but which are indisputably part of the project and part of the impact of the project .
That is why we feel that screening should have been carried out in the Damüls-Mellau ski area before the expansion took place in order to establish whether an EIA was necessary for the project .
This decision should also have been made public , giving the reasons behind it .
These are the obligations with which the Austrian authorities did not comply .
They failed to carry out such screening , which , in our view , was a requirement .
The project is in the past ; it was decided on five years ago and approved five years ago .
Construction is already complete .
We have therefore requested further details of the effects of the works from the authorities in Vienna and have also made enquiries as to whether measures to alleviate the consequences are necessary and can still be considered .
Once we have received this information , we will examine whether further steps can be taken to alleviate the effects on nature in this area as a whole .
We have also asked the authorities in Austria to confirm to us that in the event of the future expansion of this or other ski areas which met the criteria under the old version of the Austrian act on environmental impact assessments , screening will first be carried out to ascertain whether an EIA is necessary .
Mr Potočnik is currently working on a revision of the EIA Directive .
Both he and we intend to submit a new text that further enhances environmental protection , which especially takes into consideration the areas of climate change , energy and biodiversity , which also includes relevant important rulings by the European Court of Justice and which harmonises and simplifies the existing procedures as far as possible and , moreover , excludes circumvention more clearly than previously .
Mr Potočnik is in the process of preparing the recast of this directive and has therefore consulted broadly with the public and the relevant interest groups over the past year .
The results are currently being evaluated and we will table a proposal accordingly in 2012 at the latest .
The improper execution of this construction work will at least have a positive effect for the future , because European law will be worded more clearly and will no longer be so easy to circumvent .
We are pleased that the Austrian act on the EIA now complies with the directive .
The Commission will take action to ensure that the Austrian authorities look at the environmental impact of the work that has already been carried out in order to ensure that in any future expansion of the ski area in the region around Damüls-Mellau , the requirements of our directive are applied in accordance with the rules .
In other words , we have all learnt from the mistakes made in this individual case .
( Applause )
Madam President , Commissioner , Mr Wieland has already outlined the facts of the case very clearly .
I would like to add one or two political assessments , if I may .
Firstly , the fact that existing regulations or directives are examined to see how well they are working in practice or how well they are achieving their objectives and are then improved or interpreted more precisely where necessary is not an argument against European policy , but rather an argument in favour of such policy .
There will always be competition between European regulations and directives and the form that these take at local level .
The Committee on Petitions may not be a court of appeal , but in my own understanding of what we are doing in the Committee - in other words , what I understand as my role as a member of the Committee on Petitions - I am rather proud that this petition , in which we saw that things were being interpreted differently at local level than was our intention at European level , together with the opinion of the Committee on Petitions , ultimately resulted in the law being changed in a Member State .
I consider that to be a great success , and a success of European policy .
The general problem as I see it is the question that I will now put to the Commissioner .
Many citizens are concerned about how European law on the environment is being implemented in the Member States .
There are many petitions on this .
Many of these are concerned with cross-border matters , but there are also many concerning circumstances in the Member States .
Time and again , we face the problem that when we make enquiries to the Commission while matters are in progress , we get the answer : ' We assume that Member State X is implementing and applying the existing directives and regulations of the European Union appropriately .
We see no need to intervene ' .
We need an instrument that we can use to enter into a serious dialogue with the Member States while matters are in progress if there are indications that something is going wrong , so that we do not end up in the same situation as in this case .
Things did not go optimally , but it is done now and we have a solution for the future - but not , unfortunately , for the past .
Madam President , I think we can describe what happened here as a lesson from which we have learnt .
We Austrians are very keen skiers .
For that , of course , you need ski runs .
However , as we must be aware and must take into consideration , a beautiful , intact environment is also a part of skiing , and people will not go skiing where this no longer exists .
Seen in the light of this situation , Austrian policy has made many mistakes in the past .
Ski runs have been added unilaterally without considering whether more runs are actually a good idea , and administrative practice and the legal situation were also characterised by this mindset .
What happened here demonstrates the value added by the European Union and the European Parliament .
In this case , it seems that things went wrong .
In many cases when things go wrong , nothing happens .
In this case , however , a petition was tabled , people reacted accordingly and Austria put its house in order .
As far as I am concerned , it provides a good example of what should happen .
Madam President , Commissioner , I am very grateful for the information you have given .
I consider what you have said to be very important .
I have just one supplementary question .
You said that the Commission is entirely satisfied with the way that Austria is now implementing environmental impact assessments .
However , there still remains a ruling by the European Court of Justice stating that citizens must be involved in the procedure for establishing whether an EIA is required .
This has not been incorporated into the revised Austrian act and it could act as a kind of early warning system to ensure that what we saw in Mellau cannot happen again .
I would like to emphasise once more that I think it somewhat absurd if ski runs are not included in the size of a ski area just because the entire mountain has not been dug up .
As I see it , those are ultimately the areas concerned and they must be included .
It is quite clear that this is a case in which a project was subdivided into smaller parts for the purposes of circumvention .
I hope that you will bear this case in mind in future proceedings .

Madam President , we have a case that can help us resolve an issue that the Commission has , in fact , acknowledged , that has also been raised by Mr Jahr , and that we are going to include in the annual report that will be presented by the Committee on Petitions in the discussions regarding 2010 .
The situation is as follows , and we have the example of Damüls in the Alps , and also that of the Pyrenees : it is often the case that the time taken from the moment a complaint is made by some European citizens until it is resolved can be too long to resolve the issue without irreversible damage resulting .
I am referring to the ability that many Member States have to evade the European directive requiring an environmental impact assessment for public or private projects in very sensitive areas in the European ecosystem , such as the Alps in this case , or it could be the Pyrenees in Spain .
In this case , a project has been split up and divided to evade the directive , thus preventing any environmental impact assessment from being performed .
Ladies and gentlemen of the Commission , if you really accept that environmental impact assessments need to be strictly implemented , I think you have to react more quickly to stop projects going ahead despite reports that indicate that these projects need a prior environmental impact assessment .
Therefore , it is very important for us to change the time a complaint takes to be resolved and for the Committee on Petitions and the European Commission to work to shorten those times so that Member States do not evade the need to implement the Environmental Impact Assessment Directive .
It has been evaded in many Member States , as has already been mentioned here , not just in Austria .
In my country , Spain , we now have a project pending in the Pyrenees .
It is also a ski resort , in the Castanesa valley , and the Spanish state is going to do the same .
In this case , the responsible authorities in Aragon are going to split the project up in order to prevent the environmental impact assessment from taking place .
I believe that in both the European Parliament and in the European Commission , we have to work to speed up the procedure .
( DE ) Madam President , Commissioner Oettinger , ladies and gentlemen , the purpose of the environmental impact assessment is , in accordance with the precautionary principle , to determine and assess the direct impact of projects on the environment , but also their indirect effects .
Excluding planned development that is clearly linked to the project in geographical or other terms can only undermine the legal situation .
The European Court of Justice ruled back in 1996 that Member States must ensure that the aim of the directive cannot be circumvented by subdividing projects .
In its 2003 report on the application and effectiveness of the EIA Directive , the Commission found that the roots of the multiple problems that were hindering the effectiveness of the EIA provisions lay not necessarily in the implementation of the directive at national level , but rather in its practical application .
One of the recommendations formulated at the time was aimed specifically at those Member States , such as Austria , that had established binding thresholds .
It was recommended that where projects might possibly have a considerable environmental impact , appropriate screening should be carried out - particularly as regards sensitive areas and the possible cumulative impact of projects .
You mentioned the screening process in your introduction ; we are awaiting the results .
Austria 's citizens are increasingly protesting that too little consideration is given to their concerns .
The European Court of Justice has ruled that the individual act at national level must be sufficiently detailed and provide for adequate public participation .
What is the Commission 's assessment of this aspect in the Austrian act on environmental impact assessments ?
Criticism of the lack of public participation is something that can be heard in nearly all the Member States .
The current revision of the EIA Directive should also include a debate on a review of the uniform procedure for public participation which is actually laid down in the directive .
( DE ) Madam President , Commissioner , looking at the list of speakers , one might get the impression that the Community and also the Committee on Petitions is seen as some kind of supreme court in this process .
I would also like to say that these projects are not something from which we should be scoring political points .
We are talking here about a project in Damüls-Mellau .
These are two small communities .
The provincial government in Vorarlberg and the local administration tried to apply this Austrian law on the environment to the best of their ability .
I believe that there is no reason to reproach these authorities .
The legal question arises , however , as to how the Republic of Austria has transposed the EIA Directive .
Here , one must bear in mind that the legal traditions in Austria and also in the European Union vary widely .
I must point out to my fellow Member that I believe that Austria tried to do things properly .
In the course of this process , lawyers came to the opinion that a few mistakes may have been made .
I would like to emphasise once again that we are talking about just the last couple of percent here .
In this project , measures have been taken voluntarily to compensate for this , which seems to have been forgotten .
Substantial payments have been made .
That must also be stated .
Finally , we should probably also carry out a political appraisal .
Bearing in mind that compensatory measures have been carried out in this project , that an attempt has been made to put right any wrongdoing that may have taken place , then surely the project can be rubber-stamped .
Regrettably , at this juncture I must ask the Commission to treat everyone equally and to look outside our borders at some cases in other Member States where much greater damage is actually being done to natural resources .
The Commission should , however , proceed with a certain amount of circumspection here .
Such circumspection is particularly important in the area of environmental policy if it is to gain wider acceptance .
( DE ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to emphasise the aspect mentioned by the Commissioner that ' the national authorities have learnt from this ' , because I believe that the way the Austrian national government - and specifically the environment minister responsible - has proceeded with the amendment of the Austrian act on environmental impact assessments is to be seen as very positive and could be used as an example , as a benchmark , for many other cases with which many people are not as familiar .
Finally , however , I would like to give my support to the amended petition by Mr Jahr which calls for specific and effective tools to allow influence , monitoring and correction as far back as the planning and early stages of such projects .
( PT ) Madam President , I have some very brief observations which arise from this process .
Notwithstanding its positive aspects , the experience of the practical application of the environmental impact assessment ( EIA ) procedure also shows us that it can and should be improved .
It is important to look at analysis of projects ' cumulative impact in a different way , whether they are of the same type or are all different .
Too often , we cannot see the woods for the trees .
It is important to learn in a more complete way about the major and cumulative impact human activity has on nature .
Also , the post-EIA stage should merit closer attention : it is frequently neglected .
It is important to assess the extent to which predicted impacts are realised , how effective minimisation or compensation measures are , if there are any , and the extent to which they are or are not implemented .
Public environment authorities have a key role to play here and should be properly equipped to put it into effect .
Finally , the transparency of the procedure , and public participation and scrutiny thereof , are of crucial importance to ensuring , as far as possible , the transparency , quality and independence of the study .
( LT ) Madam President , today we are debating very specific issues about a specific country , but environmental impact assessments are still a rather complicated and difficult matter , both at national and international levels .
Probably the greatest problem is a crisis of confidence in society over the environmental impact assessment examinations carried out , that is , the fact that project operators carry out the examinations , etc .
The public should therefore be more actively involved in this process but , of course , we need to strike a balance , so that projects are not stopped without justification .
Another problem is the concept of post-project assessment , when certain things , including environmental impact analysis , are not mentioned and some side effects emerge later .
Yesterday , we voted in favour of the principle of independence in the impact assessment system .
This should also naturally be applied in environmental law , and when reviewing the Environmental Impact Assessment Directive , we should focus on precisely this issue .
( The speaker agreed to take a blue-card question under Rule 149 ( 8 ) )
( DE ) Madam President , it may be that I have misunderstood Mrs Morkūnaitė-Mikulėnienė , which is why I wanted to ask .
I believe that it is important for the rules that are currently in force to be followed .
We should not always be able to talk our way out of things by saying that we do not need to keep closely to the rules because of a change in circumstances .
Rules must always be followed to the letter and rightly so .
I would like to know whether you meant that the rules must be adhered to , regardless of the situation , and that people should not always be guided by the circumstances .
( LT ) Madam President , I would like to stress that it is very important to respect the rules , but there are cases where certain interest groups , perhaps manipulating public opinion , try to influence the implementation of certain projects .
However , as I have already underlined , autonomy , appropriate analysis and the independence of experts must be guaranteed , and everything should be done according to the rules , as provided for by legislation .

( DE ) Madam President , Mr Oettinger , ladies and gentlemen , this discussion once again highlights the fact that with regard to the whole area of the environment , we have a major communication problem .
The environment , the economy and regional interests are constantly being played off against one another .
This is where the big problem lies .
We need support from the Commission to ensure that the environment is seen as an essential aspect of the economy .
At the moment , far too little emphasis is being put on the fact that measures to protect the environment and the natural world can also create and safeguard jobs .
Currently , the discussion is always polarised : either nature or jobs .
We politicians have , unfortunately , also used this type of argument .
I am calling on everyone to work on raising awareness and to acknowledge on both sides that we need to preserve the environment in order for the economy to continue functioning effectively in future .
( CS ) Madam President , Austria once voted against the nuclear power plant in Zwentendorf in order to get rid of a regional chancellor , and in doing so created a structure unique in Europe - a model atomic power plant built on a scale of 1 : 1 .
I would say that this was an expensive experiment and that the Austrians should not make anyone in Europe go down the same path .
( DE ) Madam President , I am actually happy with the response , but I would just like to have some clarification on one point .
Under the current regulations , ski pistes only have to be included in the calculation of the thresholds when structural changes are planned during the development of the facility .
All the other areas used by skiers , fare dodgers or other people do not come into consideration .
I am of the opinion that the effects of using an area which has not been left in its natural state should be included .
One final , brief point : in one area of a Member State which we , Mr Oettinger , are both very familiar with , the Committee on Petitions has the option in selected cases to apply a blocking procedure .
I believe it would be a good thing for us to agree with the Commission and the Council that it is possible to put a freeze on proceedings if this is handled responsibly .
( The speaker agreed to take a blue-card question under Rule 149 ( 8 ) )

( DE ) Madam President , I would like to ask Mr Wieland again , as he is a lawyer , whether he now wants to include the mountain hikers and the ski mountaineers , who wear skis and who sometimes use the ski lifts so that they do not have to cover the entire distance on foot , and also people using other sporting equipment .
Will the whole Alpine region be subject to an environmental impact assessment ?
He should define the criteria more accurately and explain exactly what he means .
( DE ) Madam President , I would like to make one thing quite clear and to contradict the impression that has been given .
The natural world is not the property of the conservation organisations .
Nature is there to be used by the people .
Therefore , as has just been touched on , I am not of the opinion that Damüls-Mellau is a case where this blocking procedure should have been applied .
Member of the Commission . - ( DE ) Madam President , honourable Members , firstly , it must be clear to all of us that this case has not been handled correctly .
However , the reappraisal of the case will help us to make progress within Europe .
We have established that the thresholds were incorrectly applied , that no screening process was carried out and , therefore , that the environmental impact has not been assessed objectively enough .
Secondly , the Environmental Impact Assessment ( EIA ) Act in Austria needs to be amended or expanded to ensure that it corresponds with the European Union directives , in other words , with your requirements .
Thirdly , we believe it is important that , when other measures are taken in this region , whether these are additional car parks or other developments , a special screening of the entire project is carried out which includes existing developed areas and existing building projects .
You could say that the region is now under closer scrutiny .
Anyone who enjoys skiing , as I do , will know that at around 15 : 00 in the afternoon in this region , noise pollution seems to be a bigger problem than damage to the natural environment .
Of course , I do not mean that entirely seriously .
The Commission now has the option of initiating an infringement procedure .
We are not threatening to do this , but the option remains open to us .
Then we need to look in general terms at the revision of the EIA Directive .
What does Mr Potočnik have in mind ?
Firstly , this is all about incorporating new policy objectives , such as climate change , biodiversity , energy , trans-European networks and cohesion policy .
Secondly , the judgments of the Court of Justice of the European Union , which have resulted in an important clarification of the issue , must be included .
In answer to Mr Lichtenberger 's question , I would like to say that we have established that Austria 's EIA Act now meets the threshold requirements .
We are currently evaluating whether it is satisfactory in terms of transparency , civic participation and public consultation , both in form and in substance .
I can confirm that Mr Potočnik , the Commissioner for the Environment , will provide you with a comprehensive written answer during the next few weeks about whether it corresponds with the transparency and civic participation requirements of our directive .
I believe that this case and other findings will enable us to produce a satisfactory revision of the European directive next year .
Mr Wieland asked how the definition of the area should be regarded .
We will give you a written answer on this issue .
I believe that when a transport facility is built , we should include not only the area of land under the cable , in other words , not just the route of the lift , which is one metre wide and several thousand metres long .
On the other hand , the entire mountain should not be covered , although the fare dodgers are often the best skiers if they are on the black runs .
However , from a more detailed perspective , all the areas designated as pistes must be included .
In other words , any managed pistes and areas where snow making machines are used , in my opinion , belong to the developed area of the mountain and , therefore , have to fall within the threshold .
If necessary , this should be clearly defined during the revision of the directive .
How could we have influenced the process at an earlier stage ?
These discussions are , of course , taking place relatively late in the day , five years after permission to build was granted .
This is a fundamental problem because , under the terms of the Treaty , subsidiarity applies and the responsibility for implementing European law lies primarily with the Member States , which have to administer and enforce the law locally .
I hope that in Austria in particular , lessons will have been learnt from this case about taking a sensitive approach when weighing up the interests of the economy and the environment and , therefore , that the case will have a positive impact in future .
The debate is closed .
Misleading business directories ( debate )
The next item is the oral question to the Commission by Erminia Mazzoni and Malcolm Harbour , on behalf of the Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection , on misleading business directories ( Ο-000087 / 2011 - Β7-0315 / 2011 ) .
deputising for the author . - Madam President , two and a half years ago , I presented to this plenary a report on misleading business directories .
The message that this Parliament gave was clear : that there is a serious problem with fraudulent practices by misleading business directories , that tens of thousands of our small businesses , voluntary organisations , and even charities , are falling victim to these fraudulent practices , and that we need a concerted approach to stop once and for all such deceptive practices .
Two and a half years later , unfortunately , we are back here in plenary to discuss the same subject because there has been a serious lack of action to combat the problem of misleading business directories .
This is not acceptable .
Let me remind colleagues what we are talking about here .
Basically , what this involves is that a misleading business directory sends out a form , which appears to simply request people to update their own personal details or their business details , in return for what appears to be a free entry , a free listing in the business directory .
At first glance , one does not notice any cost , any payment that might result from filling in this form .
However , after submitting the form , victims receive a letter demanding payment of EUR 1 000 per year for three consecutive years .
If they do not pay , the misleading business directories resort to what are essentially bullying tactics : harassing telephone calls , threats of legal action and pursuit by debt collectors .
The most worrying thing is that such illegal tactics are being used under the very noses of the authorities of several Member States , who are well aware of these practices and have not taken any action to stop them .
The European City Guide , Construct Data , TEMDI , EU Business Services , World Business Directory , Expo Guide and DAD are still operating unabated .
The Commission has already stated that such misleading practices are against EU law , but it has not done enough to stop them .
This is why we are here today .
deputising for the author . - Madam President , the volume of complaints regarding misleading directory companies shows that this is a serious problem for SMEs .
Rogue business directory companies are both inflicting financial damage and harassing small companies .
In the period from 2003 to mid-2008 , nearly 14 000 complaints and enquiries were documented .
Hundreds of letters of complaint are still being received from new victims .
The difficulties involved in tracking down activities of this nature undermine the very functioning of the Internal Market .
Misleading practices are illegal under the Misleading and Comparative Advertising Directive and the Unfair Commercial Practices Directive .
But there is a lack of effective legal remedies and enforcement .
The Internal Market and Consumer Protection Committee , as the committee responsible for the legislation , has recently taken up this issue with the Dutch authorities , drawing their attention to fraudulent practices by a business directory company established in the Netherlands .
The answer of the Dutch authorities clearly shows that Member States are mostly concerned about what happens in their own territory .
I believe that given the cross-border nature of the problem , more cooperation between Member States on enforcement would also be absolutely crucial to stop the fraudulent practices .
The Commission could itself take a more active role in working together with the Member States on cross-border enforcement using existing EU-wide networks to facilitate cooperation between the Member States .
More emphasis should be placed on effective and dissuasive sanctions against such fraudulent practices in all Member States , which would put such directory companies out of business and enable those who run them to be punished .
It should be envisaged to extend the scope for the Unfair Commercial Practices Directive to encompass all commercial practices in a business-to-consumer relationship , whether aiming at the protection of consumers or competitors .
In that way , most if not all unfair business-to-business commercial practices in the retail sector would be covered and governed by the same set of rules as unfair business-to-consumer commercial practices , with which they generally overlap .
It is also important to help businesses combat the scam by improving access to information and awareness raising by improving redress mechanisms .
I wish to ask the Commissioner : what are the major obstacles for stronger involvement of state authorities in cross-border enforcement cooperation , and what measures does the Commission envisage in the fight against rogue directory companies ?
Member of the Commission . - ( DE ) Madam President , honourable Members , the Commission shares the European Parliament 's concerns and misgivings and its critical analysis of this issue .
The misleading practices of business directories are causing problems for numerous companies .
Three years ago , we commissioned a survey and received thousands of complaints .
We can only assume that this is just the tip of the iceberg , which means that the number of businesses that feel they have been misled could be many times greater .
Mrs Reding , the Commissioner responsible for justice , fundamental rights and citizenship , is currently collecting data in order to establish the scope of the problem .
I want to emphasise the fact that practices of this kind are already banned under the terms of Directive 2006 / 114 / EC concerning misleading and comparative advertising and of anti-fraud legislation in the various Member States .
However , some of these fraudulent practices take place across national borders and are used in business transactions between different companies and , as things currently stand , it is difficult to prosecute the perpetrators .
In order to address and resolve this problem , Mrs Reding plans to issue a communication by the end of the year which will report on the status of the implementation of the existing directive concerning misleading and comparative advertising and on the current opportunities for revising it and which will provide an evaluation of the situation .
She is considering improving the content and looking at the conclusions to be drawn from misleading practices .
She is also focusing on how the cooperation between the national authorities on the prosecution of cross-border cases can be improved .
She also plans to propose that citizens and companies should be made more aware of the growing problem of misleading business directories and to highlight the need for more public relations activities in this area .
The 2006 directive has been implemented by all the Member States .
Nevertheless , the Commission has asked the Member States to inform us about the implementation and the measures they have taken and to submit a status report as soon as possible , before the planned communication is issued .
This process was supported by a conference organised at the end of May by the Commission involving national authorities , interest groups and independent experts .
The conference focused on the fraudulent practices of business directories and , in particular , cross-border activities .
During the debate , it became clear that better and more systematic cooperation between the authorities in the Member States is needed and this will be incorporated into Mrs Reding 's communication at the end of the year .
I can assure you that we see this issue as being just as urgent as you do .
This is why we want to take the next steps as quickly as possible .
However , for formal reasons , we must ensure that those businesses which are affected are involved in an appropriate way and , therefore , we need the time to do this .
On the basis of the results of the consultation process and after examining all the arguments , the Commission intends to take further corrective measures to prevent misleading and illegal cross-border practices .
Thank you very much for your broad support on this matter .
Mr President , Commissioner , no one could disagree with what you have said .
I wish to relate the trouble suffered by a fellow Greek , who complained to me about a similar misadventure as the result of misleading advertising and gave me all the relevant documents .
It says at the top of the letter sent out by the misleading company that the information is free of charge .
Seeing that he had to enter certain information , my fellow countryman entered the information and sent off the letter .
In tiny print at the bottom of the letter , it said , as Mr Busuttil said earlier , that he had to pay EUR 1 000 a year .
Some time after that , the alleged legal department of the company sent out letters , which I have here , asking my fellow countryman to pay EUR 3 529.38 , which apparently included interest and the company 's legal costs .
Commissioner , obviously , there is a legislative framework .
However , we do not know if these directives are being applied and have been adequately transposed by the Member States .
The Stockholm programme says that we need to address these issues directly .
We stand next to our fellow citizens ; we are involved in their day-to-day problems .
Our fellow citizens need to understand that we are not in some far off place , that we do not deal only with major European issues .
We are with them in their day-to-day lives .
We need to resolve this issue immediately .
on behalf of the S & D Group . - ( SK ) Madam President , it is clear , first and foremost , that these companies are not only misleading , but are also fraudulent .
Entrepreneurship is meaningful insofar as it contributes to society as a whole , but if someone engages in pseudo-business in order to lure other , honest traders and companies to a directory purely for the sake of their own enrichment , and in doing so uses subterfuge , this is downright fraud , no matter how much they protest that they are not doing anything illegal .
Nor should we lose sight of the fact that these directory company practices clearly are outside the law according to the directive on misleading and comparative advertising .
Nevertheless , there is no need to introduce new legislation .
Rather , we should be concentrating on applying the law in practice as quickly and effectively as possible .
The problem is that these companies often swoop on undertakings in another EU Member State , and these frequently small family businesses either do not have the knowledge or the ability to put up a legal defence , or find that it will cost them a lot of money and effort .
I have only one additional question : does the Commission believe there is scope for a public campaign to name the individual companies involved and call on honest business not to associate with them ?
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Madam President , I would say to the Commissioner that over the last number of years , I have met many Irish citizens who have been victims of misleading business directory companies .
For example , I met a school secretary who paid over EUR 2 000 because the school could not afford to pay it as she felt responsible because she had signed the form .
She also felt very foolish .
She thought nobody could be so stupid as to do what she had done , not realising of course that this happens to people all the time .
I met an elderly lady whose husband was a taxi driver .
She received a form on which there were some errors .
She merely thought she was correcting the errors , sent the form back and subsequently received threatening letters for two years .
She was terrorised by those letters to the extent that she was afraid to open the letter when it arrived at her door .
I could not tell her not to pay the money .
All I could say was that if I were in her position , I would not pay the money .
That was the best advice I could give her .
There are lots of other examples , which I know you have heard .
The truth is that citizens expect to be protected by European legislation and they cannot understand why European legislation does not protect them in this respect .
There is an ambiguity here .
As I said , I tell citizens that I believe that they are protected , but I cannot guarantee it .
It is my understanding , for example , that one of these companies was convicted in one region of Spain , and yet all it did was simply move to another region and continue its work .
One of the matters that concerns citizens is that they are not sure of how legal systems operate in other countries .
They may feel that within their own Member State they will be protected , but they are not sure what happens in another Member State .
Equally , if these companies move outside the EU , they also have concerns about that .
It is good to hear , therefore , that the Commission shares our concern and that it is pushing for cooperation between Member States and again looking at cross-border cases and trying to inform citizens and companies .
Commissioner , you said the situation was urgent , but it has been urgent for a very , very long time .
Citizens see many areas where EU legislation impacts on their lives , and so they cannot understand why they are not protected from fraudulent companies .
I would ask you , Commissioner , to understand that the word ' urgent ' means ' now ' .
on behalf of the ECR Group . - Madam President , I absolutely agree with what Mrs Harkin has just said .
In my constituency in Scotland , it is the elderly and people who run bed-and-breakfast establishments or self-catering holiday cottages that fall foul of this criminal activity .
They enter addresses into this directory and then receive a bill for a thousand euro .
The elderly are terrified when they get these threatening letters from the supposedly legal representatives of these companies .
This is a cross-border criminal activity .
These companies give their identities and they give their addresses .
We have to track them down , close them down , prosecute them and protect the citizens of the European Union .
When any member of the public contacts me in my constituency , I simply say to them to write back to the company and tell it to send all future correspondence to me .
They never hear another thing .
However , these people must also be imprisoned .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - Madam President , this motion is badly needed .
Even though we have the 2006 directive , it is plain that it is not working as well as it should .
The companies we have heard of exist solely to swindle unsuspecting and sometimes over-stretched organisations , and I find that particularly outrageous when they are damaging community enterprises , often with limited budgets .
Using tactics like those of bully-boys and racketeers , they dangle promises in front of unsuspecting people , but I think the message has got to be that if an offer seems to be too good to be true , then most probably it is .
These companies are like predatory sharks and they should be stopped .
Certainly , our group welcomes this resolution , it is very timely and we will be supporting it , as it calls on the Commission to require Member States to adequately enforce the directive .
on behalf of the EFD Group . - Madam President , I know the European City Guide best and , in spite of attempts to close it down , this menace continues .
In the UK in May 2008 , the Misleading Marketing Regulations came into force .
They outlaw using the small print of any document to hide the true cost of a service .
So the Office of Fair Trading can now take action against UK companies , but there is a serious drawback .
The OFT does not have jurisdiction to tackle any scams from elsewhere , including from other Member States , so the problem continues and I continue to receive my share of complaints .
More to the point , while they may operate elsewhere due to lax policing , why can my own government not prevent what comes from mainland Europe ?
The answer to that lies at the heart of this useless EU , which has demolished national frontiers .
The free movement of people , goods and services provides perfect cover for the people traffickers , the terrorists and for threatening , traumatising scams aimed at fleecing the unwary .
( FR ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , we can summarise in figures the situation regarding misleading business directories that are supposed to be free .
Four hundred petitions have been sent to the European Parliament 's Committee on Petitions .
Fifty thousand very small businesses , associations or organisations have been affected and harassed into paying .
An average of EUR 1 000 is required to be paid over three years for unwanted contracts , as Mr Busuttil has already mentioned .
These figures only partly reflect the suffering of the victims of these scams .
These people are already taking risks by starting up their company , and quickly have to face the challenges of business , the economic crisis and the uncertainties of the future .
We must prevent them from being subjected to these fraudulent practices , which they do not have the financial or human resources to resist .
Several proposals are possible : firstly , we must put a stop to these scams that are weakening our economy .
To do so , Commissioner , it would be advisable to speed up the revision of the Misleading and Comparative Advertising Directive , in light of the fact that fraudulent advertising is increasing and becoming more sophisticated .
We should then create a blacklist of these companies , serving as a reference based on the principle of ' naming and shaming ' .
With help from the national authorities responsible for fighting fraud and from the affected businesses , we could have a simple and effective tool for deterrence and prevention .
Finally , we must severely punish those involved in this system .
The penalties and fines incurred are often lower than the amounts collected in these scams .
We should encourage Member States to be stricter in this area .
( DE ) Madam President , Mr Oettinger , the Commission shares the European Parliament 's concerns .
This is very nice , but we have been waiting for years for the Commission to take action and to make some genuine progress in this area .
We have Mr Busuttil 's report in front of us .
In the last parliamentary term , the Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection repeatedly highlighted the fact that we finally need to do something to help people .
The problem is that people are still waiting for this help to arrive .
Many of the small voluntary organisations that are affected do not have the financial means or the chutzpah to defend themselves .
Only last week I received another letter asking : ' How can I defend myself ?
I do not have the money for a lawyer , so I cannot take legal proceedings ' .
I believe that we must finally give the citizens of Europe an effective means of ridding themselves of this problem .
Madam President , dodgy scams , which are fraudulent in nature and prey on small businesses using a veil of legitimacy - often with Europe in their titles - must be made illegal .
These scams do not just damage small businesses , which are threatened , harassed and bullied into paying fees for something they believed to be free ; they damage the European Union when we do not take firm action to help .
It is the mantra of the European Commission , after all , to ' think small first ' , yet I have been raising this issue , as many colleagues have said , for many , many years , and yet no direct action has been taken : why not ?
We hear about surveys , information gatherings , and stakeholder meetings .
We need action not words , and if we say that we will only wait to the end of this year , or give it another few years , then that is just too little too late : we must act now .
So , given the nature of these scams and their EU-wide and cross-border nature , will the Commission consider introducing a form of legal aid to assist SMEs in tackling these scams ?
These types of scams will continue until the Commission takes tough action .
Madam President , the European Parliament has received hundreds of petitions from small businesses across the EU who claim to have fallen victim to these schemes .
While paying these outrageous fees may put innocent companies under severe financial hardship , the victims are often too small to afford the legal costs of bringing actions against these directory companies .
These companies often target victims that are based in another Member State .
This creates legal uncertainty for the victims , as they often do not know what the legal status is of such contracts in another country .
The directory companies play on that uncertainty .
Whilst the Commission has clearly stated that the directive on misleading and comparative advertising outlaws the misleading practices of these directory companies , it must also look at the transposing of that directive by the Member States in order to clarify whether citizens are protected equally across Europe .
The fact that this directive has been transposed by Member States does not necessarily mean that these measures are either comprehensive or in conformity with one another .
( EL ) Madam President , unfair commercial practices are like water .
As soon as they find a crack , in they go .
They have found two cracks here .
One crack is the 2006 directive , which has already been mentioned ; the other crack is the regulation on cooperation between the Member States .
Commissioner , as you have the support of all the factions in Parliament , of the entire Parliament , you should act quickly , because time is money .
As my fellow Members have already said , at least three years have passed , three years during which these people , these hustlers , as they have rightly been called by numerous fellow Members - and I am with them - are misleading colleagues and are misleading small and medium-sized enterprises , which are the backbone of the European economy .
You need to act and to act quickly .
( FR ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , it is indeed vital to know whether the directive on misleading and comparative advertising has been properly transposed and applied in the Member States .
However , we must also quickly and fully address other fundamental aspects of this problem , which can also be applied to other forms of cross-border scams .
Firstly , the Commission , Member States and their organisations must provide consumers with information upstream .
It is unacceptable that more and more citizens are being scammed .
Secondly , victims should have access to class actions in order to assert their rights .
We have been waiting for these actions for over 20 years .
Thirdly , the current discussion on the reform of alternative dispute resolutions could also include provisions to deal with these scams .
Commissioner , we expect you to take swift and concrete measures in this regard .
Madam President , the position is exactly as colleagues have pointed out .
I know this because in my own constituency , particularly in Cork , a company called the European City Guide has been fraudulently engaging with businesses all over the place .
Despite the fact that , as I understand it , it was asked to cease trading by the high court in Catalonia in 2001 and was found to be guilty of misleading practices in the Belgian courts and by the United Kingdom Office of Fair Trading , it continues to trade .
This is not good enough .
It is very important that we do two things : firstly , we have to try and raise awareness amongst businesses right across Europe to ensure they are vigilant and do not fall foul of these misleading companies and , secondly , we have to bring in legislation that ensures that , when they are taken to court , they either cease trading or are put behind bars .
It is as simple as that .
( CS ) Madam President , Parliament has received over 400 petitions , and I myself have received many complaints from businesses , non-profit organisations , schools , charities and even government institutions which have become victims of the fraud perpetrated by business directory companies .
They make costly financial commitments in the belief that they are updating their information .
The operations of rogue directory companies are deliberately managed across borders or from third countries .
We need a clear pan-European solution , but the European Commission , which holds the legislative initiative , has done nothing for years , despite all the efforts of the European Parliament .
In my role as shadow rapporteur , I have put forward numerous solutions in Parliament 's report .
In reality , all the Commission need do is propose blacklisting these prohibited deceptive advertising practices under the relevant directive .
We need a robust European legislative solution , and we need it quickly .
I urge the Commission to apply the accelerated legislative procedure .
Many honest citizens have lost a lot of money because of the Commission 's blameworthy laxity in this case .
In my opinion , a Europol investigation is also warranted .
( CS ) Madam President , the unfair practices of some of these so-called business directory companies continue to pose a serious problem .
Their operations always rely primarily on circumventions of the law and on very poor law enforcement .
Many entities are deterred from taking legal action by the cost .
Conversely , there have been many instances of absurd judgments based on the formalistic approach taken by judicial and other supervisory bodies .
What these swindlers mostly rely on , however , is the poor level of legal knowledge among the institutions responsible and , regrettably , their lack of willingness and courage in many cases , and a certain indolence .
Their formalistic interpretation of the law allows them to avoid getting involved , to avoid prosecuting these cases , and to wash their hands of them .
Paradoxically , it is then the swindlers ' interests that are protected rather than their victims .
The question put to the Commission rightly asks how the Member States approach this issue .
How have they applied the directive on misleading and comparative advertising ?
Unless the state plays an active and not just a formal role , this problem will remain truly intractable and the petitions from defrauded victims will accumulate .
And yet we are not powerless in this matter .

( DE ) Madam President , Mr Oettinger , the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) strongly supports the move to free small and medium-sized businesses from the menace of business directories , which allegedly provide a service for these companies , but which ultimately do not have any real consequences except invoices .
However , as you , Mr Oettinger , have rightly said , Directive 2006 / 114 / EC provides a legal basis for this which has obviously not been successfully implemented in some Member States .
Therefore , I hope that the Commission will tackle the root of the problem and take a systematic approach to resolving it as quickly as possible in the Member States where the situation is particularly bad .
Of course , because of the cross-border nature of the entries , the problem can spill over from these Member States into other neighbouring countries .
A broad-brush approach will not work in this case because it is clear that the problem lies with certain Member States .
( RO ) Madam President , business directories are one of the most widely used sources of information about the offerings available in a particular business sector .
They enjoy a high standing among European consumers thanks to their prestige .
This is why misleading business directories cause harm to the people who use them .
This practice can be ended by implementing the directive on misleading and comparative advertising properly .
Unfortunately , not all Member States have transposed this text into their legislation .
This means that the victims cannot be compensated for the harm they have suffered .
Revising the directive would provide the instruments needed to combat this practice .
Supplementing EU legislation with specific provisions would also limit the appearance of misleading business directories .
I think that the victims of these practices must have the opportunity to have direct recourse to the justice system .
( DE ) Madam President , Mr Oettinger , ladies and gentlemen , it seems to me that this is really a European problem .
Everyone is familiar with these cases and we are hearing stories from a number of different countries .
I have a whole stack of these cases on my desk and I admit that I would have fallen for most of them .
The problem is , and we have covered this on numerous occasions , we have Directive 2006 / 114 / EC , we discussed the matter in 2008 in the Committee on Petitions , and we have held debates here in plenary , but the problem is continuing and even growing in size .
Mr Oettinger , I heard what you said at the beginning and I have the impression that the problem has landed with you .
Perhaps a new Commissioner will have a new opportunity to take action in this area .
I would like to ask you to take the problem seriously .
It may seem to be a small problem , but it has a serious economic impact and it affects small , medium-sized and family-run companies in particular and they form the backbone of our national economies and our society .
If we do not succeed in stopping this in all the Member States and in implementing the directive uniformly and effectively throughout Europe , even greater damage will be caused .
Member of the Commission . - ( DE ) Madam President , honourable Members , I am grateful for the wide-ranging and consistent description of the situation given by the committed Members who are here today .
I will inform Mrs Reding about this and encourage her to draw up a comprehensive communication covering the strengths and the weaknesses of current European and national law and to revise the directive on this basis .
It is clear that the 2006 directive has been implemented by the Member States .
Therefore , this is not primarily a problem of adapting national law .
Firstly , in the event of cross-border problems , the law is often not even applied in many cases , as a result of the less than ideal cooperation between the authorities in the different Member States , and , therefore , these cases are not investigated at all .
Secondly , there is often a failure to prosecute .
Criminal law is a matter for the Member States , both in terms of setting penalties and of formal investigations of these cases by the authorities , public prosecutors or the courts .
Thirdly , and now I am coming to the heart of the matter , the 2006 directive only covers unfair practices in business dealings between businesses and consumers and not between one business and another .
This means that it mainly provides protection for private citizens against these fraudulent companies .
It does not protect citizens who are entrepreneurs , sole traders , retailers , businesspeople and tradesmen or who own small or medium-sized businesses against this type of fraud .
However , it is precisely this point , extending the scope of the directive to include business dealings between companies , which was opposed by the majority of the Member States during the legislative process at the time .
This means that we quite deliberately restricted ourselves on the basis of this directive to European regulation of dealings between fraudulent companies and citizens and not between fraudulent companies and small businesses .
European regulation of the issue which you are rightly complaining about on the basis of practical experience was not wanted at the time .
The directive was an ambitious European project and , at the time , the Commission was concerned that the whole proposal would be sabotaged and that there would be no directive at all if it had insisted on extending the directive beyond the relationship between fraudsters and citizens .
In the light of the specific examples you have mentioned here and the cases of abuse uncovered by the Commission , it may be possible to broaden the scope of the directive beyond the relationship between fraudulent companies and citizens in the revision which is due to take place next year .
We will start work on this immediately .
Finally , there are Member States which have satisfactory provisions under substantive and criminal law covering the relationship between fraudsters and citizens and which prosecute cases of this kind .
Good examples include Austria , Belgium and France .
There are other Member States , and you have referred to some of them here , where the national regulations are not adequate .
We must wait and see whether these Member States will be prepared in the Council in a year 's time to vote in favour of a general , EU-wide , standardised regulation to protect citizens who are also businesspeople .
I have received one motion for a resolution from the Committee on Petitions tabled in accordance with Rule 115 ( 5 ) of the Rules of Procedure .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place today at 12 : 00 .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
The problem is real , unfortunately very widespread and can be observed almost across the whole European Union .
The victims sign a contract in good faith to be advertised in a business directory after having been led to believe that this would be free of charge .
Then the operators require payment on different grounds , and continuously harass , put under psychological stress and even threaten with legal action those who do not pay up .
A review as to whether the corresponding Union law is effectively implemented by Member States is inevitable in order to avoid further misleading advertising and , if necessary , a new amendment of the relevant Union law should be proposed in order to solve the current problem .
The most important thing now is to demonstrate to the enterprises in trouble that we not only understand their plight but also fully support them .
At the same time , it is imperative to ask misleading business directory companies to cease and desist their deliberately misleading business activities , because they are contrary to the spirit of the Union 's competition policy .
Stress tests of nuclear power plants in EU and nuclear safety in EU neighbourhood countries ( debate )
The next item is the Commission statement on stress tests of nuclear power plants in EU and nuclear safety in EU neighbouring countries .
Member of the Commission . - ( DE ) Madam President , honourable Members , following numerous meetings with various parliamentary committees , I can report to you today on the progress of our ambitious plan to introduce a Europe-wide stress test for nuclear power stations in the European Union and in other countries .
We proposed to the Council that the safety of all the nuclear power stations in the EU should be investigated on the basis of a comprehensive risk and safety evaluation and the Council reached a decision on this at the end of March .
The European Nuclear Safety Regulators Group ( ENSREG ) and the Commission were asked to draw up the criteria , the methodology and the timeframe for carrying out the stress tests .
This was not an easy process and we received comments of all kinds on our efforts .
I can tell you today that we now have in place the test criteria , the methodology and the timeframe , which , in my opinion , will meet the expectations of European citizens with regard to this stress test .
( Heckling from Mr Turmes )
Simply saying ' Rubbish ' is not an argument , Mr Turmes .
' Rubbish ' is not a word that we like to see in the Minutes , but if it makes you happy , then I will accept it .
In any case , we had a tough struggle .
Firstly , many of the nuclear safety regulators were not prepared to agree to a European inspection procedure .
This is because the energy mix is a matter for the Member States and because the monitoring , authorisation and supervision of nuclear power plants also falls within the remit of the Member States .
I believe that the fact that we are carrying out a stress test at a European level with joint criteria is an extremely important and historic step forwards in the interest of the safety of all European citizens .
I can assure you that I will not allow a watered-down version of the stress test to be used .
When the outcome of the stress test is presented to the public , with all the results , evaluations , proposals and conclusions , the citizens of Europe will know more about European nuclear power stations in all the Member States than they have done despite all the efforts made over past decades .
I remember very well how people living in areas close to national borders wanted to find out about the safety features of nearby nuclear power stations .
This was often very unsatisfactory from the perspective of the citizens .
In six or nine months , we will have significantly more data , facts and findings at our disposal than have been made public over the last twenty years .
The stress test consists of three stages .
( Heckling from Mrs Harms )
Given the early hour , let us take a serious approach this morning , Mrs Harms .
Please trust me to remain objective .
When we discuss this subject , I feel as if I am being criticised by both sides .
As the worldly-wise person in the middle , I know I am in the right place .
I said ' in the middle ' , Mrs Harms .
I did not say anything about mediocrity .
Please listen carefully .
I believe that my position will meet your expectations when it comes to objectivity .
Stage 1 : In a market economy , the main responsibility of the owners and operators of industrial plants is undoubtedly to ensure themselves that their facilities are safe , to carry out regular safety inspections and to report the results .
For this reason , during the first stage , every operator of a nuclear power plant has been asked since 1 June to submit a report to the national authorities using the agreed European inspection criteria , our inspection catalogue , which is public and transparent .
The reports must be submitted quickly , but they must be thorough , and thoroughness is more important than speed .
They must include the operators ' evaluation of their own nuclear power plant and the conclusions drawn by the operators on the basis of the inspection criteria and the consequences of Fukushima .
Stage 2 : This consists of another review by the national nuclear safety regulators of the reports produced by the operators and an evaluation of the regulators ' own inspections and findings .
Stage 3 is new and is made up of peer reviews .
During the third stage , we intend to gain our own picture of the situation , make our own evaluation and draw our own conclusions at a European level .
We will not be sitting in our ivory tower and we will not be naively accepting the results provided by the national authorities .
We will be using mixed European teams and we will have the option of visiting the nuclear power plants ourselves .
The European teams will be made up of nuclear experts from the various Member States and Commission officials .
Every step , in particular , in the context of the peer reviews , can only be taken on the basis of agreement between the Commission and ENSREG , which means that without the Commission 's agreement , the process cannot be completed .
This is why I can assure you that a serious , objective and thorough approach is very important to me .
Everything that happens will be transparent .
Only in cases where security interests require confidentiality will a lower level of transparency be permitted .
I believe that the test criteria cover the main expectations and legitimate interests of the public in Europe .
They include all natural phenomena , such as high water , extremes of heat and cold , earthquakes and other things .
They involve all the nature-related risks .
Secondly , I am more convinced than ever that although the starting point of the Fukushima disaster was a natural event , this was not the sole cause of the disaster .
In my opinion , human failure played a significant if not a decisive role in Japan before the earthquake and the tsunami , when it came to improving safety and modernising the plant , and after the disaster with regard to keeping the damage to a minimum .
This is why for me the human factor was an important component of the stress test .
At first , I was not given adequate support on this issue by the nuclear regulators .
I am grateful that Parliament and , in particular , the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy and the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety were behind me .
For this reason , I incorporated their expectations into the negotiations .
We have ensured that the human factor is widely represented in the test criteria .
I would like to make a very specific distinction here .
We have made sure that the human factor and human failure are fully covered in the test criteria .
By this we mean an error , a lack of qualifications , poor management of a nuclear power station or a pilot error leading to an aircraft crashing .
This means that human issues and human failure are fully represented in the stress test .
( Heckling from Mr Turmes )
Mr Turmes , you seem to believe that you can run the parliamentary proceedings with your heckling .
Please allow me to finish what I have to say .
You will have enough speaking time afterwards .
( Applause and heckling )
I would like to explain to the honourable Member that this subject is so important that I should have at least seven to eight minutes speaking time .
Anyway , they are your Rules of Procedure .
If you want more speaking time , Parliament itself can decide on this .
You are a Member of Parliament and I am not .
The subject of human error is fully covered .
However , one area which was not included is crime .
By this I mean that deliberate attacks on nuclear power stations , perhaps by terrorists , in whatever form , including cyber attacks and attacks by aircraft , do not form part of the stress test .
There are two reasons for this .
The first is purely formal .
The nuclear safety regulators in many of the Member States are not technically responsible for this area and referred the Commission to the responsibilities of the secret service , the police , the air force , the army and the domestic authorities .
Therefore , we will now invite the Member States to send representatives from the relevant authorities to us so that we can discuss with these authorities before the summer recess how we can incorporate the consequences of crime .
The second reason is that the Member States raised the issue of confidentiality and put forward strong arguments in support of this , which meant that the discussions could not be transparent .
We want to submit an interim report in November .
I will be happy to enter into further formal discussions with Parliament before the peer review takes place .
There is one point which we need to be clear about : thoroughness is more important than speed .
I do not agree with the short timeframe which some Member States felt was adequate for the special tests .
I do not believe that we can do justice to the test criteria that are so important to us in the space of four to six weeks .
Therefore , we may need a period which runs into spring of next year .
As far as other issues are concerned , please remember that I am not concerned with the question of whether nuclear power stations are being operated , planned , constructed or shut down .
That is the responsibility of the Member States according to my understanding of the law .
However , I do feel that I am responsible for safety both with regard to power stations that are in operation and those that are being planned .
For this reason , I am grateful that our invitation was accepted on a working level and that Ukraine , Russia , Switzerland , Armenia , Croatia and Turkey agreed to take the next step of a joint European stress test , which will allow a safety investigation to be carried out beyond the borders of the European Union .
I look forward to reporting the results to you as soon as possible .
In addition , I would like to explain that I will also be concerned over the next few months with drawing up strict and objective legal regulations governing nuclear waste .
I was rather surprised that the committee did not categorically exclude the possibility of exporting waste to third countries by a large majority .
( Heckling )
I would like to explain to the honourable Member that I am here in my role of Commissioner .
My party membership is a private matter .
Please make a distinction between Mr Oettinger , the former Christian Democrat , and Commissioner Oettinger .
Therefore , I can say as a Commissioner that I was surprised that restrictions were imposed on export bans by a clear majority .
Perhaps it would still be possible to change this during the process of reaching a parliamentary decision by the end of June .
( Applause )

Madam President , Mr Oettinger , firstly , I would like to thank you very much , Mr Oettinger .
In contrast to those people whose fine words just cause uncertainty , you have made sure that something actually happens .
That is what makes a difference in politics .
It is really starting to get on my nerves , to be quite blunt about it , that some Members of Parliament are constantly demanding more and more , but are not prepared to make a contribution themselves .
Mrs Harms , we have failed in Parliament .
We did not even manage to adopt a resolution on the subject of safety because you wanted 150 % and were not satisfied with what was actually possible as a result of the various responsibilities involved .
We have not done our job and neither have you .
However , the Commissioner has done his job .
Six months ago , we would not have expected to have the opportunity to carry out a stress test of this kind .
We would never have believed that it would be possible to enter into discussions with states outside Europe on the subject of safety .
It is easy to go around shouting about how dreadful everything is and focusing solely on the question of the exit from nuclear power , in other words , all or nothing .
It is more difficult but more beneficial for the people of Europe to make progress in this area .
What Mr Oettinger has achieved over the last few months is an example to us all .
I am not trying to say that everything is exactly how we wanted it .
We will only be able to tell at the end if this is what we wanted .
Mrs Harms and Mr Turmes , it is simply not acceptable to spend your time permanently complaining and heckling and then , when you are called on to do something , to vote against better safety levels for nuclear power plants .
The resolution was here on the table and you voted against it .
You weakened the position of Parliament and of the Commission , when we wanted to improve the safety of European nuclear power stations .
That is a fact .
I have had enough of this constant hypocrisy .
It is dishonest and it does not allow us to make progress .
Of course the situation is complicated , but everyone is familiar with the legal position .
It is naïve to believe that we can do what we want .
There is a very specific legal position which we have to follow .
The things that have been achieved here within that framework are very interesting and important .
You may think that the endless heckling is funny , but it does not get us anywhere .
( Applause )
( The speaker agreed to take a blue-card question under Rule 149 ( 8 ) )
( DE ) Madam President , Mr Reul , I will explain in my speech later why we are not satisfied , but I have the impression that you have not yet properly digested what your Chancellor and your party in Germany have now decided .
( DE ) Madam President , once again , all this was obviously not about moving forward one millimetre or three metres on this subject , but about party political disputes .
We can do this .
We made much more progress on this resolution in Parliament across all the party boundaries than we have done now .
For me , it is highly regrettable that we are once again fighting over the question of yes or no .
You know that I personally hold a very individual view on this issue but I have been prepared to compromise and to find common ground in Parliament in order to improve the safety of European nuclear power stations in their current locations , which is where they are likely to stay .
It is our job to achieve results for the people of Europe and not just to make explanations .
( The speaker agreed to take a blue-card question under Rule 149 ( 8 ) )
( DE ) Madam President , Mr Reul , I take seriously your call for objectivity and honesty in our dealings with one another .
Therefore , I would like to ask why you sound so aggressive and why you are accusing the Members of the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance of hypocrisy .
You have used the ridiculous argument that a year ago , it would not have been possible to push through a stress test of this kind .
However , you did not explain to Parliament that the only reason that this was not possible was because you , Mr Reul , and those on your side prevented it .
We had this problem before Fukushima .
If we all want safety , then the right thing to do is to show a permanent commitment to safety and not just when there has been a core meltdown in three reactors .
( DE ) Madam President , firstly , the reason why I reacted so strongly is that I am still annoyed that we have not managed to adopt a joint resolution on safety , because it was more important for some people to take up an absolutist position rather than to find common ground .
Secondly , I explained during the debate and I will explain once again that I have learned a lesson from this .
I now realise that we need to do more to introduce tougher safety standards for European nuclear power stations .
We need to exert more pressure and show more initiative .
This is why I supported the joint resolution and this is why I am in favour of supporting Mr Oettinger and not constantly attacking him .
( The speaker agreed to take a blue-card question under Rule 149 ( 8 ) )

Madam President , I would like to say to Mr Reul that there was a time when power from unsafe nuclear plants was considered to be dirty and not to be bought by responsible EU states .
Those nuclear plants that are now intended to be built on the EU 's eastern borders belong to that exact category as their technology has not been experimented with before in more distant places .
The assurances that they will be safe are only empty assurances .
What does he think if Germany , refusing to build nuclear plants on its own territory , accepts their being built at our borders and buys this ' dirty ' power ?
What kind of a picture of solidarity and morals is that ?
( DE ) Madam President , Mr Landsbergis , I am sorry , but I cannot answer the question .
I cannot speak on behalf of the German Government .
However , I believe that you are right when you say that not only must we deal carefully with the subject of the safety of European nuclear power stations , but that we must also take responsibility for influencing the construction and the condition of other power stations , in as far as we can .
Mr Oettinger has said that he is making every effort to promote the stress tests and possible changes in the directives in other areas of the world and is committed to ensuring that these higher safety standards are adopted .
In this respect , I think that your remarks are justified .
Madam President , Mr Reul , you are the chair of the committee .
Ladies and gentlemen , let us all calm down a little .
Commissioner , in the meeting that we had on the day before your meeting with the European Nuclear Safety Regulators Group ( ENSREG ) , my group explained to you what our position on this question was .
Now I must tell you we are not totally satisfied .
Why is this ?
This is so because we believe that the stress tests should have been made obligatory .
However , we are pleased to hear that the 143 European nuclear plants are going to be subject to the stress tests , and we also support the Commission in its efforts to persuade third countries to re-evaluate their plants as well .
Furthermore , we are not satisfied because we believe that stress tests , which , in fact , are going to be carried out by the operators themselves , should be subjected to a second opinion in order to ensure greater objectivity .
The peer review method , involving seven experts , is one step .
However , our group 's proposal was to create an independent control mechanism which was supposed to operate from the outset and not in the later results analysis phase .
We also think that the tests should be carried out on other facilities , such as research reactors , and in respect of other threats , such as the fallout from a terrorist attack or a plant 's structural weaknesses .
We are conscious of the competition issues that have arisen but we think that a better agreement could have been reached .
Carrying out a risk analysis now is an appropriate but isolated measure .
Therefore , to guarantee maximum safety , my group proposes that an independent organisation be created at a European level that would assume responsibility for safety and control .
Finally , Commissioner , I would like to say to you that what we hope for now is consistency , so that reactors that do not pass the tests and that cannot remedy their deficiencies are closed , and transparency , so that all citizens have complete information about the test procedure and results .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Madam President , this is not an internal German issue , but a European issue .
It is vital that nuclear facilities across Europe are both safe and seen to be safe .
The mistakes of the first banking stress test must therefore not be repeated ; we do not need another pointless PR exercise .
It is the responsibility of the Commission to make sure that the stress tests are conducted in a solid , transparent and comprehensive manner and that they have real consequences .
If a plant fails the test and if the issues raised cannot be remedied , it should be shut down .
The proposed stress tests are , however , too weak .
The ALDE Group has called for the entire safety culture and the human factor to be included in the test .
This is unfortunately not the case .
I sincerely hope that the Commission finds another way forward to test the safety culture .
For instance , I expect the Commission to put forward proposals as part of the revision of the nuclear safety directive to remedy these problems .
This includes the issues that you raised , Commissioner , of security in respect of decommissioning and waste .
The stress test also lacks clear wording on the need for the independence and transparency of the tests .
There will be a peer review , with representatives from Member States other than the one where the concerned nuclear plant is situated , but they will not necessarily be fully independent .
That is a problem .
These are all problems for the credibility of the tests , but the stress tests are only the beginning .
We need a strategy which goes beyond this and that provides European common standards guaranteeing a high level of nuclear safety and information .
The safety of nuclear power plants is a European issue .
Looking ahead , we should implement stricter safety standards than the International Atomic Energy Agency recommendations and the rest of the world .
If you look at the information and the transparency in the Fukushima accident , there is a real need for a European platform and for European regulation on this issue .
European citizens expect and deserve the best possible safety for their nuclear power plants .
There is precious little time and there is a heavy responsibility on the European Commission , and certainly more now on the Member States , who are weakening and backing off from what they promised initially after what happened in Japan .
We ask the Commission to assume its responsibilities and we ask the Council , which is not here , to meet the expectations of the European citizens when it comes to nuclear safety in Europe .
on behalf of the ECR Group . - Madam President , I would like to share with you some extracts from the interim report of the UK Chief Inspector of Nuclear Installations : ' we all need to adhere to the principal of continuous improvement .
That means that , no matter how high the standards of nuclear design and subsequent operation are , the quest for improvement should never stop ' .
The UK nuclear regulatory system is largely non-prescriptive .
That means that the industry must demonstrate to the regulator that it fully understands the hazards associated with its operations and knows how to control them .
So we expect the industry to take the prime responsibility for learning lessons , rather than relying on the regulator to tell it what to do .
Conclusion number one reads : ' in considering the direct causes of the Fukushima accident , we see no reason for curtailing the operation of nuclear power plants or other nuclear facilities in the UK ' .
Conclusion two reads : ' in response to the Fukushima accident , the UK nuclear power industry has reacted responsibly and appropriately , displaying leadership for safety and a strong safety culture in its response to date ' .
Conclusion four reads : ' to date , the consideration of the known circumstances of the Fukushima accident has not revealed any gaps in scope or depth of the safety assessment principles for nuclear facilities in the UK ' .
In conclusion , let us remember the extraordinary nature of the earthquake and the strength of the tsunami that hit the Fukushima installation and which has started all this process .

Madam President , Mr Oettinger , so far , the debate has gone as I expected it to , but not as I wanted it to .
Initially after Fukushima , you moved in the right direction and set yourself objectives which included a comprehensive , in-depth investigation of all the risks presented by European nuclear power stations on the basis of what we had learnt at the time from Fukushima .
Now we know even more about Fukushima , including the fact that the disaster was systematically played down and that the core meltdowns occurred much earlier than the Japanese admitted .
We also know about the problems in the monitoring systems .
However , today you have made a big mistake .
As a Commissioner who is taking over a responsibility which he does not have , you should have said : ' Mrs Harms , honourable Members of the European Parliament , I have taken on a big task , but I have only made a small amount of progress ' .
You should have referred to the fact that there are major problems , that the stress tests are purely voluntary , that they are only being carried out on paper and that they are largely in the hands of the operators , which is where they always have been .
You should have admitted this and then I would have been able to take you more seriously .
In that case , we could have had further useful discussions about what has and has not been achieved .
What you have presented us with , Mr Oettinger , is basically a strategy which will help to play down the risks involved in the European nuclear power programme as it currently stands .
At some point , there will be a sort of Oettinger seal of approval on the old reactors which will certify that tests have once again been carried out on paper of all the things that have often been tested before .
You really have little to say on the subject of safety and we have not moved much further on from that .
Because of the Euratom Treaty , Parliament has almost no influence over nuclear safety and we have not made any progress in that area .
I will be interested to see how the debate about genuine common safety standards goes .
This is what we will judge you on again .
However , that is in the future and what we have achieved so far is extremely poor .
( The speaker agreed to take a blue-card question under Rule 149 ( 8 ) )
Madam President , I would like to thank the honourable lady for accepting my question .
I have two questions .
Would you first of all accept that this is not just a German debate and that there are other elements to this discussion ?
Because it has seemed to be rather an internal German discussion and there are different views about this .
Secondly , would you not accept that the circumstances faced by Fukushima were quite extraordinary and unprecedented , both in terms of the strength of the earthquake - the strongest ever experienced in Japan - and the height of the tsunami , which reached a maximum , I am told , of 46 metres , and had an average height of 14 metres , conditions that we might not expect in Europe ?

( DE ) Madam President , I beg your pardon , Mr Chichester , I was speaking German , but I said absolutely nothing in my speech about Germany .
If I were to say anything about Germany , it would be this : I believe it is right that the German Government , under the leadership of climate policy expert Klaus Töpfer , for example , has said that the risks involved in these power stations are too great , that in the case of a disaster , the risks would be unmanageable and that this is why Germany is getting out of nuclear power .
I believe it is important to mention this here from a German perspective .
However , I said nothing about this in my previous speech .
Secondly , I would like to say on the subject of Japan that TEPCO and other operators of nuclear power plants maintained before Fukushima that their plants were technically equipped to withstand all the types of earthquake that were likely to occur .
There were forecasts and warnings that there would be a horror tsunami of this kind .
I do not understand why the International Atomic Energy Agency did not intervene earlier .
( The speaker agreed to take a blue-card question under Rule 149 ( 8 ) )
( DE ) Madam President , I would like to ask you , Mrs Harms , why you have not thanked Mr Oettinger .
Why did you not say thank you ?
I think the accusations that you have made against him here are outrageous .
Mr Oettinger was the only person who made the most of the opportunity to bring together everyone involved immediately after Fukushima and to insist that we carry out stress tests at a European level , regardless of the responsibilities .
Now we have a result that goes far beyond the tests carried out over the last 15 or 20 years , with European involvement and with peer reviews by teams that have been put together at a European level .
I believe it is unfair for you to continue following your own green policy without taking any responsibility .

( DE ) Madam President , I remember very well a remark made publicly by Mr Oettinger who said that he knew that certain plants in the European Union would have to be disconnected from the grid as a result of the stress tests .
I then asked him which plants he was referring to .
I am waiting for him to follow up on what he said .
I remember that Mr Oettinger said during the last plenary session that he would not sign the document that was currently on the table concerning stress tests .
He did sign it , despite the fact that very few changes were made in terms of quality .
( The speaker agreed to take a blue-card question under Rule 149 ( 8 ) )
Madam President , would not Ms Harms accept that her position and the position of her group is that they are not interested in the stress tests : they are not interested in any objective evidence at all .
Their objective is to close down the nuclear industry and they have a fixed objective .
Would she not admit that this is actually true ?
( DE ) Madam President , as we currently have no nuclear power stations where , in the case of a core meltdown , the effects could be restricted to the reactor , I am of the opinion that we should get out of nuclear power .
I am happy to admit that openly .
It is not a secret .
My second point is that right from the beginning , we have been fully committed and we are still committed to genuine technical inspections of existing plants which focus on the well-known safety problems .
We very much regret the fact that this will not be happening .
We in the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance in this Parliament have campaigned for the introduction of high , mandatory safety standards .
Mrs Niebler knows why we failed and why we currently have no high , mandatory safety standards in Europe today .
( The President cut off the speaker )
( The speaker agreed to take a blue-card question under Rule 149 ( 8 ) )
Madam President , since Chernobyl , for acute personal reasons , I have been a very committed opponent of nuclear energy plants .
After Fukushima , the first victims there were the workers and the firemen .
So as an obedient , committed citizen against nuclear plants , I have submitted a Written Declaration for an expression of solidarity for the heroic efforts of Fukushima - the workers and the firemen - and I was really very surprised to see that up till now , we do not have even one signature from your Group .
How committed are you ?
At the first step of paying our tribute ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
( DE ) Madam President , I am happy for us to talk about this again , but I have a very big problem .
I think what has been done about the nuclear hell that has emerged in Japan is magnificent .
I have often visited Chernobyl , including the exclusion zone .
I believe what the workers in this dangerous zone are still doing today is magnificent .
The people who we have turned into heroes are fighting for pensions , for health care and for other things decades after they became heroes .
It is easy to talk about heroism , but genuinely dealing with the consequences is another and much sadder story .

Madam President , on a point of order , we are holding a debate now with the Commissioner , not a debate amongst ourselves and amongst the political groups .
I think , under the Rules , we have one blue card and not six or seven .
With your agreement , I shall interrupt the blue-card procedure because there are another three requests .
For my part , I am in agreement with proceeding with the debate , but I should like to avoid arguments .
Let us therefore go on with the debate
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( DE ) Madam President , Mr Oettinger , I am outraged .
The stress tests for nuclear power plants in the EU give the operators an alibi to continue running their reactors and are intended to conceal the actual danger represented by the so-called residual risks , in particular , if the power plants do not have to be shut down when the results of the stress tests are negative .
The failure to include the risk of terrorism in the stress tests means that the profits of the nuclear power companies will be protected against costly modernisation measures .
Radioactive radiation does not stop at national borders .
In order to protect the people of Europe and its neighbouring countries , the EU should develop a Europe-wide exit strategy , call on its neighbours to get out of nuclear power as part of its neighbourhood policy and , in this way , prevent new nuclear power stations from being built .
The prerequisite for this is the dissolution of the Euratom Treaty , which is used to promote the expansion of the nuclear industry .
In the past , loans of more than EUR 500 million have been made available to Romania , Bulgaria and Ukraine alone for the construction of new nuclear power stations .
on behalf on the EFD Group . - ( LT ) Madam President , today , if we were to balance the benefits of the nuclear industry and the dangers it poses on a pair of scales , it is difficult to say which one would outweigh the other .
Experience has shown that nuclear power plants are rather vulnerable - both Chernobyl 25 years ago and Fukushima a few months ago .
Very close to Lithuania , on the European Union 's external border , there are plans to build disproportionately powerful nuclear power plants , actually they are already being built , the safety and environmental impact of which is causing much controversy .
An accident in these power plants would pose huge dangers to both Lithuania and the entire European Union .
We must ensure that the highest safety standards are applied not just in Europe , but beyond its borders as well .
We must make every effort to ensure the introduction of a requirement for compulsory nuclear power plant safety checks worldwide .
In the area of nuclear safety , there is a particular focus on the European Commission .
It must monitor and check whether this approach is mirrored in neighbouring countries , particularly those intending to build nuclear power plants next to the EU 's external borders , and whether the provisions of international conventions are properly implemented or are little more than a piece of paper .
We must ensure that not just European Union Member States , but neighbouring countries , in particular , Russia and Belarus , comply with the most stringent safety and environmental standards .

( DE ) Madam President , Mr Oettinger , in Austria , where you like to spend your holidays , we are doing very well when it comes to nuclear power plants .
The radioactive intensity of today 's debate does , of course , have one benefit .
It reminds you , Mr Oettinger , that you can undergo a road-to-Damascus conversion and switch from being a friend of EnBW , the German power company , to being the person responsible for monitoring nuclear power stations .
If you do really well , you may even be drawing up the exit strategy .
However , you must be aware that this will involve a struggle over responsibilities .
The ' more ' that you promised us is not enough and , of course , it is very important for you to put pressure on a joint neighbouring country of ours , the Czech Republic , which , as far as I understand it , would prefer to not take part in any kind of more critical test , in particular , with regard to crimes .
You should also be exerting pressure on the blatant nuclear lobbyists from the United Kingdom , which brings us to the main topic .
Do not allow yourself to be influenced by the lobbyists in the Commission .
Take a look at who really holds the power in important organisations such as the European Nuclear Safety Regulators Group ( ENSREG ) and the Western European Nuclear Regulators Association ( WENRA ) .
Keep an eye on Dominique Ristori , a Commission official who is invisibly but inextricably linked with the nuclear lobby , and on other Commission officials .
It will be worth the effort if it enables you to achieve the objective that you say you want to achieve .
Most importantly , you can no longer be seen to be on the side of German industry and all the power companies whose names begin with E - EDF , E.ON and EnBW - in this discussion .
You need to keep a critical distance from them .
Austria , the country that is also your holiday destination , will give you the help you need .
( ES ) Madam President , Commissioner , we have to be careful how debates develop .
When the Commissioner is constantly being interrupted , there is then an avalanche of questions from other Members of the House , and it is very difficult for the debate to remain on the subject that is being examined and in relation to the points the Commissioner has raised , rather than other Members ' wishes .
The first thing I want to say is that some Members of this House need to show a little humility and a little common sense , because they make it appear that they are the only ones that have ever thought about nuclear safety and the only ones who are worried about the future of their children and humanity .
The 58 reactors in France or those in the United Kingdom or those in many other countries do not mean that the French or others may be more stupid or less intelligent , or that the future of their children does not worry them , or that they have never thought about nuclear safety .
Ladies and gentlemen , nuclear safety is something that is being continually worked on in all nuclear plants in relation to every nuclear reactor .
There are many top-quality professionals , not people sitting here spouting hot air , but rather people that have been working on these issues day in day out since the beginning .
Is a joint review of stress tests now required ?
I am completely in agreement , and I have to say that some of the people that are now talking about these issues refused to endorse this Parliament 's joint resolution on this subject , which was supported by the majority of the groups in the House .
On that basis , a distinction must be made : we are talking about stress tests and not the abolition of nuclear energy .
Those will be national debates and they will have to be carried out there .
This is why , speaking of stress tests , because some people do not want to talk about it , they only speak or discuss this in one debate or another with an undertone of eliminating nuclear energy , I have to say that Commissioner Oettinger has done an extraordinary job in a very short time .
He has already agreed and carried out , in practice , a series of measures and tests that will show us the extent of the situation we are now in .
Therefore , Commissioner , congratulations , we cannot have anything other than appreciation for you in how you have acted .
( DE ) Madam President , Mr Oettinger , the stress tests are necessary and also long overdue .
It is surprising that they have not been carried out before .
You should take the credit for the fact that all the nuclear power stations in the EU are finally going to be inspected .
However , we must admit that we are skating on very thin ice with these stress tests .
You have rightly said that several countries were not prepared to take part in a European inspection procedure .
Of course , there is the risk that the inspection will differ from country to country .
Some will not want to include aircraft crashes and others will only open up a part of their plants for stress tests .
You need to make sure that the tests are genuinely comprehensive .
It is also clear that you have not made a comprehensive evaluation .
The area of human failure is incomplete .
The risk now and in future is not that an aircraft will accidentally crash on a nuclear power plant , but that there will be targeted attacks on these plants from outside .
That is precisely what is not being tested .
I live on the border with France and Luxembourg and there are four nuclear power stations in Cattenom .
We have been told that the fire service and the police are responsible for them .
I imagine that al-Qaeda and other terrorists will almost die laughing when they find out that the fire service and the police are responsible for preventing the threat of terrorism .
This really must be included in the stress test .
Finally , what will the consequences be if you find errors and weak points ?
There is the risk that we will not be able to do anything at a European level and that it will all come to nothing .
Will some of the power plants really be shut down or modernised ?
It is high time that the Euratom Treaty was revised .
This situation , where we have no influence over the safety of nuclear power stations , cannot continue .
Madam President , certain Member States have jumped the gun on stress tests .
As we have heard , the UK nuclear inspector , Dr Mike Weightman , published his interim report even before the stress tests had been agreed .
Will the Commission insist that all Member States conduct the stress tests properly , and do not do their own lightweight version ?
I am particularly concerned that the UK Government might go ahead with approving a whole new generation of nuclear power stations before the stress test procedure is concluded in June next year .
Commissioner , do you agree that this would be unwise in terms of European nuclear safety ?
Will you make sure that information which cannot be disclosed publicly due to security concerns is at least shared in a secure forum , such as between national security services ?
( CS ) Madam President , Commissioner , the departure from nuclear energy that we have witnessed , for example , in Germany , is a politically flawed decision likely to have disastrous economic consequences , not only for Germany itself , but also for Central Europe , to say the very least .
I am in no way criticising the German decision , as each Member State of the European Union has the right to set its own energy agenda with all the related economic , social and political consequences .
By the same token , I insist that my country , the Czech Republic , also has the right to determine for itself how it will produce electricity .
One third of the Czech energy mix comprises power obtained from reliable nuclear plants .
I believe that we will continue to strengthen our nuclear resources and that we will develop further nuclear power units in compliance with all of the critical safety and control parameters and requirements .
( The speaker agreed to take a blue-card question under Rule 149 ( 8 ) )
( DE ) Madam President , I have a question for Mr Strejček .
What do you say to the fact that as far as we know , the Czech Republic would prefer not to take part in serious stress tests and that it does not want to be involved in the question of criminal attacks ?
What is your own approach to the nuclear industry and what are your personal relationships with these lobby groups ?
( CS ) Madam President , at this point , I would first like to emphasise to my fellow Member that I have no contacts with this lobby group .
Secondly , I am not aware of any statement by the Czech Government to the effect that Czech nuclear power plants are out of control , as reported by Commissioner Oettinger .
( FR ) Madam President , Commissioner , you are not being attacked personally in this matter , Commissioner , but you must understand that we are extremely disappointed that the Commission has given in so easily to pressure from some Member States , and France in particular .
So we do indeed want to phase out nuclear power because we believe that this is the only way to eliminate the nuclear risk .
In a country such as France , however , we also know that we will need 20 to 25 years to phase out nuclear power , and the latest studies giving the statistics on serious nuclear accidents predict that there will be an accident somewhere in the world within the next fifteen years .
We want to have real tests , and we cannot accept the fact that France has been successful in allowing the risky option to go forward .
The tests do not predict airplane crashes , either over fuel ponds or over reactors .
Neither do they predict terrorist attacks .
We refuse to accept the fact that the tests applied at European level have become a communications exercise by a crisis unit for the nuclear industry , which Mr Sarkozy will showcase at the next G8 in order to sell even more European pressurised water reactors ( PWRs ) .
That is what we cannot accept , Commissioner .
( The speaker agreed to take a blue-card question under Rule 149 ( 8 ) )


( DE ) Madam President , Mr Jadot , can you confirm that the joint resolution which we have drawn up on the subject of stress tests was initially signed by the chairs of your group , Mrs Harms and Mr Cohn-Bendit , who then opposed it in plenary , despite the fact that no major changes had been made ?
Do you also believe that this was not very helpful to Mr Oettinger who is committed to introducing more stringent stress tests ?

( FR ) Indeed , Mr Liese , this resolution was co-signed , and I would also like to respond to Mrs del Castillo Vera who said that the French public is in favour of nuclear energy .
That is not true .
All the surveys show that 77 % of French people want to move away from nuclear energy , but in France we cannot have that debate .
( CS ) Madam President , just three brief comments on the Commissioner 's statement .
First , I am in favour of the stress test methodology put forward by the Western European Nuclear Regulators Association .
These tests assume a probabilistic approach , which the Commissioner has abandoned in favour of a more absolutist approach .
Secondly , I would like to point out that stress tests should be established in all areas where energy is produced , if this whole approach to public safety is to be credible .
In energy production , the highest numbers of casualties have been reported in locations where dams have burst .
In 1976 , for example , 26 000 people died when a dam broke in China .
Thirdly , I would like to say that the Commissioner seems to have embarked on a green pilgrimage , but the Polish satirist , Jerzy Lec , notes that even if you do go on a pilgrimage , you will still be smelly and you will still have sweaty feet .
Madam President , I would like to say to the Commissioner that I trust in his sincere efforts to fight nuclear disasters and I trust his sensitivity and objectivity in providing Europe with a safety net against nuclear disasters .
I consider that stress tests should be undertaken not only within the European Union and neighbouring countries , but at a global level .
This is a global issue .
Hence , I welcome the comments made by the United Nations Secretary-General , Ban Ki-moon , who stated that he will convene a high-level meeting in Vienna on 24 June .
I hope that the Commissioner will be there .
The UN Secretary-General has set out five points on nuclear safety and , from what I have seen , they tally with the rules the Commissioner brought to us and on which he briefed us as to how we should proceed .
In Vienna , we have an international meeting , under the umbrella of the United Nations .
Then , on 22 September , we will have a very high-level meeting on nuclear safety at the United Nations in New York .
In my opinion , that is how we can cope with this issue .
Europe is not the only place or continent facing nuclear disasters , so let us face the issue with a global approach .

( DE ) Madam President , Mr Oettinger , in the bank stress tests , as we know , the leeway given was so generous that almost all the institutions investigated were able to come out of the tests relatively well .
Whenever a risk was suspected , a less thorough investigation was carried out , just to be on the safe side .
We have to presume that things may not be very different in the case of the nuclear power stations .
The nuclear stress tests have so far proved simply to be a placebo for the worried citizens of Europe .
Apart from the fact that the tests , which have no consequences at the lowest level , are pure nonsense , it is doubtful whether even stringent test criteria would achieve the desired objective .
The question always concerns the standards on which the tests will be based , as allegedly none of the 17 German reactors would be approved today , simply because the standards which applied when they were built do not meet current requirements .
Critics are doubtful about whether even the brand new nuclear power stations like the European pressurised water reactors being constructed in France and Finland would meet the latest safety requirements .
When you find out that some nuclear power plants cannot even withstand storms , all you can do is to call on everyone to work towards getting out of nuclear energy as soon as possible .
( LT ) Madam President , firstly , I would like to thank you for the opportunity to discuss this important issue today , particularly as regards the European Union 's neighbourhood .
Radioactive contamination is transboundary in nature .
This was sorely felt after Chernobyl and Fukushima .
The highest nuclear safety standards should therefore be legally binding and global , facilities everywhere should be equally safe , and the International Atomic Energy Agency ( IAEA ) should be strengthened .
Standards applied in the European Union are among the highest in the world .
To achieve even greater security , we will carry out stress tests in nuclear power plants that are functioning , those that are planned and those that have been closed .
However , if we want to be safe , identical criteria should be applied to facilities already existing or planned in the EU 's neighbourhood ( Russia , Belarus , Turkey , Armenia , Switzerland and Ukraine ) .
As we consistently strive for this , we must speak with one voice .
At the moment , less than 100 km from the European Union 's external border , near St Petersburg , a nuclear power plant with a Chernobyl-type reactor is still in operation .
Russia is planning to build two new nuclear power plants even closer to the European Union 's borders in Belarus and Kaliningrad .
From the Lithuanian border , it will be possible to see the chimneys of one of these power plants just as clearly as we can we the tower of Strasbourg Cathedral from Parliament .
Both projects have similar problems .
Work has begun even before the environmental impact assessment is completed and , as yet , there has been no explanation of the criteria for choosing the construction site of either nuclear power plant , possible alternative sites have not been analysed and general evacuation plans have not been drawn up .
There are plans for both nuclear power plants to have experimental reactors , the safety of which is impossible to evaluate , as they have not yet been in operation anywhere .
Generally speaking , Belarus is not ready to develop nuclear energy , and the Russian Government is not only failing to answer the questions put by neighbouring countries , but is ignoring its population 's requests for consultations .
For a second time , through the use of red tape , it is refusing to allow the registration of an initiative regarding a public referendum on the issue of nuclear power plant construction .
One of the steps that might encourage the European Union 's neighbours to comply with the highest safety standards would be for the whole of the Union to refuse to buy electricity produced while failing to respect these standards .
We must not use EU citizens ' money to support unsafe nuclear energy .
( FR ) Madam President , Commissioner , unlike the French Government , I sincerely hope we will have a major public debate .
We need comprehensive stress tests .
Fukushima has shown that we must imagine the unimaginable .
The method currently used fails to take into account risks such as terrorist attacks or plane crashes , and therefore does not meet this requirement .
We need a transparent debate , because the choice whether to continue or stop must be based on broad public consensus that is informed but not bypassed by expert discussions .
We need an independent debate in the presence of all parties , so as to avoid potential conflicts of interest and promote appeasement .
Finally , I am from Alsace and therefore know the extent to which the Fessenheim nuclear power plant concerns our German and Swiss neighbours .
Instead of establishing full national control over these issues , why not at least encourage a sharing of expertise between our security agencies ?
Security would benefit , as would transparency and citizenship at European level .
( FR ) Madam President , we actually have two questions facing us .
The first is about the nuclear share in Europe .
On this issue , I believe that in the coming year , we must have a transparent public debate within the Union and within the Member States concerned .
The second question is about the tests that have brought us all here this morning .
I would like to mention to you , Commissioner , the four principles that I think we should keep for a genuine control mechanism .
The first principle is that a control mechanism must be obligatory .
The second principle is that this control mechanism should be entrusted to an independent and impartial authority .
I do not have much faith in self-regulation .
The third principle is that this mechanism should be binding .
If the tests should ever give negative results for particular installations , then these tests should have a binding effect on Member States , which would then have no choice but to close those non-functioning installations .
The fourth point is that this mechanism must be transparent : the results must be put before public opinion .
In this way , we will perhaps be able to bring about what Mrs Ek has called a European safety culture .
( PL ) Madam President , nuclear safety issues - both in the Member States and in neighbouring countries - should be the object of the European Union 's particular attention .
Following the accident at the Fukushima nuclear power station in Japan , the Commission announced stress tests for similar facilities in the European Union .
This was very good news and a very good decision .
We are waiting for it to be implemented .
In view of the safety needs of all the people of Europe , particular attention should be given to making the appropriate use of all available means in order to raise safety standards and eliminate potential threats from nuclear energy .
It is not only power stations lying within the Member States which are a potential danger , but also those located in countries which are neighbours of the Union .
It is also necessary to provide suitable motivation and support for the Member States to conduct thorough stress tests of the Union 's power stations .
I would also like to underscore the profound need for additional investment , both in research into nuclear power and in other important research aimed at anticipating and combating accidents and their adverse effects in the future .

( DE ) Madam President , Mr Oettinger , using the example of the Cattenom nuclear power station which threatens hundreds of thousands of people in Luxembourg and also in the German regions of the Saarland and Rhineland-Palatinate , I would like to explain why these watered-down stress tests will not do the job .
Cattenom is on the approach path to Luxembourg airport and it is precisely the consequences of a plane crashing on Cattenom which are not being investigated .
After the first document was submitted by the European Nuclear Safety Regulators Group ( ENSREG ) , you yourself tabled an amendment to have aircraft crashes included in the initiating events on page 4 of the document .
This amendment , which was a good one , was blocked by France and the United Kingdom .
It disturbs us that you have fought for this and lost and that you have still not been able to admit that you have lost .
That is dishonest and this is why we are critical of you .
We must make it clearer that France and the United Kingdom are currently not cooperating over the things that we and you both want .
We need to take an honest look at this issue .
Mr Liese , the German Christian Democratic Union / Christian Social Union did not support us on the famous resolution about the exit from nuclear power .
Chancellor Merkel is rather braver than you are , at least on this occasion .
( PT ) Madam President , Commissioner , I am directly addressing the proposal you have brought before Parliament today and I will tell you totally frankly that I think some of us are entitled to be disappointed with this proposal , because the proposal being tabled is not just weak but also has huge gaps .
I think this is a European issue , not a question of which Member States have nuclear industries and which do not : it is an issue for the whole of Europe , and Europe desperately needs good news .
I must tell you , sincerely , that one of those items of good news is guaranteeing the public that we are taking care of their safety .
If these tests are carried out under the terms that you are presenting , Commissioner , whereby the first stage is undertaken by the stakeholders themselves , the second stage is carried out by the governments defending those stakeholders and the third stage is undertaken by partners , who are really stakeholders , I ask myself if the result will not be to say , in the end , that all nuclear plants are in good health and are to be recommended .
We know that it is not the case , and for this reason I very much hope there will be serious consequences and that we will be able to tell the public that we are taking care of their safety and not just pretending that we are .
( DE ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to thank Mr Oettinger .
He has struggled and he has achieved a great deal .
The results are not perfect , but the accusations being made against Mr Oettinger today apply above all to us .
We must be self-critical and admit that we did not manage to adopt the resolution .
Parts of my group were also not in a position to vote in favour , which is regrettable .
However , the accusations also apply to the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance and to the Group of the Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats in the European Parliament who first of all signed the resolution and then ultimately failed to support it in plenary .
This made Mr Oettinger 's life difficult in his struggle with the Member States to introduce more stringent stress tests .
This is the first step , but we must go further .
We need to amend the directive .
Mr Oettinger , we will support you in ensuring that in future , it is made legally binding .
We need to extend it to cover our neighbouring countries .
I fully support what Mrs Morkūnaitė-Mikulėnienhas said .
Germany has been mentioned several times and , of course , we will have to live with the criticism .
However , I would like to point out that 13 EU Member States are already functioning without nuclear energy , including countries with successful economies such as Austria and Denmark , so we must be able to accept this possibility in Germany .
I would also like to say that Chancellor Merkel gave a government policy statement today in the German parliament and highlighted once again that we must at least make joint progress in the areas we agree on in Europe .
For example , she specifically mentioned energy efficiency .
I would like to give Mr Oettinger my support and encourage him to submit an ambitious proposal on the subject of energy efficiency in two weeks .
I am very happy with the parts that we already know about , which are a mix of incentives and obligations for those affected .
I do not like the fact that the Member States are supposed to set their own goals .
We need the Commission to come up with a target , either mandatory or in the form of a guideline .
Please introduce a target and then we will have a very good proposal .
( NL ) Madam President , whether you are in favour of nuclear power or , like me , are an ardent supporter of a nuclear-free Europe , all of us should nonetheless be in favour of safety .
In this respect , my fellow Members from the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) who are preaching modesty are missing the point just a bit .
If Fukushima has taught us anything , then it is , more than anything else , that we are unprepared for disasters , that we are unprepared for all sorts of things which could happen tomorrow and which , if they did , would have the gravest possible consequences .
For this reason , Commissioner , I am not interested in how many compliments or objections you are going to receive here , at this time .
What I am interested in are results .
We are worried , extremely worried , because the worst thing that could happen is that we carry out stress tests in the near future and get the kinds of results which will provide the perfect excuse for many of the operators of very old power plants , including those in the area where I live , to keep them in operation even longer , instead of closing them .
I have two questions .
How are you going to ensure that the independence of these stress tests really is guaranteed ?
Secondly , how will you ensure that the results actually will lead to the closure of the oldest nuclear power plants ?
( FR ) Madam President , Commissioner , we can only thank and congratulate you for having taken this initiative .
Unfortunately , I share the view of those who are particularly disappointed with the result , which represents a victory for the operators of nuclear facilities , for the safety authorities who have covered up what has been done for thirty years , and for the Member States who do not want to reconsider the choices that they have made , not just to keep nuclear power , but also the choices in relation to risk evaluation .
Commissioner , we must deal with the underlying problem and look again at Euratom , as you have said .
That is , we must review the question of how free the Member States are to block everything , as France has clearly done .
We must look again at the unacceptable issues in relation to responsibility - because , if the rules of ordinary law concerning responsibility were applied , we would not have these problems .
We must also look again at the application of rules of ordinary law concerning the right of European citizens to information , which , under present conditions , the system that has been introduced clearly does not safeguard .
( FI ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , many fellow Members have already mentioned the drawbacks with stress tests : the fact that too much relies on their voluntary nature and , not least , how reactors would stand up to terrorist attacks .
My fellow Member , Mrs Morkūnaitė-Mikulėnienė , mentioned one reason why the weaknesses of stress tests are very regrettable .
Close to St Petersburg , and 200 kilometres from Helsinki and Tallinn , are four Chernobyl-type reactors which threaten the safety of hundreds and thousands of EU citizens .
Commissioner Oettinger , you are discussing something else .
Commissioner Oettinger , would you please listen .
Herr Kommissar Oettinger , ich bitte Ihnen ...
Commissioner Oettinger , please answer this : if Russia agrees to carry out stress tests on their nuclear plants with reference to the criteria that I am now pushing for , do you believe that it will actually improve our safety , given that there are several Chernobyl-type reactors close to the EU 's borders ?
( SL ) Madam President , may I say , Commissioner , you have achieved a great deal .
In a very short time , you have managed to draw up a very detailed specification of the stress tests and brokered an agreement between the European Commission and the 27 regulatory bodies of the Member States .
Safety limits , which , on this occasion , exceed the limits of any hypothetical accident , will be reassessed by the Member States .
That is an important piece of added value and an additional requirement .
Some members have been critical about the human factor not having been assessed or properly taken into account .
I have to say that I have personally read closely the specification of these stress tests and am pleased that the tests cover , not just technology , but the human factor and organisational aspects as well .
With this , we have taken a great step forward towards making the safety standards of the European Union uniform and I think that we should look for other ways to go even further ; where and how can we take another major step in order to enhance EU powers in this area ?
In that respect , I expect the European Commission to come up with a proposal .
In the interests of greater confidence , international inspections of the tests carried out will be undertaken and that is where I have a question .
I wonder whether the group of seven people will be so made up as to consist of representatives of the European Commission and of the regulatory bodies , or will it also include independent experts ?
If so , I would be interested to know on what basis they will be selected .
I have two more questions .
Firstly , will these tests have to be carried out by German nuclear plants which have been shut down ?
Secondly , what will be the consequences of the closure of German nuclear power plants for the internal European energy market ?
As regards the Nuclear Waste Directive , I would say that we will have more opportunities than you have mentioned in your speech to discuss it next time , and I hope that the European Commission will take into account the proposals of the European Parliament because , in the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy , we have voted for several stronger proposals than were originally proposed by the European Commission ? .
Madam President , threats to EU nuclear power plants , if they are real , are a question of life and death for thousands of people .
Even small nations must be prepared for the most severe circumstances , including terrorist attacks and airplane crashes .
How would the citizens of major EU countries feel if a non-democratic country built an insufficiently tested nuclear power plant close to Brussels , Berlin , Paris or London , without consulting its public or sharing reliable information with its neighbouring countries ?
Lithuania is currently facing such a situation .
In close proximity to Vilnius , Belarus - with a total absence of transparency - is beginning to construct a nuclear plant .
It is vitally important that the EU , with the support of international organisations , extends the practice of nuclear plant stress testing around the world , and especially to its external borders .
( FR ) Madam President , for my part , I would like to congratulate Commissioner Oettinger for his determination - which has been unfaltering from the start - on the difficult subject of nuclear safety , given that competences on this matter largely belong to the Member States .
As has already been said , our first demand is obviously the revision of this Euratom Treaty , which has remained virtually unchanged since it was first drawn up .
Admittedly , the audit of the 143 nuclear reactors in Europe will , in the end , only relate to the ' Fukushima ' scenario , and you have clearly set the limits for this , Commissioner .
That is already a first victory ; in any event , it represents a real break from the culture of secrecy that has characterised this sector for more than forty years now .
The nuclear industry , more than others , must understand that transparency is crucial for all these issues concerning safety - you definitely repeated the word more than ten times , Commissioner - as is the independence of both the operators and the state supervisory authorities , with the appointment of independent experts , and we are still not satisfied on this matter .
( DE ) Madam President , the Austrian people voted with a clear majority against nuclear power and this sends a clear message to our politicians .
I would like to mention that Mr Palacio has already made a great effort to give Europe more room for manoeuvre in this area .
Mr Piebalgs ' nuclear safety directive was also successful .
I hope that we will soon have a new nuclear safety directive which is binding and which lays down the inspection procedures and the standards .
We should be evaluating which of the International Atomic Energy Agency ( IAEA ) standards are available to us and which can be incorporated into EU law in a legally binding way .
Of course , one-off stress tests are not enough .
In future , there must be a series of stress tests so that dangerous nuclear power plants can be shut down immediately .
In order to achieve this , we need an EU regulator who has joint powers with the national regulators and who is entitled to disconnect from the grid any power stations which fail to meet these standards .
I can only endorse what has already been said today .
The Euratom Treaty must be revised .
We must call on the Heads of State or Government to ensure that this becomes a joint European issue in the Council .
It must not be the case as it has generally been in the past in the Council that the nuclear working group opposes anything which comes out of Europe .
Most importantly , we need research within the European Atomic Energy Community ( Euratom ) into the decommissioning of nuclear power plants .
We also need research into final storage and we should be focusing on protection , safety , training and inspections .
We must introduce the clearing house model that is currently in front of us into European legislation .
Mr Oettinger , you can rely on the support of this House in this respect .
( HU ) Madam President , Commissioner , governments cannot deal with a more important task today than elaborating methods to deal with events occurring with low probability , for instance , the breakdown of cooling water or electric supply , and I agree with Mr Rübig in that this should not be a single event , but should be executed over a longer period of time and on a regular basis .
I also agree that we should extend this stress test in neighbouring countries , the countries east of our borders .
This is why I ask the Commission to consider the possibility of how to execute a stress test in the context of the Eastern partnership .
And finally , Commissioner , protection against cyber attacks and terrorist attacks has to be established in all sectoral policies of the European Union where cross-border emission of hazardous materials may occur .
The incumbent Hungarian Government failed the stress test you envision , Commissioner , because it has repeatedly impeded the construction of the NATO radar facility , which would have provided greater protection for the Paks nuclear power plant against aircraft attacks than the protection we have today , for the past seven years .
( NL ) Madam President , Commissioner , it is vital that we set the bar high with these stress tests and that the tests are actually conducted according to the same criteria across the whole of Europe .
After all , many nuclear power plants are situated close to national borders , as we know , and also in very densely populated areas .
The fact that we are going to have an independent and objective European inspection of every nuclear plant is a very positive thing because this will strengthen the European energy policy .
Therefore , full marks to you , Commissioner .
All European citizens have the right to know whether or not those nuclear power plants are actually safe .
If acts of terrorism and cyber attacks are not going to be covered by the stress tests , then so be it .
You have explained why that is the case and we can understand that .
However , that obviously should not exempt the European Commission from its duty to continue badgering Member States about this and to maintain pressure on the national security services so that these services actually investigate whether the plants are going to be prepared for those risks , too .
Of course , the credibility of these tests will stand or fall on the implementation of the results .
We will have to take into account the probability that some of the 143 nuclear power plants in Europe will not pass these tests , that the weakest will go to the wall and that several plants will perhaps have to close .
Then , naturally , a unique moment of opportunity for us to switch to renewable sources of energy will present itself .
It is clear , as Mr Leinen said a little while ago , that at that moment , a solution will primarily present itself at a European level .
It is also clear that we should opt for joint European investments , coordinated investments , and for joint European financing through project bonds .
We are counting on you to take the lead at that moment , in this new step towards the development of that European energy policy .
Thank you and good luck .
( NL ) Madam President , Commissioner , you have received both compliments and criticism today .
I am going to give you a pat on the back , too , but I am also going to give you a slap on the wrists .
I am happy with the European stress tests , which will be applied in exactly the same way throughout the EU .
They were badly needed .
The only thing that worries me is this false sense of security .
We should not be attesting to the safety of nuclear power plants : we have to investigate what exactly the risks are and not give people a false sense of security .
We need independent supervision across the EU and we have to have an independent regulator .
At present , we have no such regulator .
We have now created an additional layer , but can you tell us whether we are eventually going to get an additional independent regulator , whose assessment will be supplemented by a second scientific opinion ?
I agree with my fellow Members , Belet and Leinen , that this matter should no longer fall under the Euratom Treaty .
Our citizens are entitled to maximum security and it is time we removed this aspect from the Euratom Treaty .
Are you going to start that debate ?
There is , then , one matter which has not received enough attention : what are you going to do about the recommendations of the International Atomic Energy Agency in response to the Fukushima disaster ?
Are you possibly going to adjust the stress test ?
Can you say what will happen in the event of the stress test potentially having a negative outcome ?
I am really very disappointed about what has happened to our resolution and I very much regret that we have allowed ourselves to be carried away by our emotions .
Safety should always come first , surely ?
( FR ) Madam President , this debate got off to a bad start , with the good guys , the anti-nuclear people , on one side , and the bad guys , those who still support nuclear power , on the other .
I would nevertheless point out again that nuclear power is part of the energy mix that we here in this Parliament wanted and hoped for .
Next , I would like to complain a bit about this debate , with its appeals to collective fear .
This is regrettable when we are dealing with a subject as important as this one .
It is true that nuclear power stations can , in certain cases , pose risks , but I am quite shocked because there is a certain mistrust here in this Parliament of staff who work in nuclear power stations on a daily basis and who ensure the safety of our nuclear power from day to day .
I would ask you to be responsible , therefore .
We know that there is a desire in the European Union to ensure the security of our power stations from day to day .
I would also like to add that we know perfectly well that flying over nuclear power stations is prohibited - at least , in France - and that there is no nuclear power station in France which is further than 25 km from an air base , with the air bases being responsible for monitoring the air space above nuclear power stations .
So yes , Commissioner , we agree with you .
We are in agreement on these tests .
Congratulations , you have got them .
These tests are essential , because we have to make sure that our populations regain confidence in our nuclear power stations .
These tests are essential ; they must take place in a spirit of complete independence so that this confidence can be regained .
We can also see , however , that confidentiality is necessary in certain cases .
When it comes to combating terrorism , we cannot conceive of a Member State revealing strategic plans for combating terrorism in advance .
So , let us take some responsibility .
Let us have confidence in our Commissioner , and I am convinced that we will have tests which are rigorous and which are capable of reassuring us .
Madam President , like other colleagues , I believe that safety must come first .
However , I also believe that nuclear power should be part of our future energy mix .
It is low carbon and it can provide a secure supply .
For example , it will mean that prosperous European countries will not have to import energy from less prosperous countries , with all the problems that that can bring .
It is also supported by communities like Anglesey in North Wales , who already have a nuclear power station .
However , like all other colleagues , I also support stress tests - as does the UK - and I think all Member States should give their commitment to those stress tests .
They should also be done quickly , they should cover all eventualities and they should cover both nuclear plants and other facilities within the fuel cycle .
This is such an important issue for us all .
I believe Europe needs nuclear power , but it needs safe nuclear power .
( PL ) Madam President , following the Fukushima disaster , society has become increasingly worried about the safety of nuclear power plants in Europe .
This is understandable .
The information reaching us from Japan is , at times , horrific and terrifying , and shows that serious contamination of the country has occurred .
None of us would like this to be repeated in Europe , just as no one would like a repeat of Chernobyl .
On the contrary , to put society 's fears at ease , it is all the more necessary to do everything to guarantee the safety of nuclear energy in Europe .
This is why the stress tests are so important .
However , it is also important that they be carried out very thoroughly , to guarantee objectivity and to provide credibility and the certainty that their conduct will allow the anticipation of emergency situations and crises , which can happen just the same in Europe as they have done in Japan .
We must do everything to make Europe safe and restore confidence in this source of energy .
However , we should also remember other energy sources , such as the unconventional shale gas , for example .
( PL ) Madam President , for many years , nuclear power was considered to be the energy of the future - green , efficient , non-polluting .
The tragedies in Chernobyl and , recently , in Fukushima , have shown the other side of the coin .
However , our objective today cannot be - as the Left would like - to conduct stress tests only so that with a biased interpretation of their results , there will be a pretext for giving up nuclear energy in Europe .
Today , our objective must be to improve the safety of nuclear power plants , calm public opinion and change the negative image of nuclear power in Europe .
This should be our priority today .
Therefore , I do not understand the voices of the Left which are talking about another tax on nuclear energy and the ultimate abandonment of this type of energy source .
That route , at a time when there is a lack of alternative sources , will lead to jumps in electricity prices .
Today , Europe needs revision of the law on nuclear energy in the areas of the responsibilities of Member States , establishment of common rules and optimisation of safety standards in the Union .
The stress tests must answer our questions about safety and take account of all possible forms of danger , from terrorist attacks to power cuts .
Madam President , I would like to say to the Commissioner that today , the European Union is changing its internal policy regarding nuclear safety but , at the same time , we are beginning work on external energy policy .
At one point in the future , these policies should be merged .
The nuclear stress tests should not only help the Commission revise the safety directive , but should also be included in the Commission report on the external dimension of energy policy which will soon be published .
Stress tests and energy safety should form a crucial part of our energy dialogue with third countries .
We need to ensure that new plants in Kaliningrad and Belarus are subject to the same standards and tests as such facilities in the European Union , especially now that Russia wants to invest in nuclear power plants .
( LT ) Madam President , safeguarding nuclear safety is an issue relevant for all countries , whether they have nuclear power plants or not .
Of course , we can express indignation over what has happened in the past , but today , it is clear that we must move forward .
Commissioner , it is really commendable that , following the Fukushima accident , you responded promptly and initiated the idea of testing nuclear power plants and it is also good that the Member States have agreed to carry out these tests .
However , there is no system at all concerning the construction of new nuclear power plants close to the European Union 's borders , as has already been mentioned several times when discussing the construction of the Kaliningrad and Belarusian nuclear power plants .
I therefore believe that we must initiate and adopt appropriate legislation , as a matter of urgency , which would ensure systematic , binding procedures , based on clear principles , for the construction and operation of nuclear power plants .
We would then have objective information about the possible threat and might hope to avoid it .
( FR ) Madam President , Commissioner , I would like to point out to you that , at its international meeting in Kiev on the 25th anniversary of Chernobyl , the Institut de radioprotection et de sûreté nucléaire stated that a serious accident would take place in Europe within twenty years , hence the importance of the stress tests and of enhancing the security and safety of reactors .
We are faced , however , with ageing power plants and the practice of subcontracting .
80 % of those who work in the nuclear industry are subcontractors .
Furthermore , we are familiar with the geostrategy of terrorist risks .
When we look at these stress tests as they relate to France , they become ' relaxation tests ' .
Commissioner , congratulations for introducing these stress tests , but you should step in to show your disagreement with the position taken by certain Member States , including the United Kingdom and France .
This would provide a clear statement that this cannot be a national issue , but must be a European issue , the aim being to ensure the safety of European citizens .
( SK ) Madam President , I would like to begin by expressing my appreciation for the way that the European Commission , in launching a transparent review of all 143 nuclear power plants in the European Union , has acted swiftly to assuage Europeans ' concerns that the large number of nuclear power plants throughout Europe could be a risk to them .
Ladies and gentlemen , we need to understand that these stress tests are just the beginning of an extensive dialogue on this issue , because only after evaluating the tests will we be able to see the true state of the nuclear power sector in Europe .
I am confident that the data from the stress tests will prepare us for a new round of talks on this issue , where we will discuss a new safety policy for the European Union in this field .
Today , then , rather than cast doubt on the Commission 's efforts to review the security risks of our nuclear power plants , let us try to gather as much objective information about their actual condition as we can .
This will help us in our future decision making on nuclear safety in Europe .
Member of the Commission . - ( DE ) Madam President , honourable Members , I will be happy to discuss your main comments and proposals relating to the stress tests that will be carried out over the next few months .
First of all , however , if you are concerned that a watered-down stress test will turn into a seal of approval without the necessary objectivity , I can assure you that I will do everything possible during the months to come , together with my offices , to ensure that this assumption is unfounded .
( Applause )
This is currently a concern which I completely understand , but some Members also have prejudices .
I would like to ask you not to judge any of the nuclear power stations and also not to judge me and my work until after the stress tests have been completed .
That is my offer to everyone , including Mrs Harms and Mr Turmes , and I am prepared to take a critical and transparent approach to the next steps in the process .
Secondly , if we assume that the outcome of the stress tests will not be a placebo and that the seal of approval will not be handed out randomly , but instead that the tests will be constructive , critical and objective , then I believe that these stress tests will bring many benefits and that the alternative , not carrying out any stress tests , would be a worse solution .
( Applause )
We have had some tough negotiations .
The first draft did not fulfil my requirements .
However , the version that was signed largely meets the expectations of the citizens , who are legitimately concerned about high levels of safety in Europe .
I would like to explain once again , Mr Turmes , that if I had not signed the revised and , in my opinion , positive version of the test criteria , we would now have nothing .
As the saying goes , a bird in the hand is worth two in the bush .
My second point is that you can expect me to be thorough and objective , but I have noticed a few things .
One was the speech by a Member from the United Kingdom of the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe whose party is part of the coalition government in the UK .
This party was opposed to nuclear power before the elections and supported it afterwards and this is the person who is criticising my thoroughness when it comes to the stress tests .
I can only say that this speech would have been more appropriate at the party conference in London than it was here in Strasbourg .
Another speech comes to mind .
The Spanish Government did not give me any visible support on the subject of the thorough stress tests .
For this reason , a speech by a Member who belongs to the party which is in government in Spain is also not very helpful .
That also applies to the group to which I belong , the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) .
Some of the speeches made on behalf of the groups unfortunately demonstrate how unsuccessful the representatives of the groups have so far been within their own parties in their own home countries in achieving their objectives .
In sporting terms , I am interested in what will appear on this subject in the election manifesto of the French socialist party .
I am very interested in who the candidate will be and what the manifesto will look like .
However , the Parliament here in Strasbourg cannot control matters which fall within the remit of the nation states .
To get to the heart of the matter , the energy mix remains a matter for the national governments and parliaments .
We may welcome this or we may regret it .
As a democrat , I have to accept it .
The fact that independent teams are now , for the first time , monitoring the national nuclear regulators and that the monitors are being monitored is , in my opinion , an historic step forwards in the interest of the common safety of the citizens of Europe .
Mr Turmes , aircraft crashes are covered by the stress tests .
The consequences of an aircraft crashing onto a nuclear power station are specifically included in the test criteria and , therefore , form part of the investigation in the third stage .
I will be happy to show you .
Mr Turmes , if every Member of this House were as noisy as you are , there would be chaos in the Chamber .
Only one person can get away with this .
I will be happy to talk about this afterwards .
Aircraft crashes do form part of the investigation because the impact of a crash on the safety of nuclear power plants is specifically covered in the criteria .
My next point is that I have been accused of concealing the voluntary nature of the tests .
Exactly the opposite is true .
From the first meeting in committee onwards , I have always emphasised that the stress test is voluntary .
However , we have persuaded every Member State to take part .
All 14 Member States have voluntarily opted to become involved , which is a big success for the European Parliament .
What will happen at the end ?
I would like to make it quite clear that I am relying on the power of facts .
If there are serious problems with a particular nuclear power station , the citizens of Europe and of the relevant Member State will call for the necessary measures to be taken .
This is what I believe and this is why transparency , thoroughness and objectivity are so important .
I am determined to promote this over the next few months .
The proposal to revise the Euratom Treaty is wonderful .
However , the Euratom Treaty is primary law and , therefore , is not the concern of the Commission but of the Member States .
A change to the Euratom Treaty requires unanimity .
I can only say to anyone who has good proposals to make on this subject : do you really believe , given the variety of opinions and moods and the supporters and opponents of nuclear power , that we would be likely to achieve unanimity about the continuation of the Euratom Treaty ?
I do not believe that it is very likely .
For this reason , I am in favour of taking a realistic approach and making the best we can out of the Treaty that we have .
The next question concerns the independence of the test .
The peer review during the third stage , which is the main part of the test , involves a team with seven external members .
It has been specifically stated that the team can include experts from third countries .
It also involves the Commission .
You can rely on me to make sure that the Commission officials do not bring any preconceptions or prejudices with them and do their work thoroughly and objectively .
To assume otherwise would be unfair to our officials .
This is why I will be standing up for my officials during this process .
Then there is the question of Belarus and Russia .
The fact is that our authority , yours here in Parliament and ours in the Commission , is unfortunately very limited in Minsk .
We simply have to accept that .
Perhaps we will come up with some ideas about how we can get the government there back on track .
However , at the moment we simply have to accept that the government in power in Minsk has no policies , no transparency , no democracy and no concept of safety .
For this reason , we can only call on the government to change .
We cannot do any more .
We have a much better partnership with Russia .
The subject of safety tests for nuclear power stations will play a central role in our discussions with our partners in Russia over the next few weeks .
A question was asked about Kaliningrad .
My message to the Members from the Baltic States and from Poland is as follows : we can only apply our strictest technical specifications to the nuclear power station which is being planned and which will be built in Kaliningrad if we allow the electricity from this power station to be sold on the European market .
However , if we do not accept the electricity and an electricity exchange is not possible , because we are planning our own nuclear power stations in the Baltic States , we will have less control over the technology used in Kaliningrad than if we had an open electricity market .
I will be happy to have more in-depth discussions on this subject .
Finally , please believe me when I say that I will not allow a watered-down stress test to take place .
However , please accept , on the other hand , the fact that the stress test does not include an automatic mechanism for shutting down a power station simply because you have not been successful with your programmes in your Member States .
( Applause )
The debate is closed .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
After what happened in Japan recently , it is crucial that stress tests be carried out on European nuclear plants to assess health standards and risks , avoid potential disasters and alleviate public concern .
It is a major concern for the people of Ireland that no stress test will be done in Sellafield , which is located just a few hundred kilometres from the coast of Ireland .
There is a significant risk to Ireland from those nuclear plants on the British coast .
Sellafield is the best-known station and that is where there was a significant leakage a little while ago , in 2005 .
The response of the British authorities was that an exemption applies in the case of Sellafield because power is no longer being generated there .
That is of little comfort to those in Ireland who will suffer greatly in the event of an accident .
The Sellafield station is very close to Ireland and there have been many accidents there to date , and therefore I am asking the Commission to put pressure on the British authorities to stress-test the station because it continues to be a risk to the people of Ireland .
in writing . - ( LV ) After the nuclear accident at Fukushima , EU Member States collectively agreed that the European Union must conduct stress tests on nuclear plants , and asked the entire world to do so as well .
We still do not have any news regarding whether such tests will be conducted on those reactors operating in other European nations that are not EU Member States .
The safety of reactors located in these states directly affects the safety of European citizens .
Our citizens are justifiably concerned whether the Union will be able to ensure the safety of new nuclear power plants that are being built , or are scheduled to be built , in the direct vicinity of EU Member States , such as those in Grodno ( Belarus ) , and in the Russian Kaliningrad region .
Neither Russia nor Belarus have conducted environmental impact assessments on these power plants in accordance with generally accepted international standards , as called for in the Espoo convention , to which all EU Member States are signatories .
I believe that the construction of these nuclear power plants next to the borders of the EU can pose a threat not only to EU Member States , but also to the entire continent of Europe .
This should be a matter of concern for the entire EU .
The European Commission must pay due attention to this issue and must actively work to ensure safety .
We must ensure that Russia and Belarus adhere to international standards and cooperate with international experts in all the phases of nuclear power plant planning , construction and operation .
in writing . - ( FI ) Here , we are discussing stress tests for nuclear power plants because of Fukushima .
I recall the part-session in April , at which some Members seemed to lose all sense of proportion right after the accident .
Some associated the thousands of victims of the tsunami with the damage to the nuclear power plant .
People in the House wondered if the thousands of victims were not enough .
They asked how many nuclear accidents would it actually take before there was sufficient evidence .
I could not believe my ears .
Even now , there are no actual victims who have died from radiation at Fukushima .
Despite the fact that Japan suffered one of the biggest ever earthquakes recorded , followed by one of the biggest tsunamis that has ever occurred , even though they were not prepared for them , even though they had not even carried out the improvements suggested , even though nothing had been done to ensure that there would be a supply of power in the event of emergencies , and even though the Japanese made other mistakes right at the start , there were few personal injuries .
There is no doubt , of course , that the accident at Fukushima was a catastrophe .
It should not have happened .
There are likely to be fatalities , but they will be nothing compared to the fatalities due to coal power , for example .
In Europe , airborne fine particles due to energy consumption now kill around 300 000 people each year .
It is therefore paradoxical that the Fukushima accident will lead to tens of thousands of indirect victims .
They will die prematurely because Europe will give up using nuclear power and replace it with fossil energy .
Air quality will worsen , which will increase the incidence of cardiovascular disease and threaten the lives of asthma sufferers .
The real killer behind the Fukushima disaster is therefore coal , to which they are now switching in Germany , for example .
The European Commission must include neighbouring states as well when carrying out the stress tests , applying to them the same test criteria established at EU level and taking into account the cross-border nature of the possible effects of nuclear energy .
Romania is already in the process of carrying out the stress tests .
In assessing them , we are interested in consideration being given to the specific nature of the nuclear technology used in Romania , compared with the nuclear technologies used in the EU .
This is why I think that the following points should be borne in mind when carrying out and assessing the stress tests :
the tests being applied should take into account the nuclear technology used at the power plant , which may include special characteristics that it has , without having to use test ' templates ' ;
the stress tests should be evaluated on technical grounds and not on political grounds or grounds which leave room for speculation ;
the independent peer review team should also include the national regulatory authority , along with representatives from the neighbouring countries , with a view to exchanging experience on emergency plans .
in writing . - ( LT ) No one is arguing that the consequences of the disaster in the nuclear power plant will be long-lasting , both for the environment and people , and do not stop at the border .
Three months have already passed since the disaster in Japan , and we still do not know how all of the issues will be addressed .
The European Commission reacted to this disaster in a rapid and adequate manner , proposing stress tests for all nuclear power plants and striving for more stringent nuclear safety standards .
Meanwhile , regular audits would strengthen nuclear safety and residents ' confidence in nuclear energy .
However , we can now see that stress tests will be difficult to implement even within the EU , although everyone understands the importance of and need for such tests .
Furthermore , we cannot simply focus on nuclear safety in the EU .
If the current nuclear power plant projects in Kaliningrad and Astravo on the EU border are implemented without complying with the highest international safety requirements , they will pose a threat not just to the neighbouring Baltic countries but to the whole of Europe , which is relatively near .
The European Commission has confirmed on several occasions that some neighbouring countries - Ukraine , Russia , Sweden and Turkey - are ready to join the European stress test programme , but it is still unclear what specific action the Commission intends to take to bring about cooperation , and how the situation will pan out with regard to Belarus .
Germany 's recent decision to phase out nuclear power by 2022 marks a new stage in the fundamental rethinking currently taking place in Europe concerning its energy independence and the possible alternatives to nuclear power .
However , nuclear power remains an important component of electricity provision in many European countries .
The security of nuclear power stations and installations must be at the heart of the Member States ' concerns .
Furthermore , nuclear safety tests must not take place exclusively in European power stations , but should also be implemented in every country that produces nuclear power .
The effects of a nuclear disaster often cross national boundaries .
With this in mind , I am pleased that , in Paris two days ago , there was agreement on the need for all countries using nuclear installations to implement safety audits in order to assess their capacity to withstand incidents which , up till now , have been considered ' unlikely ' .
Finally , I congratulate Commissioner Oettinger for finding a consensus on the criteria and the practical details of implementing the stress tests for nuclear installations , which will enable us to ensure the highest safety levels in the world .
Other business
( IT ) Mr President , I am speaking under Rule 173 of the Rules of Procedure .
This evening , the Supreme Court of Brazil has refused the extradition of the multiple murderer , Cesare Battisti .
No less than two resolutions of this House have called for the contrary decision .
I should therefore like to put on record , in addition to my own disappointment , my wish that Parliament 's Bureau write to the Brazilian authorities declaring the disappointment of the entire European Parliament and , above all , expressing our solidarity and our grief to the families of the victims , who have been waiting for justice for thirty years .
I am grateful to Mr Mauro for that apt intervention ...
( Mr Borghezio speaks without a microphone ) .
I believe that the whole of this House shares the disappointment and the profound bitterness at the decisions that have been taken , and therefore I can only repeat what Parliament has already made clear on this issue on at least two occasions .
Let us convey our indignation in this spirit of disappointment and with this clarity to the Brazilian authorities .
( IT ) Mr President , I only need a few seconds to send my good wishes to Mrs Weisberger , who has recently become a mother and who is present here with her baby girl , as well as to all new mothers in this House , those who will become new mothers and those who , like me , work hard to be good mothers and good parliamentarians .
It is lovely to see how this Chamber has been enlivened by symbols of hope , but ... ( the speaker was interrupted by disturbances in the Chamber ) .
I am asking for your attention because it is important and I feel compelled to tell you what is on my mind .
Let us see if you can manage to be more grown up , since in these last few days , I have unfortunately heard remarks such as ' Parliament is not a playground .
This is not a playschool .
Out with children and out with mothers ' .
Even worse , it has been said that ' the presence of children gives Members a bad image ' .
Since we very often find ourselves legislating on the work-life balance , it is truly absurd that remarks of this kind are made in this Chamber , and even more so when they are made by women .
Combating corruption in European Sport - The work of the Committee on Missing Persons in Cyprus ( written declarations )
Mr President , over the past three months , my office has sent emails , made phone calls and drafted lists to raise awareness of this declaration on missing persons in Cyprus .
The result has been a great success .
Today 's written declaration 10 has been passed with a strong and positive majority .
I wish to thank the co-authors and give special thanks to Charles Tannock , who has spent every Strasbourg session rallying support with me .
I would also like to thank the Declaration Office and my staff , whose hard work made our job that much easier .
In the gallery today , we have a group of young people from NEPOMAK , the World Organisation for Young Overseas Cypriots in the UK , who have come to see this declaration announced .
They are the youth of today , on whom the future depends .
Support for this declaration signals Parliament 's support for the future .
I thank you for your support .
( Applause )
Mrs Yannakoudakis , we welcome the present delegation and , given the principle of equal access , we shall let Mr Papastamkos have the floor .



( EL ) Mr President , apart from Mr Zwiefka , Mr Susta and Mr Bennahmias , I should like to thank my fellow Members who signed declaration no 7 .
I trust that the resounding message from Parliament will motivate the Commission to exercise its coordinating powers to combat corruption in sport more effectively .
1 .
Sudan and South Sudan (
2 .
EU-Russia Summit (
- During the vote :
( DE ) Mr President , I would like to ask why the Member who is sitting in seat number 56 has voted simultaneously for 56 and 57 .
Mr Bütikofer has voted on behalf of Mr Turmes .
Please reprimand the Member for this behaviour .
( Uproar )
In a previous parliamentary term , when Mr Bütikofer was not yet a Member of Parliament , a penalty was imposed on the chair of a group because he voted on behalf of his neighbour .
Mr Cohn-Bendit may find this ridiculous and he may be able to do it within the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance but , however , the rules in Parliament are clear .
No Member can vote on behalf of another Member from the other Member 's seat .
That also applies to the Greens .
( Loud applause )
Let us move on .
It seems to me quite right that you cannot vote on behalf of another person .
3 .
Misleading business directories (
Voting time
The next item is the vote .
( For the results and other details on the vote : see Minutes )
Explanations of vote
( IT ) Mr President , Sudan is the largest country in sub-Saharan Africa , the crossroads at which the Arab and African worlds meet , as well as a mosaic of a great many diverse ethnic groups .
As provided in the Comprehensive Peace Agreement , a referendum took place in January 2011 which represented the final stage of the process leading to the independence of South Sudan from North Sudan .
South Sudan is an area with approximately 10 million inhabitants , covering almost a quarter of the land area of Sudan as currently constituted and possessing about three-quarters of its oil reserves .
It is a state that will have to cope with huge geographical and infrastructural limitations , without an outlet to the sea and with a practically non-existent transport network connecting it to northern Sudan , where the oil treatment and transit plant is located .
The challenges the South faces are many , beginning with laying the foundations of its own institutions and improving the socio-economic and security frameworks .
I should note , however , that intervention in this country remains a priority for the European Union .
Therefore , in 2010 , the Council accorded Sudan a special allocation of EUR 150 million for the period 2011-2013 .
The European Union must mobilise the entire panoply of instruments at its disposal to support South Sudan in the delicate post-referendum phase .
At the same time , we need to maintain a balanced approach in dealing with the North and the South of the country , with particular attention being paid to the needs of the South in terms of institution building and governance .
European Union aid to South Sudan should be commensurate with what the new state can effectively absorb .
We must avoid the situation in which future funding flows to Juba end up being improperly deployed or , even worse , feeding the existing high level of corruption .
( SV ) Mr President , Sudan is currently in a very sensitive phase ahead of independence day on 9 July this year , when Sudan will be divided into two states .
It is extremely important for the EU to continue to provide aid and to direct this aid towards the building of the institutions that are necessary in a well-functioning independent state .
We all know that the situation around the Horn of Africa is extremely sensitive , we know that there are problems with the democratic traditions , we know that the situation of women is incredibly difficult and we know that there are problems with pirates .
In this context , I would also like to emphasise how important it is that people are able to exercise their human rights and are able to talk and demonstrate freely .
This goes for the whole of the Horn of Africa and not least for the Swedish citizen , Dawit Isaak , who is imprisoned in Eritrea .
The whole region is in need of democratic development and support from the European Union .
( FI ) Mr President , I would like to say here that it is very important that the European Union ensures that it promotes peace and the independence of these two states .
It is a fact that , since Sudan gained its independence in 1956 , Sudan and South Sudan have been at war - a civil war -the whole time .
That is why it is now very important that , after the referendum , in which almost everyone - more than 98 % - wanted independence for South Sudan , this peace process and process of independence is taken forward .
Our task as Europeans is obviously to support democracy , human rights and freedom of opinion , all of which are core values .
In that respect , it is important that we are keen to strengthen these democracies and independence for South Sudan .
( IT ) Mr President , there is no doubt that the resolution adopted today represents an important indication of the cooperation and enhanced collaboration between the European Union and Russia .
Economic governance ; common spaces of cooperation in the fields of security , justice and freedom ; and the fight against organised crime while safeguarding inviolable rights .
North Africa and the Middle East require a joint approach and we are convinced that Russia can play a fundamental role in this context .
This partnership and cooperation agreement , prepared for the summit of 9-10 June , will be able to stand as an important policy guideline in strengthening this cooperation , which we are confident will bring Russia membership of the World Trade Organisation , as well as encourage visa liberalisation .
Meanwhile , Russia must play its full part , especially in the field of fundamental rights .
( FI ) Mr President , an extremely important document has now been adopted and I think that it is vital that we continue dialogue with Russia .
For us , Russia is an important neighbour , and the better our relations are , the better it is for everyone .
I would like to focus attention on the matter of visa waiver .
I myself think that it is an important objective , but perhaps we should go slowly .
As a representative of a neighbouring country , I can tell you that we cannot rush ahead too fast unless there are readmission agreements that work .
In Russia , they obviously have to ensure that the dual identity that people could buy there previously can no longer be obtained .
Instead , all these matters need to be dealt with properly by Russia so that we can move towards visa waiver .
That is why we should not rush these things unnecessarily .
( IT ) Mr President , I should like to emphasise how at the bilateral summit , taking place today and tomorrow , there will be an important issue to confront ; an issue , however , that seems to me to be missing from our joint resolution .
In other words , I think that this summit could risk being overshadowed by a split on the prohibition of vegetable imports from Europe due to the E coli bacterium .
Like the Commission earlier , I find it absurd that Russia should place an embargo on products that we consume every day and on which we carry out thorough checks .
I think Russia 's reaction is more of a political move , like many we have already seen in the past .
I believe that my thoughts on this matter , including in my capacity as a member of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , will be shared by fellow Members .
I therefore think it would be a good idea to tackle this problem at the summit as well , including asking Russia to lift this disproportionate and unjustified import ban on European Union vegetables immediately , which , as such , is out of line with the principles established by the World Trade Organisation ( WTO ) , especially considering that Russia is a candidate for accession to the WTO .
Mr Putin , the Russian Prime Minister , has already announced that Russia will not lift the ban until the European Union has provided details on the source of the E coli infection .
( PL ) Mr President , the standards which apply in Russia are completely different from those which are in use in the European Union .
It is sufficient to mention the questions of human rights and the right of association , or the ruthless use of natural resources to exert political pressure on other countries , such as those of the European Union .
Construction of the Nord Stream gas pipeline is a clear example of this .
The negotiations which are in progress are a test for the European Union and the position we are going to hold in the future - that of partner or client .
( LT ) Mr President , President Lukashenko 's policies have pushed him , along with his whole country , into deep self-isolation in relations with the West .
Russia is quick to take advantage of this , and is aiming at taking over strategic and the most profitable Belarusian companies in exchange for loans .
There is already talk of the introduction of a common currency ( the Russian rouble ) .
The forthcoming EU-Russia Summit should be used to draw attention to the situation in Belarus .
I am not talking about negotiations with Russia on Belarus , as this would only imply that Russia has some sort of ' special rights ' to this country .
However , we must warn Russia , at the highest level , that it is unacceptable to strengthen influence in a neighbouring country by exploiting a situation and negotiating with an authoritarian regime that does not represent the people .
Only the Belarusian people themselves can reach a decision on the country 's integration processes and only under conditions of democratic self-determination .
( DE ) Mr President , I think we can argue for a long time about the extent of Russia 's progress on the road to democracy .
Of course , there are many problems from our perspective .
However , on the other hand , it is always better to develop our cooperation with Russia , in particular , when we are calling on Russia to respect human rights or to improve environmental rights , if only because of its size .
If we can ensure that the cooperation is friendly , but also serious , and if we do not forget to make legitimate demands and highlight legitimate failings , we will be making a step in the right direction , not only in terms of the cooperation between Europe and Russia , but , most importantly , in terms of human rights .
Ultimately , this is all about improving the situation of the people of Russia .
( SV ) Mr President , resolutions like this one always use extremely diplomatic language .
This time , I think we have been too mild in our assessment of relations with Russia .
We know that the human rights situation in Russia is beneath contempt and we know that it is almost impossible for people to express their political opinions freely .
We also know that there are many people in prison precisely because they have tried to exercise their human rights .
That is unacceptable .
Likewise , I think the choice of words with regard to energy policy is far too feeble .
The fact is that the criteria we impose when it comes to the climate and the environment must also apply to imported oil or gas from Russia .
We impose extremely high requirements on Norway , which imports gas into the EU , and exactly the same requirements should apply to Russia .
( FI ) Mr President , Russia is an important partner of the EU , and the EU would get even more out of its relations with Russia if the approach were genuinely strategic and sufficiently assertive between summits .
Only then would we achieve results .
There are three issues to consider .
Firstly , there is Russia 's membership of the World Trade Organisation .
Russia 's WTO membership and free trade are in the interests of both the EU and Russia .
Developments in the investment climate and the rule of law are essential components in Russia 's forward development .
Secondly , the EU and Russia have a common interest in the Arctic region , and that interest is important .
The EU needs to strengthen its Arctic policy .
Thirdly , visa waiver between the EU and Russia is the right goal .
Russia , however , should improve its border controls and practices significantly and , in this respect , I support this very practical approach .
( Applause )
( IT ) Mr President , while researching this subject , I realised that , paradoxically , given the size of the country , this is a question of particular concern in Switzerland , where there is a great deal of information and there are very many publications on the matter , whereas there is much less information coming from Europe .
It will not be by chance that the problem , even following the implementation of Directive 2006 / 114 / EC , continues to affect a striking number of businesses , particularly small and medium-sized enterprises , and consumers across Europe .
Faced as we are with well over 400 petitions , as stated in a paragraph of the resolution , we find ourselves discussing this issue again in this Chamber .
The problem lies in the fact that there continue to be cases of traders who unwittingly enter into contracts for valuable consideration for entries in a business directory .
Those who merely skim over the forms and sign them without thinking and without close examination can be unpleasantly surprised how dearly it will cost them .
In recent years , business practices similar to that just described have become widespread throughout Europe .
They are difficult to combat effectively with the law as it stands .
My vote in favour this morning was therefore intended principally to benefit small and medium-sized enterprises , which are great contributors to our economic system .
( DE ) Mr President , I am very pleased that we have discussed directory companies and their practices today .
This is a very important topic in the European Union .
Despite the fact that the Committee on Petitions has been working intensively on this subject since 2008 , we have not yet seen any significant improvements .
I would like to explain why the situation in Germany is so difficult .
It is both mandatory and normal practice in Germany for a legal entity to register its address in an online directory when it is founded .
Anyone who registers a company will receive around eight to 10 letters in response .
It is likely that one of these will be genuine and the others superfluous .
If you reply to the wrong letter and fill out the wrong form during this period of founding a company when you have a lot of work and a great deal of red tape to deal with , you will find that you have signed a contract and are faced with a bill for up to EUR 1 000 .
Therefore , I would like to urge the Commission , once again , to consider an EU-wide ban on these misleading business directories .
( SV ) Mr President , in general , we devote far too little time in this Parliament to the problems experienced by small businesses .
A new form of fraud has developed in which small businesses are tricked into advertising in various types of directory .
Then , when they discover that it is fraudulent , they receive a payment demand .
The invoice is then passed on to a debt recovery agency and the amount grows and becomes three or even ten times as much in a very short space of time .
The latest development is that these large established fraudulent set-ups are now operating across borders and it then becomes almost impossible for individual small businesses to receive justice .
Instead , they are pursued by debt recovery agencies without being able to put a stop to it and without being able to report or get hold of the person responsible for the crime .
In reality , this also means that the cooperation between European police forces must be strengthened , because we must have the ability to see these large-scale cross-border patterns , as this is not a question of small acts of fraud , but of large organised circles of fraudulent activity involving extremely large sums of money , running into millions of euro .
Therefore , this is a good resolution , but it is far too weak and we need to take European cooperation further .
( FI ) Mr President , I asked to speak in the debate on Russia , and perhaps you will allow me to say a few words about it , even though we have gone past it .
It is very important , I think , that we engage in dialogue with Russia .
We need high-level meetings , but , as Europeans , in this matter we have to remember what the fundamental function of the European Union is .
Our function is to take democracy , human rights and freedom of opinion forward in discussions with the Russians .
These basic values need to be stressed .
When we speak about visa waiver , that is a future objective , but now developments in democracy in Russia are the priority .
Let Russia develop and set out on the road to democracy , with human rights and the rule of law being implemented as a consequence , and after that , we can return to this matter of visa waiver .
( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the few of you who are still here , visitors to the European Parliament , in conclusion , I would like to make some brief remarks on the subject of misleading directory companies .
I have voted in favour of the resolution because it is important for us in the European Union to make our opinion clear on this .
This is a part of organised crime in Europe which involves bogus companies taking money from people and from small and medium-sized businesses over the Internet .
We must make every effort to prevent this from happening .
The Commission has made many soapbox speeches calling for genuine support to be given to small and medium-sized companies and for the amount of red tape to be reduced .
One important aspect of this is to bring an end to this type of organised crime .
The resolution represents a step in the right direction , but only a small one .
We must take action and , therefore , I am calling on everyone to continue with this work , not only those Members who are not here , but all of us who represent the citizens of Europe in Parliament .
Mr President , I would like to agree with the previous speaker .
Quite often , it appears that whatever the problem , the answer seems to be from this place more EU and more regulation .
Harmonisation versus mutual recognition , imposed EU contract law that adds an administrative burden to small businesses .
But yet what we really should be focusing on is making the EU work better .
Whatever your views on the EU , whether you are sceptical about further integration or you want more Europe , we should be focusing on making the EU and the Internal Market work better , but also tackling cross-border fraud .
For years since I have been an MEP , I have been receiving letters and e-mails from constituents who have inadvertently been misled into signing up for a business directory , then being invoiced for a rather large amount of money .
Rather than focusing on all the other stuff we focused on this week , let us make sure the EU works better .
Let us focus on reducing the administrative burden for small and medium-sized businesses and let us help EU citizens who have been affected by this cross-border fraud .
Written explanations of vote
in writing . - ( LT ) I voted in favour of this resolution on Sudan and South Sudan : The situation after the 2011 referendum .
The Southern Sudan Referendum took place on 9-15 January 2011 , with an overwhelming majority voting to establish an independent state of South Sudan , which is expected formally to declare its independence on 9 July 2011 , which coincides with the end date of the Comprehensive Peace Agreement ( CPA ) .
This will be a very important day for South Sudan , as the creation of the new state will raise many difficult challenges .
I welcome the resolution 's call on the South Sudan authorities to promote the development of South Sudan as a modern , pluralistic , democratic state based on the rule of law and respecting human rights , in particular , women 's and children 's rights , and the primacy of the right of citizens to choose their government through regular free elections .
Although South Sudan has reserves of natural resources such as oil , copper and iron , as well as forest and fertile land , the vast majority of its population live in poverty , with one of the highest infant mortality rates and the lowest education indicators in the world .
I therefore call on the future government of South Sudan to immediately take the necessary measures to help guarantee at least a minimum subsistence income , social guarantees and , above all , security for the populations of South Sudan .
I am sure that the European Union will have to play an important role in the fight against poverty and in the revitalisation of Sudan 's economy .
I would therefore like to stress the importance of maintaining the Union 's humanitarian aid to Sudan and to South Sudan .
in writing . - ( LT ) I voted in favour of this resolution .
The Southern Sudan Referendum took place on 9-15 January 2011 , with an overwhelming majority voting to establish an independent state of South Sudan .
South Sudan is expected formally to declare its independence on 9 July 2011 .
The European Parliament fully respects the outcome of the referendum as the expression of the democratic will of the people of South Sudan .
I welcome the European Parliament 's call for the government of South Sudan to enact policies on foreign investment in the interest of the population , so that foreign investment in natural resources benefits the development of the domestic economy in order to combat poverty .
Money earmarked by the European Union for development aid should be used to support basic services , notably education and health , agriculture , food security and institutional capacity building , in order to ensure the development of South Sudan as a modern , pluralistic and democratic state , based on the principles of the rule of law and respect for human rights .
I have voted in favour of the resolution as I support Sudan and South Sudan and congratulate them on their conduct after the referendum , which will help build a democratic state in peace with prosperity and security with regard to human , social and economic rights in both countries .
In order to achieve this , we ask the parties to initiate a constructive dialogue to peacefully resolve the Abyei situation as well as the issues still to be negotiated , such as the distribution of oil revenues , boundary delimitation and debt distribution .
To that end , the EU must make the necessary resources available to both countries to support social services such as education , health , agriculture , food security and institutional capacity building , and it should maintain this humanitarian aid for both countries after 9 July , the date on which South Sudan will officially gain its independence .
I warmly welcome Parliament 's resolution on Sudan and South Sudan , which reiterates full respect for the referendum of January 2011 , sanctioning the independence of South Sudan .
The resolution thus expresses support for the principle of the self-determination of peoples and recognises the right of the Christian community of South Sudan to establish a state for itself , free of the authority of the Muslim majority .
The document emphasises the need for the two new states created by the partition of Sudan mutually to recognise the other 's sovereignty and urges the adoption of measures designed to help consolidate and stabilise their presence on the path of democracy , respect for human rights and mutual recognition .
Given that defence of the principle of the self-determination of peoples and protection of Christian minorities in the world are both fundamental features of Lega Nord 's political theory , I can do no other than show my support for this resolution .
in writing . - I voted against the provision of external aid to South Sudan of EUR 200 million in development cooperation in order to assist South Sudan to cope with the numerous humanitarian and socio-economic challenges in a context of reduced governance capacity and political fragility .
As the EU is an undemocratic institution itself , and one that I strongly believe should not have a foreign policy agenda , I cannot endorse any third country activity by it .
The UK is one of the world 's largest donors of foreign aid .
It is essential that foreign aid and foreign policy remain the remit of individual Member States and is not dictated at EU level , even if the recipient is in need and appropriate .
In allowing the EU to forge a foreign policy agenda , there will come a point when we have a situation involving a third country that divides Member States and is not the unanimous wish of the Union as a whole .
Such activity at EU level paves the way for increased competence with regard to external action , which is something I strongly disagree with .
With regard to Parliament 's response to the situation in Sudan following the 2011 referendum , which decided in favour of the independence of South Sudan from 9 July , I consider the motion for a resolution tabled by the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) to be the most suitable , as I believe it represents a better approach to the political situation we are facing , as well as to relations with other African countries .
The referendum carried out in Sudan sought to bring to an end the generalised violence that had been setting the populations of the north and south of the country against each other .
Given the results of the referendum , the will of the people of South Sudan is now unequivocally in favour of independence , as has been repeatedly reiterated for many years now .
My group has been monitoring this issue and , in particular , that of Darfur , over the course of several parliamentary sessions , and successfully sponsored the candidacy of the Sudanese lawyer , Salih Mahmoud Osman , for the 2007 Sakharov Prize .
The awarding of the prize aimed to make the unconcealed outrage of the genocide in that country even more visible and to acknowledge the peaceful work of those who , against all odds , had not given up fighting for peace , solidarity and human rights .
Unfortunately , Mr Osman 's prize was not enough to stamp the international community with the desirable sense of urgency for confronting the repeated and serious human rights violations recorded in Sudan .
I hope that , before and after separation , both parties can respect what has been agreed , build two peaceful countries , pull their populations out of poverty and promote good neighbourliness ; and that the European Union may be able to contribute to that .
The final results of the referendum of 9 January 2011 on the self-determination of South Sudan have confirmed , by an overwhelming majority , that the voters were determined to create an independent state .
According to EU international observers , this referendum , whose results were announced by the Southern Sudan Referendum Commission and corroborated by the government of Sudan , took place in a fair way .
I therefore advocate respect for the results of the referendum as an expression of the democratic will of the people of South Sudan , and I urge Sudan and South Sudan to commit themselves actively to promoting democratic governance and establishing lasting peace , security and prosperity in both countries .
I consider the provision of external aid very important and I welcome the Council 's 23 May 2011 decision to allocate EUR 200 million to development cooperation in South Sudan , with the aim of contributing to the autonomy of local communities , and of attending to the basic needs of the people and to the non-existence of human resources and infrastructure .
As we warned at the time , the independence of Kosovo set a dangerous precedent in relation to imperialist intervention in the creation of artificial states , in line with its geostrategic interests of accessing and controlling markets , natural resources and workforces .
The case of South Sudan is similar to that of Kosovo in every way .
Specifically , there was the holding of a referendum , financed and promoted by various powers , just in the part demanding independence , as was convenient , without the rest of the country 's population unable to have its say .
Added to all this , in the southern part of Sudan , there are large reserves of the oil that is fundamental to big international capital .
The current situation , with the conflicts experienced in Sudan and in the whole region breaking out again , and the dispute over establishing its borders , demonstrates that the artificial creation of this country does not resolve any of the existing problems , nor will it improve the standard of living of millions of Sudanese people , but rather it will stir up contradictions and conflict .
After the great imperialist powers have finished carving up the African continent in their own interests , everything points to the belief that a process has been restarted in South Sudan which will lead to more wars and suffering for the already severely devastated populations of Africa .
in writing . - ( SK ) Following its independence , which is due to take place in exactly one month 's time , South Sudan will be faced with numerous humanitarian and socio-economic problems at once .
For a long time to come , assistance from neighbouring countries will be more important than ever to South Sudan as it seeks to fight poverty , strengthen local communities and accelerate the benefits of peace for the population .
In the period immediately after the referendum , while the country will have access to multilateral sources of finance , there is a risk that a funding gap will be created that will make South Sudan highly vulnerable and very much at risk of a state collapse .
I believe it is therefore essential that the European Union do everything in its power to help the Sudanese pull through this critical period and prevent an impending humanitarian catastrophe , because this country can begin to work systematically towards achieving its development goals only if confidence prevails in a peaceful future .
in writing . - ( LT ) I welcomed this document because it calls on the South Sudan authorities to promote the development of South Sudan as a modern , pluralistic , democratic state based on the rule of law and respecting human rights , in particular , women 's and children 's rights , and the primacy of the right of citizens to choose their government through regular free elections , with protection of freedom of movement , freedom of association and freedom to express one 's political views enshrined in both the constitution and law .
in writing . - I voted for this resolution which calls on both sides in Sudan , in the run-up to independence day on 9 July 2011 , to present concrete plans on the setting-up and / or reform of their institutions in order for the two states to be viable as of that date .
It also calls for the EU delegations in Sudan and South Sudan proactively to circulate and implement the recommendations of the recent EU election and referendum observation missions .
We respect the outcome of the referendum on the independence of South Sudan , scheduled to take effect on 9 July 2011 , as an expression of the democratic will of the Sudanese people .
We hope that the political authorities will promote the development of a modern , pluralist and democratic state , based on the rule of law and respecting human rights ; uphold the primacy of the right of citizens to choose their government through regular free elections , with protection of the freedoms of movement , of association and the freedom to express political opinions .
We agree , furthermore , that all the parties should engage in continued and constructive dialogue to address post-referendum issues , including common borders , citizenship arrangements for citizens both north and south , and the sharing of oil revenues .
We agree , finally , on the need to allocate new European funds to support basic services , notably education , health , agriculture , food security and institutional capacity building .
The EU must maintain its humanitarian aid for Sudan and South Sudan even after 9 July 2011 , and all political parties must work together to represent all the people of the country fully and to help build stable and democratic political institutions .
The conflicts in Sudan , specifically in the Darfur region , have claimed many victims over the years , particularly amongst the most disadvantaged people .
Let us hope that the referendum will bring the conflict to an end and that we are finally entering into a process for a lasting peace .
The EU is going to play an important role in future developments in that region and it cannot renounce its important role in bringing peace to the region .
The security situation in the state of Abyei is very worrying .
I would encourage the parties involved to engage in a peace dialogue by once again entering negotiations with the African Union .
I would also call for a referendum to be held , as stipulated in the Comprehensive Peace Agreement ( CPA ) .
Both the north and the south will have to work to resolve several crucial questions which have been left in abeyance , such as the drawing of the boundaries between the two countries , the dividing up of oil revenues , the use of pipelines , the issue of citizenship and the organising of popular consultations in the Blue Nile and South Kordofan .
Support for South Sudan must be one of our priorities .
We would encourage it to sign and to ratify the Cotonou Agreement , which will open the door to new prospects for cooperation .
We would encourage it , along with Khartoum , to introduce a pluralistic and multi-ethnic democracy and an independent civil society , with a key role for justice alongside legislative and executive powers .
We are delighted that we will be welcoming a South Sudanese parliamentarian once South Sudan has signed and ratified the Cotonou Agreement within the Joint Parliamentary Assembly ( JPA ) .
We must continue to be attentive to the north ; we must not ignore it or isolate it diplomatically .
in writing . - The southern Sudan referendum took place on 9-15 January 2011 , with an overwhelming majority voting to establish an independent state of South Sudan .
The agreement to conduct the referendum was concluded by the government of Sudan and separatists from the south of the country in 2005 after 20 years of civil war .
Governmental authorities representing the North signed the comprehensive peace treaty with the stipulation that the question of self-determination for South Sudan was to be resolved during the referendum .
Since the situation in the region has deteriorated significantly recently , with this resolution we appeal to the government of the South Sudan to ensure democracy in the country and to demilitarise its territories .
We also reiterate the importance of rendering humanitarian aid to Sudan and South Sudan and appeal to international creditors to alleviate the debt of Sudan and South Sudan .
I would also add that it is necessary to strengthen monitoring , to deploy more experts , to render financial aid to the region and to arrange higher education in EU universities free of charge for talented youth .
I voted in favour .
In a referendum in January of this year , the people of South Sudan voted with an overwhelming majority in favour of independence and breaking away from the northern part of Sudan .
It is important for the EU to respect the right of self-determination of these people without any restrictions and to recognise the results of the referendum as an expression of the democratic will of the people of South Sudan .
As this motion for a resolution clearly meets these requirements , I have voted in favour of it .
Now it is important for the parties to the Comprehensive Peace Agreement to engage in a continued and constructive dialogue to address the issues which remain unresolved after the referendum .
These include establishing common borders , citizenship arrangements for the citizens in the north and in the south , the fair distribution of oil revenues and the use of oil pipelines .
in writing . - ( LT ) I welcomed this resolution because it is very important to manage the armed conflicts and disagreements between both countries , to stop the unrest from spreading , and to reach and properly implement a Comprehensive Peace Agreement .
Both North and South Sudan must be governed on the basis of the principles of democracy and the rule of law , with respect for human , social and economic rights .
Long-term peace and security must prevail in this region .
Consequently , the protection and security of the people of Sudan must continue to be priority issues .
Above all , the issue of the status of the Abyei region urgently needs to be addressed , under the provisions of the Comprehensive Peace Agreement .
If possible , it is very important for the EU to provide the required development assistance .
We must make every effort to ensure that money earmarked for this assistance is used in a targeted manner for basic and essential services .
Furthermore , the South Sudan Government should begin to enact foreign investment policies that would attract foreign investment in natural resources and would thus contribute to the policy of poverty reduction .
in writing . - ( LT ) I voted in favour of this resolution on Sudan and South Sudan because the referendum that took place in South Sudan , in which the majority of residents voted in favour of the creation of an independent South Sudan state , is proof of the democratic will of its citizens .
After seven years of war , the majority of the population of South Sudan live in poverty and education indicators are the lowest in the world .
I therefore welcome the EU decision to allocate EUR 200 million in aid to South Sudan in order to help the most vulnerable segments of the population .
These funds must be allocated to education , health , agriculture and institutional capacity building .
I welcome the extension of the UN Mission in Sudan and the deployment of additional peace-keeping forces because it is now particularly important to ensure the peaceful development of Sudan and South Sudan .
The creation of the new state is a complicated process , where it is necessary to resolve very quickly the questions of establishing common borders , granting citizenship to populations from the southern and northern regions , and the distribution of revenue obtained from oil , etc .
Having signed the Comprehensive Peace Agreement , the countries should engage constructively in political dialogue .
It is important to carry out a constitutional review in South Sudan so that all political parties work together to represent all the people of the new country and help to build stable , democratic political institutions .
The results of the referendum in Sudan are an unequivocal indication of the desire of the people of South Sudan for independence , as they have been demanding for many years .
The Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) has been monitoring this issue and , in particular , that of Darfur , over the course of several parliamentary sessions , and successfully sponsored the candidacy of the Sudanese lawyer , Salih Mahmoud Osman , for the 2007 Sakharov Prize .
The referendum aimed to bring the violence between the populations of the north and south of the country to an end .
It is hoped that a new chapter will be opened at this stage and that two peaceful countries will be constructed .
The EU can , and should , perform an active role to this end , namely , by helping to pull their populations out of poverty and by promoting good neighbourliness .
This resolution , which I had a hand in drawing up , comes at a critical moment , and thus a key moment , in the resolution of the conflict in South Sudan .
In January , the South Sudanese overwhelmingly voted for their independence in a referendum .
In one month , a new state will be born .
However , there are still several concerns , especially after the recent incidences of violence in the disputed Abyei region .
More than ever , in this pivotal period , Parliament intends to reaffirm its complete support for the peace process and to appeal to the Sudanese and South Sudanese , as well as the international community , to remain committed to implementing the 2005 Comprehensive Peace Agreement .
In particular , the European Parliament is calling on the Sudanese and South Sudanese to propose specific plans taking account of sensitive subjects , namely citizenship , the sharing of debt and of oil revenues .
These plans will also have to deal with the difficult issue of borders in order to ensure that a peaceful and viable coexistence of the two states can be maintained .
Between 9 and 15 January 2011 , the majority of South Sudan 's population declared itself to be in favour of creating an independent state .
It is common knowledge that this is an area of the globe which has been continually rocked by conflicts , jeopardising the possibility of large sections of the population enjoying decent living conditions .
Faced with this new information , Parliament calls on the authorities of South Sudan - whose independence will be declared , starting from 9 July 2011 - to make efforts towards bringing together the essential foundations for establishing a democratic state anchored in human dignity .
To this end , international support will be necessary .
For this reason , I welcome the support the EU has pledged in order to help build this new state .
For these reasons , I voted in favour of this resolution .
in writing . - I am glad the EP welcomes the peaceful and credible conduct of both Sudan and South Sudan in the 2011 Southern Sudan Referendum , the efforts by all parties to the CPA and the commitment they have demonstrated to it ; views this as a crucial step in implementing the CPA and as a positive sign for the peaceful coexistence of both countries ; reiterates its full respect for the outcome of the referendum as the expression of the democratic will of the people of South Sudan ; calls on both North and South Sudan actively to pursue the promotion of democratic governance and the establishment of long-term peace , security and prosperity for both countries , with respect for human , social and economic rights ; calls on the South Sudan authorities to promote the development of South Sudan as a modern , pluralistic , democratic state based on the rule of law and respecting human rights , in particular , women 's and children 's rights , and the primacy of the right of citizens to choose their government through regular free elections , with protection of freedom of movement , freedom of association and freedom to express one 's political views enshrined in both constitution and law .
Hundreds of people have been killed in the disputed area of Abyei between North and South Sudan .
The UN recently announced that at least 20 000 people have abandoned the town of Abyei and fled to the south , following the withdrawal of the North Sudanese army from the area .
As the joint motion for a resolution quite rightly says , both sides need to present concrete plans on the setting-up and / or reform of their institutions so that the two States are completely independent , to cease hostilities , and to promote democratic governance in order to establish long-term peace and security in the area .
I voted in favour of the joint motion for a resolution on Sudan and South Sudan because I support all development efforts being made by the EU in order to restore peace and reconstruct this long-suffering area .
Recent developments in the area are raising concerns as regards compliance with the terms of the recent referendum on the independence of South Sudan , while the escalation of violence in Abyei , which is threatening to cause general destabilisation in the area , is a negative development .
The African Union has an important role to play and , with the help of the EU and the UN , must keep its eyes open at this critical time so as to prevent any return to war .
I welcome the Council announcement on more economic aid for South Sudan and I support the recommendation to maintain EU humanitarian aid to the area after 9 July .
I consider that both proposals are necessary and will help in establishing South Sudan as an independent state and in any emergency that may arise .
I think that the European Union and Russia must intensify their negotiations on establishing a partnership and on introducing a comprehensive agreement concerning the political , economic and social system and also taking account of all the issues associated with democracy , the rule of law and respect for human rights .
in writing . - ( LT ) I voted in favour of this resolution .
Enhanced cooperation and good neighbourly relations between the EU and Russia are of major importance for the stability , security and prosperity of Europe and beyond .
The EU and Russia are mutually interdependent , both economically and politically , and therefore , the conclusion of a Strategic Partnership Agreement between the EU and the Russian Federation is particularly important for the further development and intensification of cooperation between the two partners .
In its relations with the Russian Federation , the EU must speak with one voice and show solidarity , particularly as regards safeguarding energy security .
Russia 's energy policy vis-à-vis Member States and countries in the common neighbourhood will show Russia 's true readiness to follow the path of modernisation and democratisation .
I welcome the European Parliament 's requirement that the supply of natural resources should not be used as a political tool and that the principles of interdependence and transparency should be the basis of cooperation on energy security , together with equal access to markets , infrastructure and investment .
I have voted in favour as I believe that the European Union and Russia must use the Nizhny Novgorod Summit to strengthen strategic cooperation and achieve a global cooperation agreement on the social , political and economic system and include issues relating to democracy , the rule of law , and fundamental and human rights .
The summit must serve to review security and energy policy , which must be implemented on the criteria of interdependency , transparency , supply guarantees and the fight against climate change , as well as improved energy efficiency .
It will be necessary to submit plants to stress tests and , in this respect , it is regrettable that the amendment calling for the immediate closure of Chernobyl-type nuclear reactors that continue to operate has not been adopted .
I am voting in favour of the joint resolution on the EU-Russia Summit .
The resolution contains the correct recommendations addressed to the European representatives who will be taking part in the summit , reminding them that the EU must exercise its political power to persuade Russia to assume its share of the responsibility for solving the problems that afflict the world today in the political , economic , geopolitical and environmental sphere .
Russia is one of Europe 's most important economic partners , not to mention a neighbouring country on which , inter alia , European energy policy depends .
With my vote in favour , I am therefore joining in the appeal that this House is making to the EU representatives at the summit to work at this event to create a profitable and useful dialogue for both parties , leading to shared and effective solutions aimed at resolving the most important issues on the European and global political agenda .
I welcome all the efforts made to strengthen and deepen good relations between the EU and other economic powers .
In the case of EU-Russia relations , I welcome the achievements already made in respect of not just a common economic and cooperative space , but also of shared values .
I consider the motion for a resolution on the EU-Russia Summit tabled by the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) the most suitable , given the current situation that has been presented .
I voted for the joint motion for a resolution on the EU-Russia Summit as I think that relations with Russia need to be strengthened , especially in the area of energy security .
The new Partnership and Cooperation Agreement must be comprehensive and legally binding and also include provisions on respect for human rights and the rule of law .
I think that the Partnership for Modernisation is a suitable instrument for encouraging Russia to carry out reforms .
I also believe that Russia joining the WTO will boost investments and improve trade relations with the EU .
It is in our benefit to support Russia in its efforts to become a member of the WTO .
On the other hand , Russia must show its willingness to abandon protectionist measures such as the customs union with Kazakhstan and Belarus .
In the run up to the next EU-Russia Summit , which will take place on 9-10 June in Nizhny Novgorod , we are sending a clear message to the Member States : we must prioritise guarantees of respect for human rights over more ambitious agreements on trade , visas and cooperation .
The European Union must make it clearer to Russia that it should respect its international obligations and commitments .
Since 1994 , there has been no change in our relations with Moscow , even though we clearly need to update our Partnership and Cooperation Agreement .
That should go hand in hand with real progress in the area of democracy and the rule of law .
Finally , it is unacceptable that the provision of natural resources should be used as a political instrument .
The Russian Federation and the European Union have developed a close partnership , and the common fight against international terrorism stands as one of the many examples of this .
In this context , I supported the resolution adopted today on EU-Russia relations before the summit on 9 and 10 June which will seek to establish a new strategic agreement .
With this resolution , MEPs are sending a strong political signal to Russia : whilst greater economic , energetic , strategic and international cooperation between the EU and Russia is desirable , it should nonetheless be conditional upon efforts towards protecting human rights and civil liberties .
Glances exchanged between Europe and Russia have always been characterised by mutual admiration and , simultaneously , by mutual fear .
On the European side , it has been common to be in awe of the size , population and military might of Russia and frightened of Russian expansionism .
For Russia , European scientific and technical progress has been emulated since the time of Peter the Great , but it has simultaneously been feared as something that could potentially destroy the Russian soul and way of being , and viewed as a threat to its territorial integrity .
These trends were not dispelled but rather intensified by the Cold War .
The path taken by Russia towards an essentially liberal , pluralist democracy has experienced both advances and setbacks , but it is undeniable that the country has come a long way since the days of the Iron Curtain .
Nevertheless , there is no doubt that much remains to be done in this respect , and that the European Union and the Russian Federation not only share a historical , cultural and religious heritage , but that they also have common interests and challenges which warrant a closer relationship on many levels .
The European Union should continue to work to make this convergence possible and fruitful .
Russia is a permanent member of the United Nations Security Council , and shares responsibility for maintaining stability in the world with the EU .
The challenges of the Middle East , Libya , Iran , terrorism , energy security , climate change and the financial crisis will be more effectively overcome if our relations with Russia are based on cooperation .
However , three years after the conflict with Georgia , Russia is still not respecting the agreements of 12 August and 8 September 2008 relating to the withdrawal of its forces from the occupied Georgian provinces of South Ossetia and Abkhazia , and does not provide the European Union Monitoring Mission with free and total access to its territories .
I therefore advocate that the EU and Russia must step up negotiations on a new partnership and cooperation agreement based on the mutual interdependence of the EU and Russia .
This agreement should be legally binding and comprehensive , and should encompass all areas related to democracy , the rule of law , and respect for human and fundamental rights .
As usual , the interests of the large economic and financial groups in Europe are at the fore in this resolution .
It is in this context that we must view the pressure put on Russia ( which also occurs with several other countries ) to join the World Trade Organisation , in order to promote ' a level playing field for business communities on both sides ' and ' liberalise trade in the global economy ' , while facilitating foreign investment and renouncing any ' protectionist measures ' .
The resolution thus reels off the repetitive old EU primer of neoliberal and meddling policies .
In this case , however , in addition to access to investments and markets , there is also the central concern of access to , and control of , sources and flows of energy , as well as other raw materials , especially rare earths , of which there is a serious shortage in the EU .
Therefore , a call is made for ' close cooperation over the supply of raw materials and rare earths ' , especially those considered critical .
So-called ' security ' issues should also be noted , including ' the establishment of the missile defence shield ' .
We must remember that Romania , a member of the EU and NATO , has expressed willingness to host this system , which constitutes a threat to Russian security and to peace in Europe .
The majority of the European Parliament is once again expressing its now standard neoliberal and meddling position on relations between the EU and Russia .
The interests of economic and financial groups are prioritised , pressuring Russia to join the World Trade Organisation in order to promote ' a level playing field for business communities on both sides and liberalise trade in the global economy ' , with Russia having to facilitate foreign investment and renounce any ' protectionist measures ' .
Access to , and control of , energy are essential in this respect and therefore require access to markets , infrastructure and investment .
There is also a certain sense of desperation when the call is made to Russia to engage in closer cooperation on the supply of raw materials and rare earths , especially those considered ' critical ' .
And , finally , there is hypocrisy .
Russia is asked to engage in ' further comprehensive dialogue on security issues , including the establishment of the missile defence shield ' , when a Member State of the EU and of NATO , Romania , has already expressed its willingness to host this system , which clearly constitutes a threat to Russian security and to peace across Europe .
Not even the United States has given any assurance that it does not .
in writing . - ( SK ) The resolution deals with the preparations for the EU-Russia Summit to be held on 9 and 10 June 2011 in Nizhny Novgorod .
The summit will focus on common challenges such as the economic and financial crisis , WTO accession , energy and issues related to energy security , long-term efforts to introduce visa-free travel between the EU and Russia , and other international and regional issues .
Russia is a huge market for goods from the EU , of course , and it is also a major supplier of oil and natural gas to EU Member States .
While Russian-EU relations have steadily improved in recent years , the parties involved continue to maintain a certain reserve and distance .
I believe that , if appropriate action is not taken to remedy this situation , the EU 's influence could slowly wane in both Russia and its neighbouring countries , with the risk that the Union would see its role restricted solely to that of a trading partner .
in writing . - ( LT ) I welcomed this document because Russia , which is a permanent member of the UN Security Council , shares responsibility with the EU for maintaining global stability , and because enhanced cooperation and good neighbourly relations between the EU and Russia are of major importance for the stability , security and prosperity of Europe and beyond .
The conclusion of a Strategic Partnership Agreement between the EU and the Russian Federation remains of the utmost importance for the further development and intensification of cooperation between the two partners .
However , concerns remain about Russia 's respect for , and protection of , fundamental and human rights , the rule of law , independence of the judiciary , political control of the media , repressive measures taken against journalists and representatives of the opposition and the fairness of elections .
The document stresses the importance of energy security , and Russia 's energy policy vis-à-vis Member States and countries in the common neighbourhood will show Russia 's true readiness to follow the path of modernisation and democratisation .
The supply of natural resources should not be used as a political tool .
The principles of interdependence and transparency should be the basis of cooperation , together with equal access to markets , infrastructure and investment .
I voted for this resolution and I should like to emphasise that Russia 's energy policy towards the EU Member States and the countries of Eastern Europe will be a litmus test of whether and how genuinely Russia will be able to go down the path of modernisation and democracy .
If the supply of energy resources is not exploited as a political tool , if it applies equal , transparent and non-discriminatory rules to all market players , if Russia makes an objective choice to make use of our existing mutual dependence in the field of energy in a collaborative way , based on specific , fair and legally binding principles , we shall be able to speak of a new era in the development of a united Europe .
Of course , we must not forget and we cannot ignore various important issues , which continue to hinder the development of valuable relations between the EU and Russia , and especially , moreover , the fact that nearly three years after the war in Georgia , Russia continues to occupy a large part of the sovereign territory of Georgia , continues to ignore the agreement concluded in 2008 , and fails to ensure proper access to these territories by the European Union Observer Mission .
in writing . - I voted in favour of the resolution on the EU-Russia Summit but I see no real progress from the Russian side to combat corruption , to apply the rule of law and international law .
Declarative statements by President Medvedev are neither a proof nor a guarantee of real progress .
I would like to remind you that whilst Russia is trying to join the WTO , it disregards , according to suitability , different international obligations , especially regarding human rights .
Can the EU really trust a state that selectively applies international laws ?
I call upon the EU to monitor the pre-election , election and post-election period very closely and make sure every violation is picked up and pointed out .
Independent and transparent elections are the cornerstone of democratic states and if Russia wants to be among those , it has to fulfil the standards .
Although the EU and Russia are interdependent , we see mostly the EU adapting to Russia 's wishes .
The EU has to stand strong and demand full and vigorous implementation of the rule of law , democracy , respect for human rights and an independent judiciary .
Anything less means not living up to our own principles .
Even more , we would let down the people in Russia who desire freedom , prosperity and safety .
The Union needs a new openness in relations with Russia because many new challenges have arisen since the last EU-Russia Summit which we cannot overcome without improved cooperation .
Today , the European Union is unanimous against the Russian policy of stirring up frozen conflicts and Moscow 's attempts at interfering in the politics of independent states which were formerly part of the USSR , such as Georgia .
With increasing anxiety , we are observing successive instances of attacks on freedom of the press and independent journalists .
At meetings with the Russians , we must speak very firmly about press freedoms in Russia .
It must be our priority to ensure that Moscow allows freedom of the press .
However , I do not agree with the part which condemns the Russians for blocking the gay pride march in Moscow and not giving same-sex couples the right to marry or adopt children .
I think that in respect of our approach to homosexual and lesbian movements , every country is fully entitled to pursue its own independent policy .
The European Union respects the culture of its neighbours and should not intervene on questions of morality or axiology .
Enhanced cooperation and good-neighbourly relations between the European Union and Russia are of major importance for stability , security and prosperity for Europe and beyond .
I hope that today 's vote will lead to the adoption of decisive measures towards taking a common path based on transparency and the sharing of common missions to complete for the common good .
I am referring to those measures necessary to prevent any breach of safety in Europe , including further cooperation on illegal immigration , improved controls at cross-border checkpoints and more effective exchange of information on terrorism and organised crime .
in writing . - I voted for this resolution which reaffirms the urgent need for Russia to implement fundamental principles of democracy , the rule of law , human rights and media freedom as a basis for cooperation , and calls on Russia to take concrete action to improve its human rights record and to protect journalists , human rights activists , minorities and opposition representatives from violence and intimidation .
Enhanced cooperation and good-neighbourly relations between the European Union and Russia are of major importance for the stability , security and prosperity of Europe and beyond .
We believe that what is needed is a comprehensive , legally binding agreement that concerns the political , economic and social system , and therefore includes all areas related to democracy , the rule of law , respect for human rights and particularly fundamental rights .
As far as energy security is concerned , we are of the belief that the supply of natural resources should not be used as a means of applying political pressure , but must be based on the principles of interdependence and transparency , together with equal access to markets , infrastructure and investment , so as to establish a legally binding energy framework .
We expect , moreover , further cooperation on illegal immigration , improved controls at cross-border checkpoints and information exchange on terrorism and organised crime .
This report calls for Russia to ' renounce all protectionist measures ' and threatens retaliation if Russia does not bend to this demand .
It only envisages reciprocal free movement of Russian and European citizens happening in the long term , yet it supports the process of free trade that is under way .
It does not criticise NATO 's plan for a European anti-missile shield .
This is arrogant imperialism .
On the other hand , it fails to call on Russia to put an immediate stop to the Chernobyl-style nuclear reactors that threaten all of us .
I am voting against this report , despite its calls for the democratic rights of Russian citizens to be respected , something which I support .
This resolution on the EU-Russia Summit meeting envisages more ambitious trade relations , a new partnership and cooperation agreement and the liberalisation of the visa system , but Moscow has to provide guarantees with regard to improvements in the human rights situation in the country , and put an end to politically motivated judicial rulings , the lack of press freedom and the occupation of Georgian provinces .
At this time , we ask the EU and Russia to take full advantage of this summit to step up negotiations on a new partnership and cooperation agreement and to resolve the latest issues on Russia 's World Trade Organisation membership .
Another important aspect to bear in mind is the dialogue on the further liberalisation of the visa system , in view of the commitment to abolish these in the long run for travel between the EU and Russia .
in writing . - 9 June marked the opening of the 27th EU-Russia Summit in Nizhny Novgorod .
The European delegation was led by the President of the European Council , Herman Van Rompuy and the President of European Commission , Jose Manuel Barroso .
The Russian delegation was led by Dmitry Medvedev .
One of the main topics of the two-day discussion was the Russian embargo on EU vegetable imports as a result of the recent outbreak of a dangerous intestinal infection in Europe .
Russia 's actions have caused a negative response in the EU .
I very much share the concern of the Russian Government and I would like to see the Latvian Republic prohibiting imports of vegetables until the dangerous infection is eliminated completely .
With this resolution , the European Parliament appeals to the EU and Russia to step up negotiations on a partnership and cooperation agreement and calls for Russia to implement all previous signed agreements and to solve the problem of non-citizens in Russia .
I think that , firstly , Europe has to solve the problem of non-citizens in the Latvian Republic and only then make recommendations on this issue .
Overall , I support the resolution and I voted in favour .
In connection with the approaching EU-Russia Summit , the European Parliament has today adopted a resolution containing a proposal of the subjects which should be discussed at the summit .
The document also draws attention to important challenges which should be the subject of cooperation between Russia and the European Union .
Most of all , the fact should be emphasised that the EU and the Russian Federation maintain permanent relations and that their good relations as neighbours influence stability and security not just within the continent of Europe .
In addition , both parties are dependent on each other in both economic and political terms .
In the resolution which has been adopted , the European Parliament expresses the hope that during the EU-Russia Summit , it will be possible to make advances in the area of visa-free travel and energy security .
Parliament also calls on the Russian Federation to demonstrate greater commitment in efforts to combat climate change , chiefly by reducing greenhouse gas emissions .
In the light of the forthcoming elections to the Russian Parliament , it is equally important that the elections be held in accordance with the principles established by the Council of Europe and the OSCE .
It is also necessary to raise the question of violations of human rights and fundamental freedoms in Russia , which is , after all , a member State of the Council of Europe .
in writing . - ( LT ) Russia and the EU are linked both economically and politically .
They are both responsible for maintaining global stability .
Consequently , Russia and the EU must continue to enhance cooperation and develop good neighbourly relations .
Only by using such measures will we be able to guarantee the stability , security and prosperity of Europe and beyond .
The Strategic Partnership Agreement is one of the main tools for implementing the goals outlined .
In order to ensure that the agreement is properly implemented , both parties must comply with its conditions without exception and meet the commitments made , taking into account the protection of human rights and the principles of democracy and the rule of law .
I feel that the summit will remove obstacles regarding Russia 's accession to the WTO .
Russia becoming a full member of the WTO is an important step , which will create a favourable business environment for business operators from both parties and will facilitate and liberalise trade in the global economy .
Attention is drawn to the fact that it is very important to address the issues surrounding the liberalisation of the visa regime , gradually introducing visa-free travel between the EU and Russia .
Energy and nuclear security is another basis for strong and stable cooperation .
The supply of natural resources cannot be used as a political tool .
Furthermore , in order to prevent a nuclear disaster , Chernobyl-type reactors must be decommissioned as a matter of urgency and a bilateral agreement to comply with the highest safety standards must be concluded .
I voted for this resolution and would like to emphasise that Russia will always be a very important partner of the European Union .
It is therefore necessary to establish strategic cooperation , sharing not only economic and commercial interests , but also the goal of close cooperation in Europe and internationally .
I hope that this cooperation develops in accordance with the principles of respect , trust and solidarity .
Europe includes a number of states that have come from the same mould and this should be taken into consideration when examining relations between the EU and Russia .
These relations , between the most important European political union and the largest European state , are stalled .
In short , Russia is an indispensable partner for the Union , not only economically but also politically .
Therefore , the Union must strengthen the ties binding it to its most powerful neighbour by encouraging the facilitation of trade between the two states ( which itself leads to political convergence ) and strengthening the assertion of their inherent values .
Russia shares responsibility with the European Union for maintaining global stability .
Enhanced cooperation and good-neighbourly relations between the European Union and Russia are of major importance for the stability , security and prosperity of Europe and beyond .
Many challenges at international level , in particular , with regard to the Middle East , Libya , Iran , terrorism , energy security , climate change and the financial crises , cannot be overcome effectively without responsible and cooperative relations with Russia .
I note that concerns remain about Russia 's respect for , and protection of , human and fundamental rights , the rule of law , independence of the judiciary , political control of the media , repressive measures taken against journalists and representatives of the opposition and the fairness of elections .
I therefore encourage our Russian counterparts to engage in these issues in an open and constructive way .
in writing . - The EP : regrets that , contrary to Russia 's obligations as a member of the Council of Europe to uphold freedom of assembly , peaceful citizens ' gatherings continue to be banned and violently dispersed , including a gay pride march in Moscow for the sixth consecutive year , disregarding a final ruling made in April 2011 by the European Court of Human Rights ; expects EU delegations and diplomats to actively implement the Toolkit to Promote and Protect the Enjoyment of All Human Rights by LGBT People in the future .
Russia is a neighbour and important partner .
Dialogue between Russia and the EU should be extended to all sectors and we should move towards a strategic partnership for our common future .
I consider that we have common interests with Russia , which we should utilise constructively in order to reach specific agreements on trade , on energy , in order to move towards a transparent and reliable energy policy , and on facilitating the movement of people between Russia and the EU , by making it easier to obtain a visa .
Issues such as reducing corruption and consolidating the rule of law in Russia , in accordance with international rules , will help to cultivate stronger commercial and political ties and we anticipate developments in these sectors .
We trust that Russia , too , will behave like a modern , democratic country .
in writing . - ( DE ) In the split vote on paragraph 17 of this resolution , I voted against the second part .
I believe that focusing on individual disadvantaged groups in society , as this paragraph does , is inappropriate .
Other groups , such as those with differing political opinions , have their human rights violated and we must not tolerate this .
The first part of the paragraph means for me that the rights of lesbian , gay , bisexual and transgender people can be protected , without losing sight of other groups , in order to ensure equal treatment .
I endorse the principles of the resolution on the EU-Russia Summit .
We should talk about the questions of the unresolved conflicts in Moldova , Georgia and Nagorno-Karabakh .
Russian activity in these regions is making stabilisation of the situation and a peaceful resolution impossible .
Another very important question is the matter of energy sources and the costs which will be borne by EU Member States when paying Russia for them .
A resolution to the question of the ban on imports of vegetables from the EU to the Russian market is urgent .
In the summer period , its financial effects on producers are colossal .
I do not agree , however , with paragraph 17 of the resolution , which attacks Russia for not giving gay and lesbian people the right to marry or adopt children , and neither do I agree with the condemnation of Russia for blocking the gay pride march .
Granting such rights should be a sovereign matter for each country .
Ways of life , traditions and models which are socially acceptable in some EU Member States are foreign to Russia .
So the European Union , which respects the cultural traditions of Russians , should not put pressure on Moscow on this matter , and should leave the questions of the rights of sexual minorities to marry and adopt children in the hands of national legislation .
In the last few years , the European Parliament has received more than 400 petitions concerning misleading business practices by certain business directory companies .
These petitions have been sent by independent traders , voluntary organisations and family businesses which have fallen victim to misleading business directories .
As the current directive on misleading practices has turned out to be insufficient , I voted in favour of this resolution calling on the European Commission to speed up the revision of this directive so that such misleading practices can no longer take place .
This is not the first time that the European Parliament has discussed the issue of misleading business directories and the directories problem has often been brought up with the Commission and the Member States .
I have often spoken on the matter in Parliament and I recently contacted the Commission to discuss all the complaints coming from my own constituency about Internet directory fraud schemes based in other countries .
The fraud scheme people pretend that they are genuine directories and then they charge the businesses - which did not seek the service in the first place or realise that there would be a charge .
Even though Directive 2006 / 114 / EC is in place , not enough is being done by the Commission or the Member States to aid businesses affected by the fraud schemes or to eliminate the fraud schemes entirely .
I support the resolution of Parliament , which draws attention to this issue , and again ask the Commission to take prompt measures to eliminate this misleading and destructive practice .
The EU must protect the people and businesses of the Union from this fraud scheme which is far too prevalent .
in writing . - ( LT ) I voted in favour of this resolution .
The European Parliament has received more than 400 petitions concerning widespread misleading business practices by business directory companies that are having a significant financial impact on thousands of mostly small businesses in the European Union .
The practices in question typically entail luring businesses , as well as professionals and non-profit entities , into being listed in a business directory free of charge , although signatories later discover that they have signed up to a contract with a fee .
As the business directory companies are often established in a different EU Member State from that of their victims , it is difficult for the latter to seek protection and / or redress from national authorities .
Although the European Commission cannot demand that an individual or a company implement the provisions of the directive on misleading and comparative advertising , as Guardian of the Treaties , it must ensure that the directive is properly implemented in the Member States .
I welcome the call for the Commission to take action , verifying the transposition of the provisions of the directive into Member States ' national law and their proper implementation , and to take corrective action , where necessary , in order to stop misleading activities .
I have supported this initiative as the Commission must ensure that Member States comply with Directive 2006 / 114 / EC on misleading and comparative advertising , which applies to business-to-business transactions .
However , either the directive is inadequate or it has been incorrectly enforced by Member States .
Therefore , the Commission must immediately review and improve the directives in order to avoid these practices .
My vote in favour of this resolution on the misleading practices of business directory companies represents a new phase in the long campaign conducted by the Lega Nord in defence of our entrepreneurs .
The resolution denounces the exceedingly high number of scams carried out to the detriment of thousands of small businesses across the entire European Union and highlights the defective transposition by Member States of the 2006 directive on misleading advertising .
With my vote , I fully support the appeal that the resolution launches to the Commission for the latter to face up to its responsibilities and its duty to scrutinise the actions of individual states , and for it to improve the existing legislation on business protection .
in writing . - ( CS ) More than 400 petitions delivered to the European Parliament draw attention to the widespread misleading commercial practices employed by certain ' business directory companies ' , consisting of persuading businesses and also non-profit entities to register free of charge in a directory , only to discover that they have signed a contract that also entails a fee .
However , directory companies are often established in a Member State other than the one in which their victims are based , making it difficult for the latter to seek protection or redress from national authorities .
Regrettably , Directive 2006 / 114 / EC concerning misleading and comparative advertising , which applies to business-to-business transactions , fails to provide a sufficiently effective remedy or is inadequately enforced by Member States .
Since the Commission is obliged to ensure that this directive is properly implemented by Member States , it should take stock of the situation , and , where necessary , take appropriate corrective action .
In particular , it has a duty and a responsibility to stop the misleading commercial practices used by ' directory companies ' .
The production of some sort of blacklist of the misleading practices employed by these companies could be of at least some assistance here .
in writing . - I voted against the motion for a resolution on misleading business directories as the UK operates its own misleading marketing regulations via the Office of Fair Trading , which controls the regulation of open and honest trade and contracts within the UK .
However , such regulations do not encompass misleading contracts in other Member States .
Yet homogenising EU law on the issue would undermine British competence in this area and also open up further channels for EU businesses to exploit the British market as they may be able to circumvent EU law .
In the UK , the Chambers of Commerce and UK Trade and Investments offer access to secure business directories and networking opportunities through programmes such as the Overseas Market Introduction Service , Passport to Export and even the European Enterprise Network .
It is paramount that these directories are given prominence in the UK market and are not expunged by allowing EU companies to flood the British market under the aegis of EU trade legislation .
The misleading trading practices used by publishers of business directories chiefly affect small businesses , and so have substantial negative consequences for the sustainability and development of the economy .
Therefore , and taking into account the constant recurrence of this problem throughout the EU , I welcome the draft resolution proposing to tackle such activities .
in writing . - MEPs have received more than 400 petitions concerning widespread misleading business practices by business directory companies affecting thousands of mostly small businesses .
The misleading business practices in question typically consist in luring businesses , as well as professionals and non-profit entities , into being listed in a business directory free of charge only for the signatories to later discover that they have signed a contract with a fee .
Indeed , the business directory companies are often established in a different Member State , making it difficult for the victims to seek protection or redress from national authorities .
I support this resolution .
The directive on misleading and comparative advertising ( 2006 / 114 / EC ) , which applies to business-to-business transactions , is insufficient in providing an effective remedy and is also inadequately enforced by Member States .
The resolution urges the Commission to verify Member States ' correct transposition , implementation and national enforcement of the directive and to speed up its activities with regard to revising and improving the directive and other relevant legislation so as to put an end to the misleading practices of business directory companies as soon as possible , notably by specifically blacklisting misleading practices by business directories .
Misleading advertising and dishonest trading practices undermine consumer confidence and thus work to the detriment of the Internal Market .
It is therefore vital that European legislation should protect consumers and businesses against this kind of practice .
As regards misleading practices in business directories , which are common and have a disastrous effect on businesses , I consider it a good sign that the relevant legislation is being overhauled so as to put an end to the misleading practices used by publishers of business directories , namely through the creation of a blacklist of misleading practices used by business directories .
The present motion for a resolution analyses the conduct of certain directory companies that behave unacceptably when they trick thousands of citizens and companies in the European Union .
Regrettably , not only is Directive 2006 / 114 / EC on misleading and comparative advertising failing to obtain the hoped-for results , but the victims are , in particular , elderly individuals , small and medium-sized businesses and even charitable organisations .
We are dealing with companies that are very aggressive in their tactics , real predators with no scruples , whose activity must be stopped as a matter of urgency .
Since these practices are carried on across frontiers , it is very difficult to bring those responsible to justice .
Moreover , there is no blacklist of these fraudulent companies , such as would help to prevent their practices , which meanwhile continue with the knowledge of the national authorities .
European legislation has to protect European citizens .
We cannot allow these companies to move with impunity from one Member State to another and even out of the EU , taking advantage of the principle of free movement of people and goods throughout the Schengen area .
What we have before us is a very timely proposal which deserves my full support .
The victims are waiting for practical results , and I hope that the Commission will take the measures necessary to bring this state of affairs to an end .
As is mentioned in the resolution , the European Parliament has received more than 400 petitions on the subject of widespread misleading trading practices by publishers of business directories which affect thousands of businesses , mostly small ones .
These practices have a significant financial impact overall .
On the whole , the misleading trading practices in question consist of inviting companies , professional individuals and non-profit-making organisations to register free of charge in a business directory .
Those who sign up discover only later that they have put their names to a contract with a fee attached .
Furthermore , the publishers of business directories are often located in a different Member State from their victims , making it difficult for the latter to appeal to their national authorities for protection and / or justice .
The Commission for Petitions regrets the fact that Directive 2006 / 114 / EC on misleading and comparative advertising , which is applicable to business-to-business transactions , seems either to fall short of providing effective counter-measures or to be insufficiently implemented by Member States .
In the resolution that has now been adopted , the European Parliament calls on the European Commission to analyse the problem and work towards a solution , a request that has gained our support .
These directory companies are clearly not only deceptive and misleading .
They are also fraudulent , because anyone who lures lone traders and firms to their directory solely for their own benefit and enrichment is clearly engaging in malpractice .
These directory company practices are also clearly outside the law , according to the directive on misleading and comparative advertising .
However , I do not think we need to create new legislation .
We need to try and put the law into practice as quickly and effectively as possible and to create conditions so that what are often small family businesses know how to mount an efficient legal defence .
I understand that over 400 petitions relating to abuse of business directories have been received by the European Parliament .
What usually happens is that a business registers with a directory to have the name of the business listed in it , believing that no fee is involved .
Only later does the business learn that it must pay a fee .
I fully support this resolution , which calls on the European Commission to properly implement the directive on misleading and comparative advertising .
in writing . - Proper implementation and enforcement of the MCA Directive is essential to protect small and vulnerable organisations and business against unfair , misleading or aggressive marketing practices .
Even though the directive covers business-to-business misleading advertising , its wider scope is to protect consumers ' interests , to safeguard smooth functioning of the Single Market and to significantly improve citizens ' lives .
I have seen some improvement , but I still believe that much has to be done in order to stop unfair misleading practices .
Businesses in Europe are still victims of abusive misleading behaviour leading to significant financial losses mostly for small business and start-up business .
Due to the inaccurate transposition of the directive , I fear that there is still little coherence from one Member State to another in the way in which these unfair practices are regulated .
If the situation does not improve , further actions are required .
There is a need for closer collaboration and coordination between the Commission and Member States in order to better implement and enforce the directive .
There is also a need for better dissemination of information and training , in particular , to small businesses and public servants .
Flexible rules for sanctions , complaints and compensation mechanisms are necessary in order to adapt to the changing market conditions and new market practices .
With the adoption of today 's resolution , the European Parliament has once again called for protection for small and medium-sized enterprises .
Practices in which firms are offered a listing in a business directory while the false impression is given that it is a free service are becoming increasingly common .
Unfortunately , when the facts are revealed , it turns out that in reality , the enterprise has undertaken to pay a fixed sum for a certain period of time .
This type of practice has been the subject of complaints made to the European Parliament by businesses .
This is why we also want the European Commission to check how the Member States have implemented the provisions of Directive 2006 / 114 / EC on misleading and comparative advertising .
The European Parliament is also demanding that the question of misleading business directories be included in a review of that directive .
In the resolution which has been adopted today , we return , too , to a proposal which has already been made in the resolution adopted by Parliament in 2008 on the same matter , namely , the idea of creating a blacklist of dishonest practices employed by businesses which operate business directories .
I hope the European Commission will not drag its feet over taking the appropriate steps to protect small and medium-sized businesses from these dishonest practices .
in writing . - ( LT ) I welcomed this document because Parliament has received more than 400 petitions concerning widespread misleading business practices by business directory companies that are having a significant financial impact on thousands of mostly small businesses in the European Union , and Parliament continues to receive petitions and complaints about business directory companies .
The misleading business practices in question typically entail luring businesses , as well as professionals and non-profit entities , into being listed in a business directory free of charge , but signatories later discover that they have signed up to a contract with a fee .
The business directory companies are often established in a different Member State from that of their victims , making it difficult for the latter to seek protection and / or redress from national authorities .
The Commission is urged to speed up its activities with regard to revising and improving Directive 2006 / 114 / EC and other relevant legislation in order to put an end to the misleading practices of business directory companies as soon as possible , notably by specifically blacklisting misleading practices by business directories .
in writing . - I voted for this resolution which urges the Commission to speed up its activities with regard to revising and improving the directive and other relevant legislation so as to put an end to the misleading practices of business directory companies as soon as possible , notably by specifically blacklisting misleading practices by business directories
in writing . - ( CS ) The motion for a resolution tabled in response to oral question B7-0315 / 2011 on misleading business directories , while brief , encompasses two areas requiring constant attention .
The first area is the support of small and medium-sized enterprises by EU bodies and institutions , in the context here of protection from misleading commercial practices ; the second area is the protection of competition by preventing widespread unfair competition , which includes misleading and comparative advertising .
We should welcome the anticipated efforts of the Commission , which , under the resolution , is urged not only to revise and improve Directive 2006 / 114 / EC concerning misleading and comparative advertising , but also to take corrective measures against the patchy enforcement of this directive by EU Member States .
Misleading advertising and dishonest trading practices are bad for the Internal Market .
We therefore must legislate to protect consumers and businesses from this kind of practice .
in writing . - Parliament has received more than 400 petitions concerning widespread misleading business practices by business directory companies , affecting thousands of mostly small businesses in the European Union , with a significant financial impact .
Parliament continues to receive petitions and complaints about business directory companies .
The misleading business practices in question typically consist of luring businesses , as well as professionals and non-profit entities , into being listed in a business directory free of charge .
Signatories later discover that they have signed up to a contract with a fee .
The business directory companies are often established in a different Member State from that of their victims , making it difficult for the latter to seek protection and / or redress from national authorities .
The European Parliament urges the Commission to speed up its activities with regard to revising and improving Directive 2006 / 114 / EC and other relevant legislation so as to put an end to the misleading practices of business directory companies as soon as possible , notably by specifically blacklisting misleading practices by business directories .
I fully agree and I voted in favour .
In recent years , there has , unfortunately , been a growing trend towards unfair business practices and misleading advertising .
In the past , it was generally consumers who were the targets of these scams , but now the fraudulent practices are extending into the business world .
The problem is that these fraudulent activities generally take place across national borders , which makes it harder to arrest and prosecute the criminals .
Some of the companies constantly change their names and their P.O. box addresses and this also makes it difficult to arrest the people who are pulling the strings .
Therefore , it is important for us to close the loopholes in this area so that we can take action against fraud more effectively .
However , the measures should be directed not only at the business world and not only , as in the specific case covered here , at the misleading commercial practices of directory companies .
Decisive action must also be taken against the various forms of fraud aimed at consumers .
I see this petition as a step in the right direction , which should be followed by further measures , and , therefore , I have voted in favour of it .
in writing . - ( LT ) I welcome this resolution because we must encourage honest business practices and halt the spread of misleading business practices .
To that end , we must set out effective means for redress .
Currently , most companies , particularly small and medium-sized enterprises , suffer significant financial losses as a result of such misleading activities .
Enterprises receive inaccurate business propositions and they are entrapped into unwanted contracts for advertising in business directories .
In this case , national authorities are unable to provide adequate protection or redress because the business directory companies are often established in a different Member State from the businesses affected .
This enables business directory companies to abuse the current situation unopposed .
In order to stop such dishonest activities as soon as possible , the Commission must compile a blacklist of misleading practices by business directories and adopt relevant legislation , focusing , in particular , on the provisions of the directive on misleading and comparative advertising and the implementation of these .
I believe that we must create the right conditions for cooperation between the Member States ' national authorities , which would facilitate the application of administrative or legal measures across borders .
The European Union must implement these measures for the Internal Market to be able to function normally , for consumers to be protected , and for business operators to be able to engage in fair business practices .
in writing . - I voted for this motion for a resolution because it has clearly pointed out the current situation of misleading business practices , which are already against EU law , and that the international dimension of the fraud makes it difficult for the victims to pursue and fight against the fraudsters .
I believe that vulnerable small businesses and professionals need to be protected from the misleading business directories , and thus the EP and the EU as a whole must show that European law is there for everyone to follow and respect .
Therefore , I fully support this resolution that calls on the Commission to proactively verify Member States ' transposition , implementation and national enforcement of Directive 2006 / 114 / EC and take corrective action where needed .
The Commission should also speed up revising and improving the directive and other relevant legislation to end the misleading practices of business directory companies as soon as possible .
This European Parliament resolution of 9 June 2011 on misleading business directories warns the Commission of the need to step up its activities regarding the revision and improvement of the directive and other relevant legislation in order to put an end , as soon as possible , to the misleading practices used by publishers of business directories , namely , through the compilation of a specific blacklist of misleading practices used in business directories .
According to the rapporteur , Parliament has received more than 400 petitions concerning misleading trading practices .
Such practices threaten the healthy functioning of the Internal Market , first because consumer confidence is essential to the healthy functioning of the economy and , more importantly , because the practice in question should be made illegal .
The matter is of such importance as to have already warranted legislative intervention by the Union .
However , in view of the results that are now known , the Commission must be urged to supervise the implementation of Directive 2006 / 114 / EC and , at the same time , to test its limits with a view to its improvement .
in writing . - The EP : 1 .
Regrets that Directive 2006 / 114 / EC ( 2 ) on misleading and comparative advertising , which applies to business-to-business transactions , appears to be either insufficient in providing an effective remedy or inadequately enforced by Member States ; 2 . Recalls that , although the Commission has no power to enforce the directive directly against individuals or companies , it does have a duty to ensure that the directive is adequately implemented by Member States ; 3 .
Calls on the Commission to proactively verify Member States ' transposition , implementation and national enforcement of Directive 2006 / 114 / EC and take corrective action where needed .
in writing . - I voted in favour of this resolution as part of a sensible reaction by European politicians from 27 countries to this fraudulent behaviour .
For too long , companies , especially in my region of the South East of England , have been targeted by this unscrupulous practice .
I have been told by constituents that they have been invited to advertise their business for no costs only to receive a large invoice with legal threats not long after .
This practice heralds from Spain but could happen elsewhere .
The local authorities in Spain should do far more to take on such tricksters and prosecute those involved in fraudulent behaviour .
The number of complaints which Parliament has received concerning misleading business directories and the fact that they are often cross-border in nature demonstrate that there is a need to improve EU regulations in this area .
in writing . - ( DE ) I voted in favour of the motion for a resolution and the call for an improvement to the legal situation that it contains .
However , action needs to be taken in the meantime in order to prevent the number of businesses affected rising still higher .
A strategic information campaign is needed in order to pull the rug out from under these profiteers .
It is important that offers for inclusion in directories be examined extremely thoroughly and carefully , particularly if they are allegedly free of charge .
Corrections to votes and voting intentions : see Minutes
Approval of the minutes of the previous sitting : see Minutes
1 .
Madagascar ( debate )
The next item is the debate on Madagascar .
author . - Mr President , the illegal and unelected regime of Andry Rajoelina is riddled with corruption and has orchestrated serious human rights abuses in Madagascar , yet Rajoelina came to power pledging an end to corruption and human rights abuses that allegedly flourished under the ousted former President , Marc Ravalomanana .
This irony cannot be lost on the long-suffering people of Madagascar , many of whom live in abject poverty .
The EU now needs to consider a substantial reinforcement of targeted measures against Rajoelina and his henchmen and cronies and , if necessary , to invoke the Cotonou Agreement 's provisions on failures of governance and to apply the necessary sanctions .
The African Union ( AU ) could do far more .
We have heard many platitudes from the AU , but we have seen little concrete action so far .
Such action should include brokering an agreement between Rajoelina and Ravalomanana , allowing the former president to return to Madagascar without any risk or prejudice .
Rajoelina should also allow his rival to stand in the presidential election planned for September this year .
Sadly , the portents for stability and reconciliation in Madagascar are not good .
I hope that in the next few months , matters will be resolved peacefully .
Mr President , this is not the first time that we have discussed the drama in Madagascar in this Chamber .
Things have hardly changed for the people of Madagascar since the resolution in February 2010 , except for the worse .
They are the focus of my concerns , as they are the main victims .
Beyond that , we are now seeing an apparently never-ending power struggle being played out .
More than a year ago already , the European Parliament clearly expressed its support for the idea of a democratic process which could lead to elections .
That has still not transpired .
Rajoelina is still in place .
As we restate in this resolution , he must not be able to stand in new elections - that must be made clear .
I would simply like to ask for the negotiations in progress with the Southern African Development Community ( SADC ) , which have not yet produced a conclusive result , to be given a chance to do so .
That is why I would opt for a measured tone in relation to the situation so that we leave an opportunity for negotiations , which should take place very urgently and , I hope , reach a conclusion .
author . - ( FR ) Mr President , just for once , today , the Confederal Group of the European United Left - Nordic Green Left can only regret the tone of the resolutions before us .
This is particularly true of the resolution on Madagascar .
I have already had occasion to deplore this and other resolutions , in February 2010 , when the previous urgent resolution on that country was adopted .
In that country , as in many others in Africa , the European Union is demonstrating its political impotence , and we are not going to change things by calling for harsher economic sanctions to be imposed on that country .
The only victims of the situation are , and will continue to be , the people of Madagascar , who do not need this .
We would have preferred it if the European Parliament had sent a clear message of support to the mediator of the Southern African Development Community ( SADC ) , who has worked hard for a year to try to find the most amicable solution possible .
We would have preferred a message congratulating Mr Chissano on his mediation work , which led him to present a road map to the SADC for the resolution of the political crisis in Madagascar .
A new meeting of the SADC is to be held in Johannesburg on Saturday in the presence of all the representatives of the different strands of political opinion in Madagascar to ratify this road map .
We wish to make a plea for the people of Madagascar and to reiterate that it is up to them , and them alone , to decide , without international pressure , who governs them .
The role of the European Union is to help them .
We do not therefore wish to be associated with this partial resolution , which risks adding fuel to the fire instead of supporting the efforts of the SADC , and we refuse to support the imposition of harsher economic sanctions .
Mr President , just as the previous speakers have also mentioned , I , too , wish to say that since February 2010 when we discussed the situation in Madagascar , we have seen no progress .
We could say that the transition has taken place not to democracy , but to an even deeper crisis than a year and a few months ago .
The Southern African Development Community meeting in Gaborone was admittedly presented as a final chance .
Unfortunately , we have all seen that it was a failure .
I believe that we can retain the hope that during the meeting this weekend , on Saturday , there will still be some positive developments .
On the other hand , it is true that Madagascar 's economic and social situation is extremely dire , with the majority of the Madagascan population living on less than USD 1 per day .
How can they get out of this situation ?
Through a neutral , inclusive and consensual transition process .
We are not here to give our backing to one side or the other , but to support the idea of this kind of process .

Mr President , following the coup d 'état , Mr Rajoelina 's government has turned Madagascar into a hub of political instability .
It is a country where there is no separation of powers , the media are controlled by the government , human rights are violated and there are abuses by the current Malagasy security forces against the people of Madagascar and it is they who have directly suffered from the political consequences .
This illegal regime is causing enormous humanitarian problems in a resource-rich country through the lack of basic foodstuffs , water and sanitation , health and education services .
The European Union must continue with its humanitarian aid to the people and must contribute to finding an agreement between the parties that facilitates a neutral transitional government , which is consensual and inclusive , in order to restore constitutional order and call free and transparent democratic elections that allow all political movements and leaders to participate freely and let the Malagasy people decide their future .
author . - ( FR ) Mr President , the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance once again deplores the conditions under which Mr Rajoelina came to power in Madagascar .
The political situation of that country , which is very unstable , is extremely worrying .
There have been numerous human rights violations : violence against demonstrators , illegal arrests , arbitrary detentions , as well as abuses against journalists and political opponents .
The security forces enjoy total impunity .
Leaders of opposition political movements have been imprisoned .
We are demanding their release .
In addition , the uncontrolled management of the country 's natural resources threatens prospects for development for future generations and paves the way for an ecological disaster .
We condemn the illegal exploitation of the mineral resources as well as the pillaging of precious wood , particularly rosewood .
The restoration of the rule of law in Madagascar is an absolute priority and requires the organisation of free , transparent and democratic elections supported by international aid and , first and foremost , the European Union .
In our resolution , we condemn the human rights violations and abuses by the Malagasy security forces against their own population , and call for the dissolution of political militia , for full respect for human rights , as well as civil , political , social and economic rights , and for the restoration of the rule of law .
We call for the immediate release of political prisoners and for the direct return of political exiles .
A return to constitutional order is a condition for the return to normality in Madagascar .
What is needed are free , transparent and fair elections organised under the supervision of the international community and which will comply with democratic standards .
Our main dilemma concerns how to increase humanitarian aid to the people of Madagascar , since we do not recognise the unconstitutional regime .
I hope that in spite of this , such help can be effective .

on behalf of the S & D Group . - Mr President , two years have passed since power was taken by force in Madagascar by a military regime that has not fulfilled at all the commitments made to ensure a transition to democracy , political pluralism and freedom of expression .
The fact that the African Union has suspended the country 's membership , declaring the political regime illegal , along with the suspension of assistance by the IMF and the World Bank , have led to the government 's international isolation and deepened the problems of a population deprived of foreign aid .
Therefore , our proposal for a resolution outlines two sets of measures : an appeal to the EU and also to the Security Council to extend to all the member countries the visa ban adopted by the African Union and also to increase humanitarian aid to the civilians in Madagascar .
Politically , the EU should insist more strongly that political parties in Madagascar rise above their obvious conflicts and agree on the road map proposed by the Southern African Development Community to overcome the crisis .
In this respect , a decision by the former President Marc Ravalomanana to return to his country is essential , taking into consideration the fact that the current leaders are forcing him to choose between exile and forced labour for life .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Mr President , a military coup d 'état in Madagascar has been followed by continual violations of human rights and civil liberties .
We have had to witness the concentration of executive , legislative and judiciary powers , together with the media , in the hands of Andry Rajoelina , who prides himself on the title of the President of the High Transitional Authority .
I am pleased that the EU and its Member States have not recognised his illegitimate government .
We should never give credit to any authoritarian ruler by engaging in formal relations , even if we have done so in the past .
Therefore , I welcome the sanctions that have so far been imposed on the regime , and encourage the international community to extend them in order to overthrow Rajoelina 's government and bring about a true and definitive transition to democracy .
( RO ) Mr President , the coup d 'état which took place in March 2009 has been followed by acts of violence , human rights violations , including the random arrest of opposition leaders , and internal insecurity .
These matters must be investigated and their perpetrators punished .
The regime is boycotting the international and regional efforts to restore peace and organise free elections for a legitimate , democratic government .
However , the efforts to find solutions must not be abandoned .
In addition , the political militia must be disbanded , as a matter of urgency , and the abuses carried out by the government 's security forces against the population ended .
It is vital for free , democratic elections to be organised as soon as possible so that legitimate constitutional order can be established and the country 's reconstruction can get under way .
This is why I call on the Commission and Council to continue their efforts and step them up more quickly so as to provide solutions and the environment for organising free elections and protection for human rights in Madagascar .
( FI ) Mr President , the people of the world 's fourth largest island have been suffering since the military takeover in 2009 .
Madagascar has an illegal government in power which the people have not elected .
Even its natural riches and renewable natural resources have failed to promote prosperity .
The Madagascans live in squalor and poverty on their island .
Repeated violations of human rights , the harassment of politicians , religious people and civil society , frequent arbitrary arrests , the looting of churches and the intimidation of the press are everyday occurrences in the country .
The list could go on to include media censorship , keeping the nation in poverty , unlawful arrests , disappearances and torture .
In addition to the human suffering , Madagascar 's biodiversity is under threat .
The island 's flora and fauna have evolved in isolation and are irreplaceable and unique , when considered globally .
The nation must be able to decide its future itself , and the European Union has to be involved in supporting the Madagascans in every way possible .
Mr President , the situation in Madagascar is the classical situation where the new is no better than the old .
This illegal regime came into power in 2009 with military support and matters have not improved one bit .
So all the old bad habits remain : unlawful killings , mental and physical torture of prisoners , overcrowding and pre-trial detention are rampant , and , of course , poverty abounds with the minimum wage of USD 35 per month .
The solution is obvious .
We need a democratic regime there and we at the European Union must do our best to establish that because , without that , progress cannot be made .
If we can get free elections and a new government in place , the European Union , in conjunction with other international bodies , particularly the African Union , can help nurture this country along on the road to democracy and the road to economic recovery .
( FI ) Mr President , since the transfer of power in March 2009 , the political situation has continued to be unstable , and there have constantly been new disturbances in Madagascar .
Rajoelina 's administration breaches human rights and oppresses its own citizens .
In May 2011 , representatives of the Africa Caribbean Pacific-European Union ( ACP-EU ) group took the view that Madagascar should have a viable temporary administration , and soon .
Right now , an attempt is being made to resolve this crisis , and the Southern African Development Community ( SADC ) has invited 11 Madagascan political parties to a summit in Botswana .
Three of the main opposition parties , however , have rejected this road map , because it would allow Rajoelina to continue in power until the next elections .
Up till now , Rajoelina has reneged on all earlier possible attempts at agreement .
Why , then , should he be trusted this time ?
That is why the EU and the international community must intervene in the situation , and this illegal government headed by Rajoelina should be brought to an end .
( PL ) Mr President , the cause of the current political crisis in Madagascar was a military coup d 'état , which forced the democratically elected President of Madagascar , Marc Ravalomanana , to resign and go into exile two years ago .
The seizure of power by the military was strongly condemned by the international community , including the European Union , which immediately cut off development aid .
In addition , Madagascar was suspended from the Southern African Development Community and the African Union , which contributed to further isolation of the island .
The political crisis in Madagascar is just reaching a crucial point , in which there is the opportunity that the negotiations which are in progress between the political leaders will bring about an end to the crisis .
This is an ideal opportunity to restore constitutional order and call new elections .
The talks also have fundamental significance for the restoration of funds to the country , which had payments of over EUR 600 million in EU development aid suspended .
I hope the sides which have been in conflict will now manage to introduce a road map which will provide for the establishment of an interim government until new and - I trust - fair elections are called .
( PT ) Mr President , I wish first of all to deplore the delay in providing the Portuguese versions of this afternoon 's resolutions .
Some of these are still not available as I speak , and I therefore wish to register my strong protest .
Regarding the situation in Madagascar , the European Union may give its support to a process of reconciliation , but it must do so without intervening or interfering in matters which only the Malagasy people can decide .
Above all , the European Union must refrain from taking sides in the conflict .
All our efforts should be in the interests of the Malagasy people and not of any one of the conflicting parties .
It is important to value and follow up the efforts of the Southern African Development Community to resolve the conflict and find a political solution to the crisis in the country .
For our own part , we wish here to reaffirm the necessity of respecting the ability of the Malagasy people to choose and determine their own future .
( RO ) Mr President , the current political crisis in Madagascar poses a risk to democracy and stability in the region .
The removal from power of the democratically elected president has resulted in a climate of violence and insecurity being imposed .
I should remind you that international donors have withdrawn the financial support given to the island 's population .
This means that Madagascar is now faced with a poverty rate of 80 % .
The US has stopped offering tax exemptions to the textile imports from this country for the same reasons .
This has resulted in the disappearance of one of the main sources of national income .
I welcome the efforts of the Southern African Development Community to put an end to this crisis and restore democracy in the country .
I think that it is vital to involve regional organisations in resolving these tensions in order to reach a political compromise .
( RO ) Mr President , the political crisis in Madagascar has led to this country being isolated on the international stage .
Financial aid to Madagascar has been suspended by the European Union , through the enforcement of the provisions of the Cotonou Agreement , as well as by the IMF and World Bank .
I support the measures adopted by the European Union in a situation where the transition to a democratic system is being jeopardised indefinitely by the illegal and , by extension , unconstitutional way in which Rajoelina took power .
On the other hand , the decision to apply sanctions is always difficult due to the inevitable humanitarian , economic and social consequences triggered by this .
We must think about the Madagascan people , who need our support .
This must be demonstrated not only by appealing for free , pluralist elections to be organised and democratic order to be restored , but also , in practical terms , by providing proper humanitarian aid .
( IT ) Mr President , it is only since July 2003 that Madagascar began again to take an active part in the life of the African Union , since until the end of the 1990s , its political and economic ties were predominantly with the non-aligned socialist countries .
The military coup d 'état of March 2009 , however , saw the former mayor of the capital city install himself in the presidential palace , which had already been occupied by the army that supported him .
After 19 months of institutional crisis in the country , precisely on the day on which nearly 8 million Malagasy people were called on to vote on reforming the constitution , in November 2010 , all hope of fashioning a genuine democracy in this former European colony was lost .
Today in Madagascar , there is a transitional government that nevertheless holds no promise of anything good , either on an economic level , if we consider that people there live on less than one dollar a day , or on a humanitarian level .
Since , until now , neither the European Union nor the African Union have managed to achieve any compromise with the government of Madagascar , certain measures have been adopted , including the suspension of aid from the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank , as well as our withholding recognition of the transitional government .
We condemn the coup d 'état and stress the urgent need for free and transparent elections , monitored by the international community .
Mr President , I have great respect for you , but surely it is up to the speaker the speed at which he chooses to speak , and that should be the choice of the speaker .
The speakers in this Parliament should not run the risk of having their speech wrecked by interruptions from the Chair on behalf of the interpreters .
Could I put that point to you ?
( Mixed reactions )
Lord Dartmouth , to a large extent I agree with your view , but we also get indications from our interpreters that they cannot keep up with the pace .
Of course , when I interrupt the speaker , I always give him the additional time , so everybody is happy - the speaker is happy , you are happy that you get the interpretation , and , of course , our interpreters are happy as well .
That is the purpose of the work we are doing here .
( Applause )
( FI ) Mr President , since the military takeover in March , political instability and a deteriorating humanitarian situation have been becoming ever more obvious features of everyday life for the Madagascans .
With the political crisis , they have even more difficulties accessing basic foodstuffs , water , hygiene products and health services .
Those currently in power have illegally monopolised executive , legislative and judicial power , and have taken control of the media .
The country 's security services are guilty of violence against ordinary people .
Many activists have been imprisoned for political reasons , and former leading political figures have had to flee the country .
The negotiations that are in progress must be stepped up fast , and a way must be sought to restore constitutional order .
The human rights violations call for impartial investigation .
The EU should increase humanitarian aid for Madagascar , and targeted sanctions should be continued until a solution to the political crisis has been found .
Mr President , honourable Members , the Commission and Baroness Ashton , the High Representative , are deeply concerned about the situation in Madagascar and we have promised to give our continued support to the people of this beautiful country .
We attach great importance to overcoming the ongoing political crisis and the economic and social effects on the population of Madagascar which are increasing the burden placed on the people on a daily basis .
In the same way as you , the Members of Parliament , we are monitoring developments there very closely and using every diplomatic means at our disposal to bring an end to the crisis .
The last two years have involved many retrograde steps and blocks to progress in the country .
Now I believe that we have reached a turning point .
Two days ago , on 7 June , talks began in Gaborone between the Southern African Development Community ( SADC ) and various players in the country , in order to find a way out of the crisis , which is based on neutrality and consensus , includes all the relevant groups , and can be supported both by the international community and by the broad majority of the citizens of Madagascar .
We are hoping for , counting on and working to ensure the success of the talks , so that the African Union and the international community , including the EU , can help and support Madagascar to return to the rule of constitutional law .
We are opposing all attempts to bring about a transition to a one-sided , ' de facto ' government .
For this reason , the European Council decided last week to extend the measures imposed under the terms of Article 96 of the Cotonou Agreement by another six months .
This does not affect humanitarian aid or measures to combat poverty , provided that they are compatible with the terms of this article .
We are still prepared to provide political and financial support for this transition process , provided it is consensual .
It must be based on the road map agreed by the local players and must be endorsed by the SADC , the African Union and the international community .
Against this background , I am hoping for positive developments after two tough and difficult years . Thank you very much .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place shortly .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
For several months , the whole of Europe has been looking at the situation in the countries of North Africa , watching events which are taking place in our immediate neighbourhood with unconcealed anxiety .
Today , we return to the question of another African country , which , for a long time now , has been lost in chaos and political oblivion .
Madagascar has become a lawless state in which an illegal regime is allowing the country to be plundered and engulfed in chaos .
The regime 's repression and disregard for the rights of its own citizens can only aggravate the situation , and this may unfortunately lead to bloodshed .
Therefore , although the call for the restoration of constitutional order and the holding of open and free elections under the supervision of the international community may appear to be nothing but demagoguery , it is , in fact , the only way for the situation in Madagascar to return to normal .
We must also remember that although sanctions may prove successful , they should go hand in hand with a specific proposal for a solution to the political crisis , because the longer the current situation continues , the harder it will be in the future to bring the rule of law to Madagascar .
2 .
Guantánamo : imminent death penalty decision ( debate )
The next item is the debate on six motions for resolution on Guantánamo : imminent death penalty decision .
author . - Mr President , the ECR Group believes that capital punishment is a personal conscience issue for each MEP and , although we acknowledge the EU 's common position opposing execution in all circumstances , the fact of the matter is that many millions of European citizens , our constituents , are still in favour of capital punishment .
Furthermore , this resolution refers to the potential death penalty being imposed on some of the most dangerous terrorists in the world , who thought nothing of conspiring to murder thousands of innocent people .
Indeed , when reading this resolution , I thought of my own constituents who were mercilessly blown up by al-Qaeda-inspired terrorists in London six years ago .
The struggle against global Islamic terrorism is an asymmetric war with unforeseen results and unprecedented consequences , and new jurisprudence internationally is now needed to address this .
The detention camp in Guantánamo Bay is a reflection of this tragic situation .
It is also a reflection on the fact that the United States is carrying a disproportionate share of the burden for the global war on terror .
Of course , all such trials by the US authorities - which , after all , is a country that is a democracy and shares our common values - must nevertheless be conducted fairly with all legal safeguards of due process , and ideally by civilian courts .
author . - Mr President , Europe stands right against capital punishment .
It should be abolished and the EU , particularly the High Representative and the upcoming Polish Presidency , and all the Member States , must firmly demand that the US exclude the death penalty as an option in the first military commission trial for a Guantánamo detainee .
The case of the Saudi citizen , Abd al-Rahim al-Nashiri , must set the standard .
Not only would it be a disgrace to the US human rights record to put him on death row , but it could be totally counterproductive in the fight against terrorism .
President Obama is committed to bringing to an end President Bush 's outrageous legacy of running over international law in the name of national security .
President Obama has yet to deliver on his promise and to close Guantánamo - an area where EU Member States could and should have assisted him more .
But Congress should also help him and press him to reverse this decision to reinstate the military commission system , as it offers no guarantee of a fair trial , and it must also reverse the decision to keep in indefinite detention detainees against whom no charges are brought .
The EU must be very clear on this : charge them or release them .
Mr Abd al-Rahim al-Nashiri has been in US custody for nine years and he claims to have been secretly detained by the CIA in a secret detention centre in Poland .
The upcoming Polish Presidency of the EU has , therefore , a particular responsibility to bring justice to a man who has been subjected to torture , unlawful detention and now faces an unfair trial before a military tribunal .
It is time to set the record right ; both in the United States and in Europe .
( The speaker agreed to take a blue-card question under Rule 149 ( 8 ) )
( PL ) Mr President , I would like to ask a question : where did Mrs Gomes get this information about secret detention centres in Poland ?
An investigation into this matter is under way in Poland , and so far there is no evidence at all that such centres existed .
Perhaps they did exist , but there is no proof of this .
So I am interested as to the source of this information .
author . - Mr President , this Parliament conducted an investigation into the so-called renditions programme and went to Poland and two other countries , including Romania , where there were allegations of secret prisons .
We now know that something was found in Lithuania and a parliamentary inquiry has been set up in that country .
We expect nothing less from the forthcoming Polish Presidency than a proper investigation to establish the truth about these serious allegations .
author . - ( FR ) Mr President , the Confederal Group of the European United Left - Nordic Green Left took the decision not to associate itself with this resolution on Guantánamo .
We do not deplore its substance ; rather , we find it pretty feeble .
For my part , I regret the way in which we worked on drafting this resolution .
How cautious we have been in the way we have talked about condemning the human rights violations perpetrated by a country which claims to be the greatest democracy in the world , which still has the death penalty , and for which Guantánamo is an illustration to the world of human rights and international law violations committed in the name of combating terrorism .
Men have been held in detention for almost ten years on this part of Cuban territory for the sole purpose of bypassing US legal jurisdiction and in spite of the lack of evidence against some of them .
For those men , this is a case of arbitrary detention .
Worse still , some of them have been tortured , including on European soil : in Romania , in Lithuania and in Poland .
This must not be spoken of , however .
We can lecture the entire world on human rights but we are incapable of enforcing them on our own territory .
We must not even speak of it today , in this resolution !
I regret this most sincerely and I do not think that this is how we will promote respect for human rights in the world .
Yes , it is essential to prevent the death sentence being imposed on Mr Abd al-Rahim al-Nashiri and on many others , but we could have condemned more strongly the position of the United States in this regard , while regretting , at the very least , the change in attitude on the part of President Obama , particularly with regard to military tribunals .
( The speaker agreed to take a blue-card question under Rule 149 ( 8 ) )
author . - ( RO ) Mr President , I have a question for Mrs Vergiat and I am sorry that I could not ask Mrs Gomes it as well .
Referring to these allegations against Romania , just like those Mrs Gomes made against Poland , does Mrs Vergiat believe that they help al-Nashiri 's case ?
In what way does referring to these allegations help us identify the means by which we can prevent capital punishment ?
Or is our resolution not about the death penalty but , somehow , about these allegations ?
author . - ( FR ) Mr Preda , we were together at the same session , but we do not share the same conception of those Thursday afternoon sessions .
I am against double standards being applied to human rights .
For some countries , we overdo it , we make sweeping statements and , for others , rather arbitrarily , we only take into account specific situations .
That session , which was held to prepare this resolution , was , from that point of view , a farce , and that is why I left it .
( The speaker agreed to take a blue-card question under Rule 149 ( 8 ) )
Mr President , I would like to ask Ms Vergiat if it is true that her hatred is really directed towards the United States of America in its war against terror , rather than the issue of the death penalty ?
I have never heard her group condemn the execution of people in places like Cuba , or even in China , where it is a common occurrence , unfortunately .
author . - ( FR ) Mr Tannock , I refer you to my statements on Cuba .
I said that I condemn human rights abuses anywhere in the world , in Cuba as elsewhere .
I do not need any lessons from you in this regard .
I do not defend Christians against Muslims .
I defend all human beings who live on this planet , so that they can live free and equal - all of them !
Mr President , what I would like to suggest is that we focus specifically on the al-Nashiri case .
There is the possibility of the death penalty being imposed during the military commission trial on Abd al-Rahim al-Nashiri .
I wish to remind you , just as Mr Tannock has also done , that al-Nashiri has been accused of very serious crimes , including involvement in the attacks against a US aircraft carrier and the oil tanker MV Limburg .
Our opposition in principle to the death penalty must make us ask the US authorities not to impose the death penalty .
On the other hand , I would like to say that the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) has regarded and does regard a strong transatlantic relationship as a priority , in that this is based on the conviction of the existence of a set of common values and on respect for human rights .
We are all united in this Chamber in utterly rejecting acts of terrorism and in expressing our support for the victims of these attacks .
However , I regret that a democracy like the United States and dictatorships which Mrs Vergiat is defending explicitly or implicitly are grouped together .
( The speaker agreed to take a blue-card question under Rule 149 ( 8 ) )

author . - Mr President , I would ask Mr Preda what he has to say to the fact that , in this Parliament this morning , many colleagues including myself heard Mr Thomas Hammarberg , the Human Rights Commissioner of the Council of Europe , state clearly , in response to a question on this matter , that he indeed had corroboration of the serious suspicions of the existence of secret detention centres in Poland , in Lithuania and in Romania , and that he expected investigations to proceed .
Let me say that I do not have any animosity towards the US .
I have only admiration for a US which defends the rule of law and human rights , and for a US that distinguishes itself from terrorists whose aim is indeed to detract from the rule of law and to violate democracy and human rights .
Allow me to take the opportunity to say that I very much regret that throughout this whole discussion , you have never believed the position of the Romanian authorities .
I must remind you that Romania is a member of the European Union and I believe that we can at least trust our partners .
In fact , I want to remind you that the Romanian authorities have always supplied all the information required in these international inquiries .
All the investigators were given access to the airports at Otopeni , Bucharest and Constanţa , as well as to the base at the Torrejón Satellite Centre .
Matters were always conducted in an atmosphere of cooperation and there is no way of credibly confirming these actions .
I do not really understand why , in this game of slinging the same retorts all the time , you never believe the authorities of a partner state .
Mrs Gomes , Romania is part of the European Union and should not be confused with the countries which we discuss in this Chamber every Thursday .
( The speaker agreed to take a blue-card question under Rule 149 ( 8 ) )

author . - ( FR ) I note that Mr Preda is straying far away from the situation we were discussing to come to the aid of Romania , but that was not my point .
I regret that he is hurling what I consider to be insults at me .
I am sorry , Mr Preda , but I have never defended , here in this Chamber , or at any other time in my life , a single dictatorship anywhere in the world .
I have always denounced all human rights abuses , wherever they are committed .
I would therefore ask him to kindly withdraw the comments he made about me and thank him in advance .
Mr President , I had understood that a question was being asked , but one was not put to me .
What I would like to say is that I still feel it is wrong that we can put in the same boat , on an equal footing , democracies such as the United States or EU Member States , and countries and societies where power is exercised in an authoritarian and totalitarian manner , with ordinary citizens suffering excessive abuses .
This is what I wanted to say .
If Mrs Vergiat felt offended by this , I am very sorry about that .
author . - Mr President , I do not know if we are about to vote on the resolution , but we will eventually do so after the end of this debate .
I think this issue is a good example of what it means to be consistent with our own principles and values , because this Parliament has spoken out on several occasions against the death penalty , wherever it may occur .
It has also spoken on what due process of law means ; these two fundamental human rights issues are at stake in the case of al-Nashiri .
Due process of law excludes military commissions .
We have already criticised this system as it fails , in every respect , to meet international standards on fair trails .
Moreover , in this case , the Saudi Arabian national faces the death penalty imposed by a military commission , although in 2009 , the UN special rapporteur on extrajudicial executions specifically asked the US not to conduct capital prosecutions before military commissions .
The Liberal group in this Parliament remains fully committed to combating terrorism , but without any concessions with regard to respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms .

Mr President , Mr Oettinger , the current US Government initially spoke out clearly in favour of closing the detention camp at Guantánamo .
Unfortunately , the US Government was not able to follow up on its announcement .
This included closing the military commissions set up there because they do not meet any of the standards for fair court proceedings .
This makes the fact that there is an imminent death penalty decision and the threat of an execution all the more dramatic .
Therefore , our resolution calls urgently on all EU institutions and on the Member States to do everything possible to prevent Mr al-Nashiri from being executed .
We are calling again for the USA to impose a moratorium on the death penalty and to join a worldwide movement in which 96 states have made an irreversible decision to abolish the death penalty .
The number of states which have retained the death penalty and still make use of it has fallen to 58 .
This is a positive development .
Mr al-Nashiri was imprisoned in Poland in a secret prison set up by the CIA where he was subjected to intense torture .
We Europeans must finally seriously come to terms with our shared responsibility for these grave violations of human rights .
The practice of hushing this up , sweeping it under the carpet and allowing those responsible to remain largely immune from prosecution must not continue .
Today 's debate also shows that it is not helpful to talk in superficial terms about anti-Americanism or anti-European sentiments .
Instead , we must deal with the facts , including the sources which Mrs Gomez referred to .
In addition , the UN special rapporteur on torture submitted a useful document during the last committee meeting which proves that prisons of this kind were established by the CIA in Poland .
Mr President , the USA is not the largest democracy in the world , as another speaker said .
It is the third largest .
However , I believe that the USA will not be impressed when the second largest democracy in the world after India - the European Union - collapses into internal polemics on this important topic .
The subject is far too serious and it has rightly been said that our partnership with the USA is based on human rights .
We are fighting in support of the rule of international law .
Guantánamo is a zone where national and international law do not apply and , therefore , it goes against the principles of international law .
We are fighting against military jurisdiction and for the rule of law , which is not compatible with military jurisdiction .
We are fighting for the right to life and this is not compatible with the death penalty .
We are fighting for human rights and these human rights are being violated in Guantánamo .
Therefore , we must make it quite clear to an important ally , like the USA , that we are not prepared to accept this .
This has been Parliament 's position right from the beginning and across all the groups .
It has also been the position of the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) .
Guantánamo must be closed .
Even terrorists have human rights , but they must , of course , have a legitimate punishment imposed on them in the interests of their victims .
However , that must be the subject of proper legal proceedings .
( The speaker agreed to take a blue-card question under Rule 149 ( 8 ) )
Mr President , I have enormous respect for Bernd Posselt .
The biggest democracy in the world is , of course , India .
I have never heard the European Union described as a country before .
Could he confirm whether this is the view of his group now : that the European Union is a country alongside India , Brazil , America , the great democracies of the world , as it were ?
( DE ) Mr President , I am following in the tradition of Winston Churchill , who said : ' We must build a kind of United States of Europe ' .
on behalf of the S & D Group . - Mr President , the continued existence of the death penalty in the US and the situation in Guantánamo Bay undermines the United States ' legitimacy as our partner in advancing human rights .
I appreciate President Obama 's earlier calls to close Guantánamo very much , but we have yet to see decisive action by the US Government to respond to those calls or take action to reform their system for dealing with detainees , especially in the al-Nashiri case .
It is impossible to explain to people in Europe or in the world why the death penalty , abolished in Ukraine , Russia , Azerbaijan and everywhere else in Europe except Belarus , still exists in the USA .
I believe it will be not too long before we get good news from America on this score .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Mr President , no one will disagree that terrorism needs to be prevented and that suspects need to be tried and held accountable , brought to justice in a fair trial , but in the so-called war on terror , we risk compromising precisely those freedoms and values that we claim to defend against destruction through terrorism .
If we allow the erosion of fundamental rights and principles , we will have allowed the terrorists to win .
If we act unjustly , we are less credible and even weak .
The declaration of the end of the war on terror was one of the first landmarks by President Obama .
However , the failure to close Guantánamo Bay is disappointing and we must also look at ourselves in Europe .
We are unwilling to take remaining inmates and we must get clarity on the participation in renditions and extrajudicial acts , including torture , on European soil .
Yes , we must hold ourselves to the highest standards and open these dark pages of recent EU history .
That means we must openly be able to talk about countries involved .
Even in this Parliament , that still appears to be difficult .
The EU and US need to work together , not in violating human rights , but rather to address the most pressing threats in our world .
We generally share core values , but the difference in our position on the death penalty , which I am proud to say is entirely banned in Europe , makes our joint voice less effective and less credible in the world .
Let us lead by example in the free world and let us be known for our respect for human rights , indiscriminately of whether we are dealing with friends or enemies .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - Mr President , I would like to thank all those colleagues who have reminded me that thinking on human rights can only be based on a non-discriminatory treatment of all violations of human rights , wherever they happen .
This also applies whether they happen inside the European Union or outside the European Union .
I believe that the time has come for Parliament to take a second look at the possible involvement of the EU Member States in these renditions and secret detention centres .
I do not think that anyone should be afraid to face the truth and certainly Parliament could , with a new report on this issue , bring some daylight to the issue and also do away with unjustified claims and suspicions .
As was mentioned this morning , the Human Rights Commissioner of the Council of Europe , whom I very much admire , Mr Thomas Hammarberg , explained to us that this is not a closed story , that it is still going on , and that he would very much wish for Parliament to cooperate with the Council of Europe on this important issue .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - Mr President , the hypocrisy of the imperialist powers and their double-speak about human rights is demonstrated most graphically behind the wire in Guantánamo Bay .
The WikiLeaks files have now given an even clearer picture of the grossest abuses of human rights that have taken place there - the widespread use of waterboarding , other forms of brutal torture to extract confessions and information - and they also revealed that hundreds of people were held in Guantánamo with no real evidence against them .
Yet Barrack Obama has not only ditched his promise to shut that horrific prison but has now approved the resumption of military trials for detainees .
This hell-hole must be shut down immediately with all of the current detainees having access to fair trial before a civilian court , all of the secret CIA torture prisons in Europe must be shut down , the use of Shannon airport in Ireland for military and rendition flights by the CIA must be ended , and the barbaric death penalty must be brought to an end .
( The speaker agreed to take a blue-card question under Rule 149 ( 8 ) )

( RO ) Mr President , I would like to ask Mr Murphy whether he can also very quickly describe how political prisoners are tortured in Cuba .
Mr President , similar to Mrs Vergiat , I do not support torture .
I do not support abuses of human rights anywhere .
Here , I think we are talking about Guantánamo Bay .
I think we are talking about secret prisons .
I think we are talking about gross abuses of human rights and I think they are taking place in the biggest imperialist power in the world - the United States - and they should be condemned here .
on behalf of the EFD Group . - Mr President , Guantánamo is important , but let us put it in perspective .
The total number of detainees at Guantánamo since it was opened is 775 .
If you look around this Hemicycle now , there would be room here for all the 775 people that have ever been detained at Guantánamo .
Of course , this Parliament is strongly concerned about individual liberty and the due process of law , and rightly so , but we should recognise that some detainees do present a problem .
For example , there was a British citizen who , when arrested on the battlefield in Afghanistan carrying weapons and wearing the black turban of the Taliban , gave the explanation that he was in Afghanistan in order to take a computer course .
Parliament 's concern for the absolute probity of the legal process at Guantánamo is impressive .
However , I put it to the House that the cause of individual liberty under the law in the world would be better served if Parliament took more interest in the operations of the European Arrest Warrant .
That European Arrest Warrant , by its nature , outflanks and bypasses legal protections from arbitrary arrest , and 500 million people in Europe are subject to it , while there are now just 171 detainees at Guantánamo .
( IT ) Mr President , five days ago , we had news that five presumed authors of the 11 September attacks on the Twin Towers had been formally charged for the second time and that in doing so , the Obama administration had formally opened the way for these people to be tried before military commissions in the prison in the Guantánamo base .
Although my outrage at , and condemnation of , all terrorist attacks and of fundamentalist terrorism remains absolute , I believe it is necessary to call for the abandonment of the death penalty in all cases and in all circumstances .
I say this because we are opposed to every violation of fundamental human rights , always and wherever they occur .
In fact , we have already condemned the violation of the right of Guillermo Fariñas to come here to Strasbourg to receive the Sakharov Prize .
We are talking here of the Mr Fariñas to whom members of the Confederal Group of the European United Left - Nordic Green Left did not wish the Sakharov prize to be awarded , saying that the designation had been exploited for political ends .
( FR ) Mr President , here we have a prime example of the way in which the human rights issue is being used by the European Union for its own ends !
We refuse to clearly condemn the United States for the criminal attitude it is displaying at Guantánamo .
We refuse to acknowledge the responsibility of Member States of the European Union for allowing incarceration and torture in the secret prisons of the CIA .
We refuse to talk about the minors incarcerated and tortured by the United States at Guantánamo despite their being recognised by UNICEF as child soldiers who have been arrested , whereas we would not hesitate to denounce appalling dictatorships and vote for sanctions in other countries .
When it comes to ourselves and to the United States , human rights appear to be less of a problem .
We , for our part , ask for universality of human rights .
We also ask that our attitude be guided solely by the desire to serve the people and , in that context , want the United States to be tried for human rights violations , as well as the Member States of the European Union found guilty of complicity .
International law must be complied with at all times , and torture and killings in the name of the war against terrorism must be stopped .
Last but not least - it is worth repeating - the base at Guantánamo must be closed , and Cuba must regain control of its entire territory .
Mr President , just as the right to life has a very special place among human rights , the death penalty has no place in democratic societies .
Today , Europe is the only region in the world where the death penalty has been abolished , with the sad exception of Belarus .
I would like to emphasise that the European Union remains strongly committed to the abolition of the death penalty everywhere .
There is no doubt that the transatlantic relationship is invaluable to the European Union , as is our mutual cooperation in the fight against terrorism .
Still , I would like to take this opportunity to support the call on the United States authorities not to seek the death penalty in the case of Abd al-Rahim al-Nashiri .
In conclusion , I would like to join all colleagues who urge countries that retain capital punishment to follow the European model , outlaw the death penalty and make abolition a universally accepted value .
All executions , wherever they take place , should be condemned .
Mr President , I agree with my colleagues who are saying that , when we make such a serious accusation against a country , we have to be sure that we have all the necessary information .
I do not think it is about double standards : it is about honesty and being professionally informed .
Regarding our subject , the USA is responsible for detainees ' rights and has the moral obligation to abolish capital punishment .
As transatlantic relations are primarily based on a set of common values , I hope that the American authorities will be more receptive to the EU 's commitment to dropping the death penalty worldwide .
( RO ) On a different note , I would like to reply to Mr Preda .
The fact that we have this stance supporting the abolition of the death penalty does not mean that we undervalue the strategic partnership which we have with the United States and which we want for both the European Union and our countries .
Relations with the United States are a priority not only for your group , the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) , but also for the Group of the Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats in the European Parliament and will be from now on as well .
Mr President , I wish to stress the case of Abd al-Nashiri .
He is not only emblematic because of Guantánamo and the death penalty , but also because he is one of the only two named victims of secret detentions in Europe .
He has actually been granted victim status in the Polish judicial investigation , together with Abu Zubaydah , and given some concrete hope that the accountability process can move forward in Europe .
I believe it is , therefore , very important that the final resolution includes a clear call for full effective investigation into the European Union Member States ' complicity and their renditions and secret detention programmes .
As Amnesty suggested , however , it is vital to link these with the TDIP report and with the follow-up that the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs ( LIBE ) has agreed to take up in a new own-initiative report .
Work in the European Parliament on the accountability front is absolutely key to keep these issues on the EU agenda .
( PT ) Mr President , we have here yet another sorry example of the double standards that are so often evident in this House .
What is at issue in this debate is the violation of human rights on the part of the United States authorities , arbitrary and illegal detentions , denial of the right to a fair trial , the practice of torture and capital punishment .
Some of these violations were committed with the proven complicity of Member States of the European Union , which placed their territories at the disposal of the CIA .
Deplorably enough , however , in the joint motion for a resolution , we do not find a single word of condemnation of the United States authorities or of the European countries that were complicit with them in this activity .
Such words are never in short supply when it comes to condemning certain other countries !
In this case , demands have been softened into requests and the preferred approach is to emphasise , in the first point of the resolution , the close transatlantic relationship based on shared values and respect for human rights .
You can see what this respect amounts to .
It is lamentable , but very revealing .
Mr President , allow me to conclude by saying that , rather than to appeal for the Guantánamo base to be closed , it would be more to the point to call for the restoration of Cuba 's sovereignty over this part of her territory , which is illegally occupied by the United States .
( FI ) Mr President , we are certainly all unanimous on one thing : the EU must continue to cooperate closely in order to eradicate international terrorism .
We must , however , make it much clearer that the war against terrorism cannot be waged at the expense of human rights and other basic values .
The EU has opposed torture and the death penalty for a long time , and this also holds true in the case of al-Nashiri .
Two important principles must be borne in mind : an unconditional ' no ' to the death penalty , and the fact that the war against terrorism must also be a war against the causes of terrorism .
As you know , our transatlantic relations are based on values that we have shared for a long time , such as universal human rights and the right to a fair trial .
That is why the United States of America must examine its military courts , shut down Guantánamo , and refrain from torture in all cases .
( PL ) Mr President , many fellow Members have spoken of evidence of the existence of detention centres in Poland and Romania and evidence of the use of torture .
I would like to make an earnest appeal for this evidence to be given to the Polish prosecution service , because an investigation into this matter is under way in Poland .
The service is independent , and is also independent of the government , and the investigation is being monitored by the Helsinki Foundation for Human Rights .
Lawyers acting for two Guantánamo prisoners are involved in the investigation , so if any evidence does exist , it should be placed in the hands of the Polish prosecution service so that it can be examined .
In the previous parliamentary term , there was a parliamentary committee which investigated this matter .
One of the members of that committee says about this in Poland today that there is evidence , in the form of a document signed by a former socialist prime minister of Poland , and which regulated the question of a detention centre .
Asked whether he had seen this document , he said that he had not seen it , but had heard of it .
So I hope those people who do have evidence and documents will hand them over , and not just talk about them .
( FI ) Mr President , it has to be said that this debate and the political squabbling that goes on between us have not entirely served the purpose of this resolution in the best possible way or shown that in this House , and unanimously across the EU generally , we are keen to defend each person 's right to an impartial trial and , moreover , that we are opposed to the death penalty .
We are categorically opposed to the death penalty , regardless of what crimes the accused may be guilty of .
As has been made clear in many speeches here , the charges against al-Nashiri are very serious .
He is accused of acts of terrorism in which many dozens of people have been killed .
Consequently , it is by means of this resolution that we want to say that we indeed do not accept what he has done .
We do not support terrorism , but we want to defend the principle where each person has the right to an impartial trial , and we are pleading in favour of the abolition of the death penalty .
Mr President , honourable Members , the European Union is working closely together with the United States of America in the war against terror .
Nevertheless , we attach a great deal of importance to protecting human rights as part of the process of combating terrorism .
In June of last year , we - the EU and the USA - drew up a joint declaration on combating terrorism which states that the war on terror must be in accord with the fundamental values and the principle of the rule of law .
The agreement specifies that all court proceedings against terrorist suspects must take place within a proper legal framework which ensures that appropriate procedural law will be followed and guarantees a fair trial which , as far as possible , is accessible to the public and efficiently run .
The European Union has been calling for the closure of the detention camp at Guantánamo Bay for many years .
We believe that a long imprisonment without trial is not compatible with international law .
The EU therefore welcomed the fact that , more than two years ago , President Obama announced and organised the closure of the camp within one year .
We have agreed a joint framework with the USA which forms the basis for the release and the admission into the EU Member States of some of the former prisoners .
We are still prepared to work closely with the United States on further measures to close the detention camp .
Despite the decree issued by the President in March of this year in which he officially authorised a longer stay in Guantánamo for some prisoners , the Union hopes - no , in fact , expects - the government of the United States to continue to discuss this subject in Congress and to work towards closing the detention camp as quickly as possible .
The European Union and the Member States resolutely oppose the death penalty under all circumstances .
We stand up for this viewpoint in the context of our relationships with all the countries of the world .
In accordance with the EU guidelines on the death penalty , we are exerting strong pressure on the United States to abolish the death penalty at a national level , and at the level of the US federal states , and we are calling for a pardon in individual cases .
We are therefore concerned about those prisoners who could be facing the death penalty .
We assume that the US authorities have not yet decided whether Muhammed al-Nashiri and the five people accused of complicity in the terrorist attacks 10 years ago can be sentenced to death by the court .
I can assure you that the European Union is monitoring the proceedings carefully and will regularly raise its concerns with regard to the death penalty and the fairness of the trial with the US authorities in an appropriate manner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place shortly .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
Saudi citizen Abd al-Rahim al-Nashiri was arrested in 2002 by the United States and transferred to the Guantánamo base in 2006 , accused of war crimes and terrorism .
The US Attorney General called for the death penalty .
Indeed , the US authorities will decide by 30 June 2011 whether to support this punishment or not before a military commission which is due to issue a verdict .
Terrorism must be condemned and those guilty of this crime must be punished without exception .
However , all defendants must enjoy the right to a fair trial .
The death penalty does not have a place in a country that defends human dignity , which is at the core of human rights .
I share the sentiments of those calling for the Commission and Council to urge the US authorities to abolish capital punishment and ensure that this Saudi citizen receives a fair trial .
in writing . - The United States Department of Defence and its agencies have bluntly disregarded international law , in particular , the Geneva Conventions , with regard to the Guantánamo Bay detention camp .
It is unacceptable that the United States of America - considered a torchbearer of human rights and democracy - has engaged in ill-treatment and torture of the detainees of the camp .
The European Union must insist that the US closes the camp immediately and conducts an independent and impartial investigation of the alleged violations of human rights that have taken place in the camp .
The death penalty should not be exercised by any democratic country ; therefore , we call on the US authorities not to implement it in the case of Abd al-Rahim al-Nashiri or any of the other cases .
The European Union and its Member States ought to persuade the United States to set a moratorium on the death penalty .
In the interests of the credibility of the European Union , we must , at all costs , avoid setting double standards on matters of principle such as this .
3 .
Ukraine : the cases of Yulia Tymoshenko and other members of the former government ( debate )
The next item is the debate on five motions for resolution on Ukraine : the cases of Yulia Tymoshenko and other members of the former government .
Mr President , on behalf of the Group of the Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats in the European Parliament , I want to state that the development of democracy in Ukraine is a priority for us on which we cannot compromise .
No doubt should be cast on the Ukrainian people 's achievements either by external or internal factors .
The current government is attempting , by means of a series of initiatives , to improve both the legislative foundation and the effectiveness of the battle against corruption .
This is why it must receive encouragement .
Removing the Ukrainian elite 's sense of impunity may provide an opportunity for the beneficial reforms which will bring the country closer to the European Union and offer its citizens prospects for the future .
However , we currently risk being accused of protecting the leading figures from the previous government with a European political ' screen ' , including former Prime Minister Tymoshenko personally .
If we basically expect the Ukrainian Government not to interfere in the work of the independent court and prosecutor 's office , what right does the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) have to call today for the European Parliament itself to get involved in such political interference ?
I cannot accept that we should pardon all the decisions made by the previous government in Ukraine .
This is precisely the sense of the text being tabled , which calls , in practical terms , for the individual abuses of power to be concealed behind collective guilt .
A more balanced approach has allowed us to have a joint motion for a resolution today which will be constructive and targeted at the opportunities for closer cooperation between Ukraine and the European Union , while judicial reform is carried out in the country and the anti-corruption measures implemented .
However , it has been based on an ideological , confrontational approach .
I call for the so-called ' motion for a joint resolution ' to be rejected and for us to rally support for the proposal from the S & D Group .
( The speaker agreed to take a blue-card question under Rule 149 ( 8 ) )
( DE ) Mr President , I would simply like to ask my fellow Member what the continuous declarations concerning the universality of human rights mean when , in the case of Ukraine , the issue suddenly only concerns internal affairs .
Saying that no one should intervene in the internal affairs of a country is the old Soviet argument .
In cases which concern human rights , we will always intervene , in particular with regard to a partner as important as Ukraine .
Mr President , I want to say that we are not talking about interference in Ukraine 's internal affairs , but about non-interference in the operation of the independent court and prosecutor 's office in Ukraine .
I think that there is a clear difference .
We do not want political interference , either from the government in Ukraine or from the European Parliament .
However , this is exactly what we are doing with the texts which have been tabled in the so-called ' joint motion for a resolution ' .
If we are talking about universality - I do not know how many minutes I have , Mr President - but if we look around , there are European Union Member States where we can see very similar cases .
I will believe you , Mr Posselt , that you adhere to the principles and want us to enforce human rights everywhere - both in the European Union and Ukraine - if you table such a resolution for Bulgaria as well where prime ministers and former ministers are being investigated on absurd charges .
author . - ( CS ) Mr President , there are moments when I go beyond mere amazement .
One such moment for me came with the opportunity to read through the motion for a resolution on Ukraine .
Until then , I had no idea that the ministers and prime ministers of some countries enjoyed special lifetime immunity .
It is unquestionably remarkable that the European Parliament , on the one hand , demands consistent action against corruption but , on the other hand , when former government member Mr Danilishin faces charges , he is granted political asylum , and in the Czech Republic - my own country - at that , without any preliminary investigation of the case .
Incidentally , Mr Danilishin has never been a member of any political party , so the charge brought against him is entirely economic in nature .
Let us seek consistent sanctions for corrupt behaviour both inside and outside the European Union .
That is entirely proper , but we should read through the constitution of the country concerned , and try to establish the facts .
Only when corruption has genuinely been eradicated in European countries should we try reverting to the imperious recommendations granted to various countries in the resolutions adopted , unfortunately , by us .
The Confederal Group of the European United Left - Nordic Green Left agrees with the general parts of the resolution , but has serious doubts over the points specifically mentioned , and therefore will not support the resolution .
author . - ( DE ) Mr President , unfortunately , we have grounds for expressing strong criticism of the political situation in Ukraine and , in particular , of the means used to curtail the constitutional rights of opposition politicians .
The opposition leader , Mrs Tymoshenko , and other prominent people have had their human rights violated and have been prevented from doing their political work by means of politically motivated criminal proceedings and antiquated procedural law .
Anyone who turns the constitutional right of an accused person to access their files into the exact opposite , in other words , into a compulsion to access the files , and anyone who does this , as in the case of Mr Lutsenko , by means of imprisonment and , in the case of Mrs Tymoshenko , by a total of 44 summonses so far , clearly demonstrates what sort of person he is and the fact that he is abusing the judicial system in the old-fashioned way for the purposes of political disputes .
President Yanukovych and his authorities must bring an end to this persecution .
He is personally responsible for the well-being of Mrs Tymoshenko , Mr Lutsenko and their colleagues and supporters .
Mr Yanukovych , your behaviour in these cases is the litmus test of your credibility and your determination to introduce European values into Ukraine .
( The speaker agreed to take a blue-card question under Rule 149 ( 8 ) )
( PL ) Mr President , I agree with the fellow Member on many issues .
We all know how important it was for the consolidation of democracy and human rights for the countries of Central and Eastern Europe to be able to achieve accession to the Union , and before that to have the perspective of accession .
I would like to ask Mr Gahler if he is willing to declare that he is in favour of giving such a political perspective to Ukrainian society and to politicians of all persuasions and that the road to the European Union is open to them , and if he will endorse statements of this kind in the European Parliament .
author . - ( DE ) Mr President , the current behaviour of the government of Ukraine will definitely not make the country 's move into Europe any easier .
author . - Mr President , we are not here today to judge the actual innocence or guilt of Yulia Tymoshenko .
It has gone well beyond that point because the Ukrainian authorities have overlooked the correct legal procedures and taken measures that violate the rule of law .
We protest against the elimination of political opponents in Ukraine with the help of the judicial system .
Defendants must be granted their legal rights , as enshrined in law , and the measures taken against them must be proportionate to the nature and gravity of the crimes that they have been accused of .
The purpose of this resolution is to draw the attention of the Ukrainian authorities to some apparent breaches of the rule of law which have distanced Ukraine from European values , and which , if they become commonplace , would curtail their country 's prospects of future European integration .
author . - Mr President , the reason we , the Greens , support this joint resolution is that we consider the fight against corruption a fundamental factor in the establishment and consolidation of the rule of law in Ukraine , with a view precisely to deepening its relations with the European Union and enhancing its integration into EU policies .
We stress , therefore , that those efforts require fair , impartial and independent legal proceedings .
That is why we note with concern the widespread opinion that the recent case brought against Mrs Tymoshenko and some members of the government are politically motivated , and warn against a possible use of penal law as a tool to achieve political ends .
That is also why we call on the Ukrainian authorities to ensure that judicial measures are not used selectively and that investigations , prosecutions and trials are held in maximum transparency .
Finally , that is also the reason why we call on the Ukrainian authorities to avoid any perception of judicial measures being used selectively and insist that the maximum transparency of investigations , persecutions and trials be guaranteed ; we also call on the Commission to assist in the reform of the judiciary in Ukraine by making use of EU capacity-building programmes and to consider creating a high-level EU advisory group for Ukraine to assist the country in its efforts to align itself with EU legislation , including on the judiciary .
Mr President , the restrictive measures taken against Yulia Tymoshenko mark the continuation by the current government of a series of actions targeted against members of the former government , with the aim of intimidating and weakening the opposition .
We are deeply concerned by the use of the justice system for political ends through selective actions aimed solely at members of the opposition .
They jeopardise the consolidation of the rule of law and democracy in Ukraine .
We call on the authorities in Kiev to ensure that the justice system operates on an impartial , independent and transparent basis by giving the defendants a fair trial .
At the same time , we call on them to abide by the rules of a democratic state and to ensure respect for human rights , which are obligations they assumed as part of the Eastern Partnership .
We must stress that respect for these principles is vital to promoting cooperation between the EU and Ukraine , including with a view to signing the Association Agreement .
Mr President , one of the priorities of the forthcoming Polish Presidency is to strengthen the Eastern Partnership .
Ukraine , as Poland 's nearest neighbour , is one of the most important partners and has the opportunity to gain more than the other partners from this situation .
While I share the opinion about the necessity of bringing Ukraine closer to the Union , I also think that this must involve the adoption by Ukraine of European standards in the field of the rule of law and transparency in public life .
It is with great concern that I have followed the corruption scandals in Ukraine and the trials of politicians who are being accused in a way which is sometimes ludicrous .
The Union is being very careful in the way it comments on events in Ukraine .
Furthermore , the statement of the High Representative for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy on Yulia Tymoshenko was exceptionally cautious .
However , I think that as part of future cooperation between the Union and Ukraine , instruments should be created which , in the longer term , would contribute to a strengthening of the rule of law in Ukraine .
I have in mind , here , the idea of creating , for example , an advisory group to help bring Ukrainian law closer to European standards , and assistance in various areas of law , including the training of judges , for example .
I think Ukraine 's European aspirations , which , on the one hand , are hedged around with conditions , should , on the other , show a willingness to help in this .
I hope the Polish Presidency of the Council of the European Union will adopt such a stance .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Mr President , Ukraine is a democracy .
Therefore , we signal our concern to a partner , an ally , and a friend .
As we all know , nobody is perfect in this world , but it is in accordance with Europe 's political standards and norms , and also in accordance with the logic and values of democracy , that we expect the Ukrainian authorities not to abuse their power by encouraging and holding politically motivated trials , and instead to give those who are suspects a fair trial , rather than political retribution .
Yulia Tymoshenko and other members of the former government of Ukraine , who had long been the rivals of President Yanukovych , should not be regarded as collectively , or by association , guilty and responsible for what is perceived as a liability in political practice .
First and foremost , they are all citizens of a democratic state .
By no means are we offering a defence speech here .
Instead , we are merely reminding our friends how democracy works .
on behalf of the ECR Group . - Mr President , six years on from the Orange Revolution , Ukrainian politics remain characterised by rivalry and tension .
Former Prime Minister Tymoshenko and some members of the former government that she led are now being pursued through the courts for criminal acts allegedly committed whilst in office .
These charges to me have a smell of being politically motivated .
I fear that President Yanukovych is trying to neutralise the only Ukrainian political figure with enough gravitas , courage and popularity to challenge his authority .
We should not forget that the Orange Revolution was a direct response to Yanukovych 's attempt to steal , by fraud , in 2004 the Presidential election .
He was never prosecuted for that crime .
Mrs Tymoshenko has substantial popular support in western Ukraine and carries the hopes of millions of her compatriots with her .
It is very curious that the latest charges relating to fraud against the medicines budget were not levelled against Zinovii Mytnyk , the Deputy Minister for Heath at the time , who signed off on the deal , because he has now re-emerged , curiously , as the new Health Minister in Yanukovych 's Government .
If Yanukovych wants to reduce Mrs Tymoshenko 's political potency , he should seek to do so in an open and democratic battle of ideas , not through the political manipulation of the justice system .
And my question to Mr Vigenin , as the Socialist Group has links to Yanukovych 's Party of the Regions , is : do you have confidence in the political impartiality of the General Prosecutor 's Office in Ukraine ?
Mr Vigenin , could you answer that ?
on behalf of the EFD Group . - ( SK ) Mr President , Ukraine 's political scene is characterised by a gubernatorial style of leadership , deeply rooted in the former Soviet era .
Even those who led the Orange Revolution , President Yushchenko and Prime Minister Tymoshenko , exhibited some peculiar political behaviour .
Indeed , it is an open secret in Ukraine and abroad that the real cause of the gas crisis that descended on us in early 2009 was a rift between the family clans of Prime Minister Tymoshenko and President Yushchenko , as they fought to control the profits from the transport of gas .
I agree that exploiting the baseless criminalisation of political opponents in order to repress opposition forces is unacceptable , but I find it highly presumptuous to claim that none of Tymoshenko 's team put a foot wrong during their chaotic period in government .
Tymoshenko 's group lost the elections precisely because ordinary people had had enough of widespread corruption and the theft of public property by certain public officials .
Therefore , if we really want to help Ukraine to develop an open , democratic society , we should concentrate on systemic recommendations and not tell them that those senior officials who may be endearing to some of you or with whom you may be friends should be treated any differently from other criminal suspects .
Indeed , here in the European Union , we also say that all are equal , and that includes equality before the law .
( CS ) Mr President , the methods used to conduct the investigation into alleged violations of the law by Mrs Tymoshenko and other opposition politicians have completely discredited the Ukrainian judiciary , the police , and the current government .
Such persecutory practices belonged to the arsenal of totalitarian communist regimes in the last century , and those EU citizens who lived under those regimes are particularly sensitive to this .
We see this as yet another abuse of public power to discredit political opponents , which is absolutely unacceptable in a democratic society .
I draw attention to the fact that this fundamentally challenges the independence of the Ukrainian judiciary in the eyes of the world .
Under these circumstances , I appeal to EU Member States to join the Czech Republic in standing ready to grant political asylum to persecuted Ukrainian opposition politicians and to consider sanctions against Ukraine for violations of international law , if the situation in Ukraine does not change .
( PL ) Mr President , we are wondering what the essence is of what we are talking about because the facts are , after all , generally known , and we are coming down in favour of those who today are having problems , and of those who are finding themselves at the wrong end of the abuse of authority .
However , we must learn the lessons of this situation , and lessons must be learned , above all , by the authorities in Ukraine .
A condition for building a normal democratic system in Ukraine is respect for the rights of the opposition , and we must say this very clearly from here , today .
However , in this Chamber , we must also say something very clearly to ourselves .
This is the experience of the Czech Republic , Slovakia and also East Germany .
There can be no real modernisation in this part of Europe if we cannot say that for Ukrainians , and not for this or that authority , there is a place in Europe .
Perhaps not today , perhaps not in several years , but that perspective does exist .
Without talking clearly about that perspective - and I am talking to all friends from every part of Europe - we are , in fact , going to be working together to maintain badly functioning democratic systems in the East .
Do not be under any illusions about this .
It is a very simple matter .
So , as well as holding this debate , we also have something else to do - to say clearly : the door is open , do not worry .

( PL ) Mr President , I would like to start with the words of Mr Donskis , who called the Ukrainians our friends and allies .
This is indeed the case , and this is how we should treat our friends in Kiev .
I would like to ask everyone a question .
I have similar comments and I share the quandary of most of you who have spoken , today .
I , too , am not satisfied by the way human rights are being observed and by how democracy is functioning in Kiev , but what have you done - what has this House done , and what have all those who have today , with such high principles , condemned the situation with Mrs Tymoshenko - what have you done to send a clear signal to Kiev and other cities of Ukraine that we are their friends and allies , that we are waiting for them , and that this House should one day be enlarged by the presence of Ukrainian Members ?
I ask this because respect for human rights and respect for democracy in Ukraine are , to a large extent , dependent on us .
I must ask you to understand this .
( The speaker agreed to take a blue-card question under Rule 149 ( 8 ) )
( DE ) Mr President , I would simply like to ask my fellow Member whether he is not aware that we have adopted a resolution in Parliament with a large majority - I myself voted in favour of this resolution - in which we clearly underlined the European perspective of Ukraine .
We have done this not once , but many times .
( PL ) Mr President , Mr Posselt , firstly , I do know , and secondly , thank you for that resolution .
I am asking , however , if this is all we could have done ?
Is this really all that can be sent from this Chamber and from the EU institutions to the Ukrainians , who are fighting today about the same things which once happened to the Poles and the Czechs ?
Finally , how many positive signals of this kind about membership of the European Union have been sent to the Ukrainians from the German Government , for example ?
Mr President , the road to democracy is often a slow and tortuous one .
Some countries move quicker than others and we see that with the countries of the former Soviet Union , who are now our valid colleagues here in the European Parliament .
Others countries move somewhat slower - maybe Ukraine is an example of that .
Nevertheless , it is important to recognise that it has made progress but must go further .
In particular , to establish true democracy , it needs , first of all , to promote civil society , secondly , end state control , particularly over NGOs , thirdly , have a truly independent judiciary , and fourthly , have a free and strong opposition .
You cannot have proper democracy without having a free , strong and vibrant opposition .
We in the European Union must use every means to encourage Ukraine to go the full circle and establish true democracy .
It has made progress , but it needs to go a bit further .
( FI ) Mr President , the charges that have been brought against Tymoshenko are , as she herself has said , purely political in nature .
We also have to remind ourselves that several other former members of her Cabinet are also accused or suspected of corruption .
As I believe Mrs Ojuland mentioned here earlier , we are not a court .
We are not here to decide whether these people are guilty or innocent .
Instead , we want to remind everyone of how important it is that these hearings cannot be selective in any sense and that the legal proceedings must be open and must be non-discriminatory .
May I say that I wish to thank Lady Ashton for expressing her concern back in May regarding the charges brought against the Ukrainian opposition leaders , and their possible political ends .
We have to continue along this path and ensure that these hearings in Ukraine do not actually become selective or anti-opposition in nature .
( IT ) Mr President , Ukraine is a democracy , a friendly country , a partner of this European Union .
However , Ukraine must adopt European standards also in the administration of judicial power , which is characterised by politicised trials in which the accused do not enjoy all the rights and means necessary to face a trial that , in some cases , is a purely political trial .
This represents a criminalisation of political opponents of the government in office , aimed solely at eliminating and silencing the opposition .
Yulia Tymoshenko , the former prime minister , and her ministers are being attacked by means of show trials , rather than by a political confrontation which , although heated , would be serious and transparent .
The Ukrainian Government must respect the opposition , without brandishing the weapon of judicial power , and respect the rules of a democratic state and human rights , as subscribed to in the Eastern Partnership agreements .
( FI ) Mr President , the former Ukrainian Prime Minister , Yulia Tymoshenko , has had to answer several corruption charges this spring , and a ban on travel in February prevented her from coming to meet us in Brussels .
If Tymoshenko is eventually found guilty , she faces a sentence of up to ten years in prison .
The background and context , however , beg awkward questions and arouse concern regarding the partly politically motivated nature of the charges .
Our resolution rightfully raises the issue of the charges against the leaders of the political opposition , charges that look ever more selective in nature , and insists on a guarantee of the transparency of the investigations and of the judicial process .
The fight against corruption and the affirmation of the rule of law are not just preconditions for deepening EU-Ukraine relations : they are also crucial for reinforcing Ukraine 's democratic development .
Ukraine 's new political leaders must also show a sense of responsibility and start implementing the reforms that have remained half-finished since the Orange Revolution .
( RO ) Mr President , the motion for a resolution relating to the case of the members of the former Ukrainian Government is needed to ensure respect for the basic principles of the European Union , starting with respect for human rights .
It is not Ukraine 's justice system which is the biggest concern , but the possible interference of politics in the administration of justice .
The European Union , as a community of law and values , must support the members of the former Ukrainian Government to ensure respect for the principle of the presumption of innocence and the European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights .
I would like to highlight the need to continue and step up the reforms being carried out in Ukraine and to align its legislation with the EU 's provisions and obligations as key elements aimed at bringing it closer to the European Union .
The success of the reform process taken on by Ukraine will depend on the promotion of , and respect for , democratic principles , the rule of law and transparency .
With regard to the charges made against Yulia Tymoshenko and the members of the former government , an abuse of power cannot be used to take action against an accusation of an abuse of power .
Democracy must make progress in Ukraine and we can support this process .
Member of the Commission . - ( DE ) Mr President , honourable Members , the Commission is following developments in Ukraine with regard to the former members of the government of Ukraine , Mrs Tymoshenko , Mr Lutsenko and others very closely , as Parliament and the parliamentary groups are also doing .
Since the beginning of the year , we have been making clear our concerns about the possible political motivation that lies behind these cases .
The EU has a delegation in the country and is monitoring developments carefully .
The progress report on Ukraine which we published a few days ago gives a comprehensive picture of the situation in the country last year .
Our evaluation of the situation , which has not changed , shows the need for comprehensive reform of the justice system and for measures to combat corruption .
The report emphasises that respect for the rule of law in criminal investigations and criminal prosecutions and fair , impartial and independent court proceedings must be guaranteed , in order to ensure that criminal law is not abused for political purposes .
In cases involving former members of the government , a clear distinction must be made between criminal and political responsibility .
The concerns about the excessive use of detention and custody measures and of travel restrictions also give the impression of an arbitrary approach to justice .
At the same time , a large part of Ukrainian civil society , experts throughout the world and foreign businesspeople working in Ukraine are firmly convinced that the courts in Ukraine are being subjected to strong pressure from different sides .
We are hoping that future amendments to the law on the reform of the judicial system will take into consideration the statement by the Venice Commission of the Council of Europe and sweep away these concerns .
I would like to emphasise that we attach great importance to safeguarding the rule of law in Ukraine , which is a country that we want to enter into a closer contractual relationship with on the basis of association and economic integration .
A smoothly functioning , independent and transparent justice system is essential in order for this to happen .
We do not want to take sides in any individual cases , but we expect Ukraine to bring about fundamental changes in its system in order to guarantee impartial , fair and transparent court proceedings .
We are convinced that the stability of Ukraine and the confidence of its citizens in the country 's public bodies will depend on the progress made in this area .
The speed and the scope of our integration with Ukraine , and vice versa , will depend on whether Ukraine can fully guarantee its respect for human rights , the principles of democracy and the principles of the rule of law .
These principles must not be called into question in any way .
This conclusion is in line with the results of the review of the European neighbourhood policy .
The meeting of the EU-Ukraine Cooperation Council which is taking place in the course of the next few weeks will give us the opportunity to discuss numerous issues that are important for our relationship and to send clear signals to Ukraine which are the same as those that you are sending about the importance of reform in this area .
We are pleased about Ukraine 's determination to conclude the negotiations on an association agreement before the end of this year .
So far , so good .
However , Ukraine must implement the necessary far-reaching reforms , in particular , of the judicial system , the electoral system and the constitution , in order to be able to enjoy the opportunities which this agreement can offer with regard to association and economic integration with the EU .
In addition , the country must make more decisive efforts to combat corruption .
Ukraine is not alone in this respect , but it must demonstrate its unconditional determination to introduce more comprehensive and more inclusive reforms if it wants to move closer to the EU .
We will continue to provide Ukraine with significant support in its efforts to bring about internal reforms .
Finally , I would like to say that we will make clear our absolute respect for proper court proceedings , without passing comme