Resumption of the session
I declare resumed the session of the European Parliament adjourned on Friday , 17 July 1998 .
I trust that everyone had an enjoyable holiday , and I hope your work in this final year of our term will meet with success .
Tribute
I would like to pay tribute to Dr Allan Macartney who died suddenly at his home in Aberdeen on 25 August .
We have lost a colleague who was respected right across the political spectrum , both at home in Scotland and here in the European Parliament .
Elected to the European Parliament for the North-East Scotland constituency in 1994 , Allan Macartney was a very active Member of Parliament .
As vice-chairman of the Committee on Fisheries , he fought tirelessly for the interests of the fishing industry .
To the Committee on Development and Cooperation , of which he was also a member , he was able to bring his great experience and commitment in Africa .
Allan Macartney was a member of the Scottish National Party for some 40 years , being the founder president of the student wing of the party .
He held various posts in the party before becoming deputy leader in 1992 .
He was the party spokesman on Europe and external affairs . He was deeply involved in his party 's preparation for the new Scottish Parliament .
His last public engagement was on the day before he died , when he detailed his proposals for developing links between the new Scottish Parliament and Europe .
Allan 's wife , Anne , and other members of his family are with us in the gallery today .
I would ask you to stand with them in observing a minute 's silence in remembrance of our colleague .
( The House rose and observed a minute 's silence )
Order of business
The next item is the order of business .
The final version of the draft agenda as drawn up by the Conference of Presidents pursuant to Rule 95 of the Rules of Procedure has been distributed .
Mrs Theato has the floor .
Mr President , Mr Bösch 's report on the independence of UCLAF has been taken off the agenda .
I have more or less found that out from unofficial sources .
I was told a letter from you to me as chairman of the committee was on its way .
I find it somewhat strange that I heard so late about the report being withdrawn .
DG I had in fact indicated , following the majority vote in favour of this report in the Committee on Budgetary Control on 4 September , that it would be put on the agenda .
It was then not released , however , and is still unavailable today , with the result that it is not possible to table amendments .
I know from administrative documents the reasons why the report was withdrawn , although our committee has not yet received a political explanation .
I should like to point out that this report is based on Article 206 of the EC Treaty , since it has been drawn up on the basis of the Court of Auditors ' Special Report No 8 / 98 .
That is a sufficient legal basis and , in my view , Rule 50 is therefore not applicable .
There is a political issue here , since the media are currently highlighting a suspicious case regarding humanitarian aid and irregularities in that field .
It would have been a very good political move if we could have adopted Mr Bösch 's report this week , in order to clearly show how Parliament reacts to improve the prevention of fraud as well as to make it punishable .
I would therefore ask you to accept this objection which I am making today as chairman of the committee .
Unfortunately , this report does not appear on the agenda as planned , even though a full vote was taken on it in committee .
I object to that and would ask to be informed when it is made available .
( Applause from the right )
Actually , Mrs Theato , I did reply to you in writing on 11 September . I said that I had read your letter and that my duty was to ensure that reports comply with the Treaties and the Rules .
I am very sorry you did not get more detailed information and I will take the appropriate steps to arrange that as soon as possible .
As you rightly say , the problem is that the report does not indicate the legal basis - and we need that to take the vote with the right majority to make it effective - and nor does it contain a financial statement .
I think your committee will be able to meet those two requirements of Rule 50 in time for the first October part-session .
Therefore , and in view of the political reasons which you have just explained , the Conference of Presidents has arranged for the report to be debated during the first October part-session .
The legal basis simply needs to be stated in the report ; as you know better than I do , Article 138b should be invoked and the vote should be taken by an absolute majority , so that the Commission is forced to consider the legislative proposal you are requesting .
You know that if you do not invoke that article , the proposal will not have the same binding force on the Commission .
It is your committee 's decision which route to take , but you must state one or the other .
And under Rule 50 a financial statement is also required .
I assume it must be relatively straightforward for the Committee on Budgetary Control to determine the cost of an organization with 300 posts .
I do not think there will be any problem about including this for the first October part-session .
Mr President , I wish to address the same subject , with reference to Rule 96 ( 1 ) .
I would also like to point out that Mrs Theato 's request , made in her capacity as chairman of the Budgetary Control Committee , should give rise to a vote on the request for the Bösch report to be re-entered on the agenda .
Under Rule 96 ( 1 ) , on behalf of my group , I request that the report be placed back on the agenda .
Mr President , you have been wrongly informed .
What you have just told us has no legal basis .
Neither Rule 50 of our Rules of Procedure nor Article 138b of the Treaty applies here , and all the Members present will bear me out .
There has been no own-initiative report , and the Conference of Presidents has not authorised this report .
The report falls under the discharge procedure .
It follows a special report by the Court of Auditors on the manner in which UCLAF operates , and is a damning account of the fraud practised in connection with the Community budget .
Hence Article 50 does not apply and we do not need either a legal basis or financial statements .
Indeed , this is not the first occasion on which the Committee on Budgetary Control has made similar suggestions in its reports , and I know what I am talking about because there have been times , as you may have noticed , when I have not voted for them .
The Committee on Budgetary Control is asking the Commission to take action .
This is certainly not a legislative proposal as you have inaccurately stated .
This report must therefore be placed on our agenda , because the measures that must be taken are urgent and are related to budgetary matters ; if we wait until the first October part-session we will have missed the meeting of the Committee on Budgets on 28 September .
Therefore , I request that this report be re-entered on the agenda , pursuant to Rule 96 .
( Applause from the right )
Mr Fabre-Aubrespy , you are a legal expert and a member of the Committee on the Rules of Procedure , and you will know that Article 138b of the Treaty does not restrict legislative proposals of this kind to those made on the basis of owninitiative reports .
You will also be aware that when the Commission is requested to submit a legislative proposal - and that is the purpose of paragraphs 2 and 3 of the resolution - Article 138b of the Treaty has to be applied , unless the committee in question states that it does not wish its request to fall within the scope of that article .
That is why it is unfortunate that the Committee on Budgetary Control did not specify the legal basis , because this has implications for the majority that is required .
If it is the majority under Article 138b , it must be an absolute majority .
Otherwise , the committee responsible is not bound by Article 138b and a simple majority will suffice .
It is for this reason that our Rules of Procedure , under Rule 50 , require the text of the resolution in question to indicate the legal basis .
Unfortunately , all I can do is to ensure that our Rules are properly applied .
The problem can quite easily be resolved .
I also think it will be quite easy to give Parliament the chance to vote on a proposal to create 300 new posts on the basis of the financial statement .
That is what is required by Rule 50 , and it is as simple as that .
I cannot be held responsible for the fact that the Committee on Budgetary Control , which should have all the figures at its disposal , failed to indicate them .
Parliament 's services have made me aware of the problem , and I have no option but to ask for the report to be revised as quickly as possible .
If you have any doubts , I should be very glad to refer this interpretation to the Committee on the Rules of Procedure .
Mr President , before I comment on the Rules of Procedure , I should like to say thank you for something which my group has been pressing for since I have been a Member of the House .
Finally , I have discovered that the waste in my office is being separated .
There are new waste baskets , and I am very grateful that it has at last been possible to take this measure .
Now to the more serious matter .
In connection with investigations concerning ECHO , I have personally asked for the Commission to make a statement during the week .
My group has also presented this request to you in writing .
I and other members of the Committee on Budgetary Control have now received , about an hour ago , a detailed dossier from Mr Trojan with opinions on the relevant questions , which were raised in the Committee on Budgetary Control .
For this reason , I assume that we can come to an agreement on this with the Commissioners this week or next , if their offer of dialogue is to be taken seriously . I would therefore no longer support the request for this matter to be discussed in plenary .
I should like to make one point , however .
The coinciding of our researches into ECHO with the Bösch report would have meant that a proper , thorough debate could have taken place in the House at 5 p.m. today on the question of how we deal with irregularities and suspicious factors concerning fraud in our own ranks .
I am sorry to have to say , Mr President , that with or without all your legal arguments , this political manoeuvre appears all too obvious to me , and whilst on the matter , I would tell you that your reference to Rule 50 is completely unfounded in my view !
It was clear from the start that the Bösch report is one that has been drawn up under Article 206 .
If the President believed this not to be the case , then he could at the very least have consulted Mrs Theato or the rapporteur .
Instead , our DirectoratesGeneral are endlessly having to clarify references , remarks and legal eventualities , about which there is full agreement amongst the majority who voted through this report in the Committee on Budgetary Control .
It is not in order , Mr President , that you should undermine the political debate here with your legal arguments .
Incidentally , in addition to what Mr FabreAubrespy has requested , I would ask for the report which the competent parliamentary committee has adopted to be made available tomorrow by 12 noon to all Members of the House in all languages !
I shall not comment on your insinuations , Mrs Müller .
My duty is simply to apply the Rules of Procedure .
And as this Parliament steadily gains greater powers , it also has a greater obligation to be aware of the rules governing the exercise of those powers and to respect them .
That is all , Mrs Müller .
This is not about what each committee would like to do , but what it can do under the rules .
That is my responsibility , and anyone who interprets the position otherwise can make a submission to the Rules Committee . I say that with all due respect for everyone 's opinion .
Mr Crowley has the floor .
Mr President , regarding the order of business I should like to put on the official record my congratulations to my constituency colleague and good friend , Mr Cox , on his election as president of the ELDR group .
It is a great honour for him and his family and , in particular , a great honour for Ireland to have a president of a group from Ireland .
Thank you very much , Mr Crowley .
I have already had occasion to congratulate Mr Cox personally , but now that has been signed and sealed by Parliament .
( The order of business was adopted )
Third country aircraft safety
The next item is the recommendation for second reading ( A4-0295 / 98 ) , on behalf of the Committee on Transport and Tourism , on the common position adopted by the Council ( C4-0338 / 98-97 / 0039 ( SYN ) ) with a view to adopting a Council Directive establishing a safety assessment of third-country aircraft using Community airports ( Rapporteur : Mr González Triviño ) .
I call Mr Dary , who is deputising for the rapporteur .
Mr President , this proposal stems from a directive establishing a safety assessment for third-country aircraft using Community airports .
It is the first of a series of measures recommended by a highlevel working group with a remit to draw up a Community aviation safety improvement strategy .
Since January 1992 , the European Community has had a harmonised set of safety requirements for its operators , consequently making European carriers among the safest in the world .
However , the safety record of a number of third countries ' aircraft is less reassuring .
This obviously affects both European citizens and carriers when they use Community airports .
The problem was highlighted by the February 1996 crash of a Turkish aircraft chartered by a tour operator in which all 176 passengers died .
Unfortunately , this was not an isolated incident .
Recent safety concerns have focused attention on the older models of Boeing 737 and 747 aircraft , with the result that in the United States 150 of these aircraft were recalled for inspection .
It is hoped that similar inspections are being undertaken by all European carriers , and indeed all operators of this type of aircraft .
During the short period since the end of August , one aircraft which had been in service for 20 years crashed in Quito , Ecuador , while another , newer aircraft belonging to Swissair crashed into the sea near Halifax for reasons as yet unknown .
The proposal before us aims to collate information from pilots , passengers , maintenance engineers and others and , where there is reason to suspect non-compliance with international safety standards , to carry out checks on the aircraft involved and , where necessary , impose corrective measures .
As a last resort , where rules are not observed , the aircraft would be grounded or the carrier banned from using European airports .
The following are the main elements of the draft directive proposed by the Commission .
Firstly , aviation authorities are to collate and share all information pertaining to ramp checks .
Secondly , conditions are laid down which should give rise to ramp checks and ultimately to groundings .
Thirdly , collective Community action is envisaged , ranging from the definition of content and procedures for ramp inspections to imposing bans on specific operators .
It is this last feature which lies at the heart of the directive and which has caused the most disagreement with the Council .
Essentially , the Commission was proposing that it should be able to recommend whether or not to institute specific surveillance of a third-party operator or to ban a specific country 's carrier from using Community airports .
Recent experience of third-country operators evading a ban in one Member State by simply landing across the border in a neighbouring country at an airport of convenience would seem adequate justification for this collective Community action .
At first reading , Parliament fully endorsed the Commission 's proposal to improve the safety of foreign carriers , taking the view that safety cannot and should not be compromised .
Nevertheless , 14 amendments were adopted , aimed at strengthening collective action , extending the sources of information and introducing a degree of transparency by providing for the publication of groundings in cases where there is an immediate safety hazard .
This was an essential amendment , since Parliament has always considered the release of information on aviation safety to the public to be an essential part of a Community aviation safety policy .
The Commission accepted practically all of these amendments and presented an amended proposal .
Yet the Council , in its common position , only accepted half and removed all the most important and progressive elements , particularly those relating to flight bans .
Your rapporteur , whom I represent today , takes a firm stand against the text of the Council 's common position .
When compared to the statements of the British Presidency concerning the need for safety to be a priority for the common transport policy , this text adds nothing whatsoever : all it does is recognise rights already exercised by Member States , without conferring power on the Commission to determine any general sanctions valid throughout the Union which would apply to Member States , aircraft and operators failing to meet the international safety standards .
The amendment simply reiterates Parliament 's view that all third-country aircraft landing at Community airports and suspected of not complying with international air safety standards should be subject to ramp inspections .
Adopting anything less is to compromise on safety .
In addition , the rapporteur considers that this must apply to all airports open to international passenger and freight traffic and not just the main ones , since many of the accidents reported concern foreign freight or charter companies using smaller regional airports to save on landing fees .
Amendments Nos 3 and 4 address the matter of the Commission 's power to decide on penalties .
Mr President , Mr González Triviño 's report on safety assessments of third countries ' aircraft has now also been unanimously adopted at second reading , as it was at the first .
The report is of particular importance because it involves the safety and lives of both crew and passengers .
If the European Union guarantees the free movement of people , then it must also assume responsibility for the safe movement of people .
The passengers who take advantage of cheap flight offers are , in particular , more often than not unaware of the dangers of the journey they are undertaking , especially as they do not receive any reliable information on whether safety problems have been detected and with which companies .
We have made good progress with the draft directive on the way towards achieving the complete safety of all passengers travelling by air in Europe .
Parliament and the Commission quickly agreed during their discussion of the directive that effective protection for passengers is only guaranteed when ramp inspections are carried out on all aircraft everywhere in accordance with a common inspection list .
At the same time , the Member States and the Commission must fully inform one another about the inspection results and measures taken against third-country aircraft .
The Member States must finally take common measures against aircraft which have safety problems .
We will only achieve the greatest possible safety at airports in the European Union when the system of carrying out inspections is standardised and third-country aircraft can no longer avoid the system when flying from one Member State to another or from one airport to another .
The safety net which we are tightening must not be so broad-meshed that it is possible to slip through unnoticed .
Against this background , I cannot understand - and nor can nearly all my colleagues here in the House - why the Council has cut back the original proposals of the Commission and Parliament quite considerably in its common position .
Nor can I understand why the Commission should not be able to declare an EU-wide grounding of aircraft of its own accord .
Naturally , we respect the freedom of decision-making of the Member States .
But in what area , if not safety in Europe , would it be appropriate for the Commission to take central decisions on sanctions ?
In this case , if we leave the Member States too much scope to make independent decisions , we run the risk of not achieving the purpose of this directive - safety - once again .
The freedom of decision-making of the Member States and the concept of subsidiarity must not be confused with national egoism .
I am therefore very grateful to the rapporteur for the solid and fair compromise which he has proposed in his amendments and which we have adopted unanimously .
My group supports the compromise unconditionally .
The first link between what is a matter of concern for the Parliament and the Commission , and the reservations of the Member States has therefore , I think , been successfully forged .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I will be very brief and thus hope to make up some of the extra time which my colleagues have previously taken .
First of all , I should like to warmly congratulate the rapporteur , who unfortunately is not with us here today , on his excellent report .
He has really done a very good job .
I should merely like to endorse his criticism of the Council .
We do not want anything impossible , but we do want safe aircraft , even if they come from non-EU Member States .
This has after all been regulated since 1992 for the Member States .
We do not want excessive bureaucracy , but we do want information to be exchanged and the general public to be able to access information .
None of this is going too far - our concern is to achieve something useful for Europe 's citizens , namely the highest possible standard of safety .
The Group of the European People 's Party therefore supports all the amendments from the Committee on Transport , as we have already done in the committee .
We think that a sensible compromise has been found here .
At the same time , we expect the Commission to vigorously support these amendments , which express the continued will of the House , in the talks with the Council at second reading .
The Council would also be well advised to adopt our amendments .
Mr President , I too would like to congratulate the absent rapporteur for his insistence upon some very correct views .
At the same time , I must declare my group 's full support for the report in question and for Commissioner Kinnock 's efforts , and denounce the Council 's policy .
The Council must understand that political expediency or political compromise may have their place in dealing with some other issues , but when we are talking about issues that affect our lives and those of our families and children , then the Council has no right , absolutely no right at all , to make decisions which represent a compromise policy .
It grieves me particularly , because the information we all have is that the Council is not even disposed to accept the agreed text , the agreed amendments from second reading .
In such a case , Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , we must back Commissioner Kinnock with our authority and stand by him , and if the Council persists in its refusal , we must denounce this publicly . The citizens of Europe should know who bears moral responsibility in the event of a fatal air accident caused either by lack of information or by inadequate safety regulations .
Where the lives of Europe 's citizens are concerned , no Minister and no Council has the right to make high-handed decisions .
Mr President , this directive came as a direct response to the plane crash in the Dominican Republic in February 1996 in which 176 people died .
Two and a half years on and with the terrible disaster in Canada fresh in our minds , little has improved in practice .
We may not be able to prevent all accidents from happening , unfortunately , but we must do everything we can to prevent avoidable accidents .
Human life is priceless , and the Member States must do everything in their power to protect it .
Community legislation is an important tool here .
Operators in the Community are rightly subject to strict technical rules , most of them based on the Chicago Convention which all the Member States signed up to .
The Community cannot impose these rules on other countries , but by applying conditions for landing at Community airports we may well encourage third countries to comply with them .
Passenger safety could be improved if the legislation applied both to Community operators and to operators from third countries landing at Community airports .
I agree with Mr González Triviño that we need improvements in both active and passive passenger safety .
Active safety could be improved by carrying out ramp inspections at airports to check whether aircraft are airworthy , and we must ensure that there is a sound basis for the inspections and any consequences they might have for operators .
Checks must be carried out wherever there is justifiable doubt as to whether certain aircraft are airworthy .
If the results are negative , other Member States must be informed in order to prevent operators from trying to avoid sanctions .
Passive safety could be improved by ensuring that full and accurate information is provided on the various operators , so that consumers have all the information they need to decide whether they wish to risk flying with a certain operator before they book .
This means , as the rapporteur proposes , that the relevant information must be published .
In conclusion , I would just say that I hope the Council does not disregard Parliament 's opinion for a second time .
Mr President , Commissioner , we are now in the final stages of the work on this proposed directive , and I hope we can agree on a sensible recommendation .
Safety in transport is of concern to us all .
Unfortunately we are occasionally reminded that it is necessary to think about safety in transport .
Human and technical errors should be prevented by proper procedures and training .
I have some misgivings as to whether we are actually achieving what we want through this proposal .
We can draw a parallel with shipping , where we have port state control , which means that ships are monitored , and we can say that some success has been achieved in singling out the really bad ships .
In Amendment No 1 , where the text reads ' Each Member State shall put in place the appropriate means to ensure that third-country aircraft suspected of non-compliance ... ' , ' appropriate means ' and ' suspected ' are somewhat vague formulations .
Suspicion is not enough for me .
There should be a better reason for detaining an aircraft than mere suspicion .
But neither commercial considerations nor kindness should play a role in these judgments at airports .
I very much hope that Mr Kinnock , together with the committee and the Council , can devise some methods of verification on the basis of which the directive will serve the intended purposes .
There is no point in adopting a directive if it does not work .
The next point I would mention is that European airlines are currently phasing out large parts of their fleets .
New resources are being deployed and energy-saving aeroplanes are being introduced , and indeed that is a good thing .
Unfortunately , many of these pensioned-off aircraft - often 20 years old - are to be seen dressed up in new clothes and operating in the European area under different flags .
That shows how greatly this directive is needed .
It shows that we cannot be guided by commercial considerations or kindness alone ; we must really have a system that works .
I very much hope that we can agree on something that works .
We must get something adopted which does not merely look good on paper , but which can really be implemented in the Member States and which the Member States are able to enforce .
This is in fact my greatest concern .
Mr President , it seems to me that it is very sad that we are discussing the issue of aircraft safety so shortly after the tragic Swissair disaster off the coast of Nova Scotia 10 days ago .
I join my fellow parliamentarians here collectively in sending our condolences to the friends and families of the victims of that crash .
I feel that not enough has been done at a political level , either by the European Union or the Member States , to deal with the issue of congestion in our skies .
The Association of European Airlines has gone so far as to intimate that a certain sense of complacency exists in some governments , particularly the British Government , about seriously tackling the problem of air congestion .
The statistics are rather frightening .
Air delays in Europe have reached the worse level in nine years .
30 % of all scheduled flights in Europe take off late 45 % of the time .
Charter flights are subject to great delays .
The most crowded airspace in Europe is over South-East England where , this year alone , air traffic controllers are filing a record number of overload reports .
Near-misses are being reported more frequently .
The opening of a new air traffic control centre in England is four years behind .
Two-thirds of flight hold-ups are due to congestion in the skies .
I feel that the time has now come for the Commission and the EU Member States ' governments to come together and collectively do something urgently about this .
In the past three years I have not been on a plane that left on time or arrived on time .
There is something wrong somewhere , Mr President .
Mr President , I will begin by echoing the views expressed by the President of Parliament earlier on lamenting the sudden and tragic death of Dr Allan Macartney .
He was , as everyone here will know , someone regarded with universal respect and affection that crossed the political divide .
And as we send our sympathy to his loved ones we record the fact that he will be sadly missed by everyone , including of course his constituents .
We also join Mr Andrews in sending our condolences to those who are bereaved and suffering as a consequence of the appalling and tragic Swissair disaster just 10 days ago off the coast of Nova Scotia .

I would like to congratulate the rapporteur , Mr González Triviño , on his excellent work for the second reading of this Commission proposal before the House today and also to thank Mr David for taking his colleague 's place today because of Mr González Triviño 's unavoidable absence .

As in the first reading , the rapporteur has adopted a very supportive stance in his recommendation and I am glad to say that his four proposed amendments provide the basis for an acceptable compromise between the common position of the Council and the Commission 's proposal .
As the House will recall , the initial proposal suggested that third country aircraft suspected of not complying with internationally accepted safety standards should be checked at Community airports .
As Mr Sindal says , this is a relatively modest proposition beginning , we hope , with even more comprehensive developments , but one that is certainly necessary .
Of course national authorities are already free to exercise that right of checking , of supervision and of detention but the added value of the Commission 's proposal is that it introduces the facility for taking common action against unsafe aircraft or operators of those aircraft or their countries of origin that tolerate those standards .
Regrettably , that feature was not recognised in the common position , nor was account taken of the legitimate interests of the public in being informed about the safety of the air transport they use .
That , to say the least , is somewhat inconsistent , especially in those Member States where the law already obliges governmental organisations to release all the information that they receive .
The House knows that in safety matters we in the Commission always seek to achieve the delicate balance between providing legitimate information for the general public and securing publication of information that might be harmful to individuals or enterprises and have the effect of silencing information sources that we consider to be vital for the improvement of safety and safety standards .
None of our proposals would have departed from that convention of sensible and responsible balance .
I am pleased therefore that the amendments proposed by the rapporteur will allow the Commission to propose common action against dangerous operators and will also achieve the correct balance between the dissemination and the protection of safety-related information .
For this reason the Commission supports all four of the amendments in Mr González Trivino 's recommendation , subject to slight rewording of Amendment No 2 relating to the release of information to passengers ' organisations .
We would make that change simply because we believe that the issue is already well provided for in an earlier part of the same amendment .
In conclusion , I am particularly glad to see that the way is now open for the rapid adoption and implementation of European legislation that should contribute to improving the safety of people who travel by air and also of others , particularly of course those who live near airports .
Naturally , I am grateful to Mr González Trivino and his colleagues for their effective work and for their continuing cooperation in trying to advance the levels of safety for the travelling public .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Legal protection of designs
The next item is the report ( A4-0315 / 98 ) by Mr Medina Ortega , on behalf of Parliament 's delegation to the Conciliation Committee , on the joint text approved by the Conciliation Committee for a European Parliament and Council Directive on the legal protection of designs ( C4-0467 / 98-00 / 0464 ( COD ) ) .
Mr President , the proposal we are presenting today - the joint text approved by the Conciliation Committee - is the result of a great deal of work in Parliament , the Council and , of course , the Commission .
The Commission first presented a proposal in this area five years ago , in 1993 , involving both a directive and a regulation .
The directive was to harmonise the relevant law in Member States , but ultimately of course there will be a regulation establishing a Community law , with the Community 's own register and set of standards .
But there has been a problem from day one - a fly in the ointment , one might say - arising from the so-called ' repairs clause ' , because in practice , and even by law in some Member States , property rights in a motor vehicle model or design are contradicted by manufacturers having the right to reproduce visible and external vehicle parts for replacement without needing authorisation from the vehicle manufacturer .
This issue has major economic implications , because there are thousands of road accidents every day .
Mr Kinnock was talking about aircraft accidents just now but , as we all know , far more people die on our roads in car accidents and , of course , the material damage caused each day in our Community amounts to truly astronomical figures .
We are talking about thousands of millions of ECU , about vast amounts of work , and about something affecting intellectual property .
So this is not a trivial matter .
It is an important issue because of its impact on employment in certain Community countries and regions where this is an important sector . It is also in the interests of the motor manufacturers to push for some kind of law , given the legislative diversity .
Five years have gone by and all we have been able to achieve is a kind of armistice .
Parliament came out in favour of a formula involving the right to manufacture spare parts against payment of compensation to the vehicle manufacturers , but the Council was unable to reach agreement .
In the end , the final text maintains a sort of armistice - as I have just said - because Article 14 , the ' repairs clause ' , was turned into a transitional provision , and under Article 18 the Commission must make an analysis of the situation and present proposals to complete the directive within three years .
So we are currently at a standstill , with each state keeping its legislation in force and everyone doing their best not to interfere with the single market . If states change their legislation , they undertake not to make the internal market in these products even more difficult by doing so , but to use the opportunity to facilitate the liberalisation of the internal market .
We may not be very proud of the work that has been done , but this armistice does mean we have prevented a war .
However , the directive is more than just the repairs clause ; a whole series of sectors were waiting for this directive to be able to consolidate their legal position , and the text includes useful provisions giving a definition of a design or model .
Reference is made , for example , to the fundamental characteristic which a utility design or model must have in order to be recognized as such .
This is the characteristic of innovation , and this innovation is primarily defined in terms of a certain visibility , so that an informed user can distinguish it from another earlier product by that innovation .
Obviously all this directive does is get things moving .
The directive must be incorporated into the legislation of the various Member States .
There will doubtless be Community legislation and Court of Justice decisions to help us disentangle this matter .
I hope the directive will achieve a final formula and also that , in the meantime , Parliament and the Council will progress with the approval of the regulation on the utility design and model , so that we end up having Community arrangements permitting free movement of all these products .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the design directive which we are talking about today has a path of trial and tribulation behind it , but it is not yet out of the woods .
The result of conciliation between Parliament and the Council has left open some important questions .
Against this background , I should like to thank my colleague , Mr Medina Ortega , on behalf of my group for the steadfastness with which he has represented the concerns of Parliament before the Council and the Commission .
His steadfastness was particularly evident during the struggle for the so-called repairs clause .
We only have to look at the motor vehicles sector to recognise the importance of this detail .
The European Parliament has found a balance between the interests of the car industry , spare parts manufacturers and consumers .
It would have proved the benefit of the European Union to its citizens if the Council had agreed to our proposal .
It failed because of the egoism of individual Member States , which is not good evidence of Europe 's ability to solve problems .
The result of conciliation which we agree to with bad grace is no solution .
It merely postpones a solution .
We shall therefore only agree to this legislative standstill because nothing will become worse through it , and because we assume that it will still be possible to achieve a satisfactory ruling on spare parts .
This must prevent monopolisation - which restricts competition - and at the same time secure inexpensive repairs for consumers with spare parts of their choice .
The Commission has the job of making this objective achievable in the next seven years .
Commissioner , we in Parliament and my group in particular will keep a close watch on how and whether this is happening .
Mr President , this is perhaps one of the most difficult conciliation procedures we have yet had to conduct .
On this occasion , the dispute did not involve an institutional or budgetary matter .
We had a fundamental divergence with the Council on an important point in the directive .
Parliament obviously defended the so-called repairs clause that we had voted for in second reading by an overwhelming majority .
The Council , for its part , rejected it unanimously .
After long weeks of informal negotiations which were , unfortunately , unsuccessful - Mr Medina reminded us earlier that this dossier has been pending since 1993 - we are now faced by a most uncomfortable alternative .
Either we should seek a compromise with the Council on the controversial issue of spare parts , or we must accept that conciliation cannot be achieved , with the attendant risk that numerous sectors of activity which held high hopes regarding this directive would be seriously affected .
I am grateful to our delegation - and particularly to our rapporteur , Mr Medina Ortega , whose work has been outstanding and who has been angelically patient , if I may say so - for being so clear-sighted .
It was concluded , upon mature reflection and after a discussion that was not always easy , that harmonisation of the legal protection of designs and models in all sectors of European industry was truly essential , and that we could not take the responsibility of deferring it any longer .
Consequently , we had to find the best , or certainly the least bad compromise regarding the protection and use of spare parts for the repair of motor vehicles .
I have been struck by two things throughout this labourious process .
I would like to mention them because they reveal , it seems to me , a positive development in the conciliation procedure .
During the committee 's first meeting , we entered into a very wide-ranging substantive debate , during which members of the delegation and members of the Council alike were able to fully express their differing points of view .
This might seem natural but , in some ways , it was unprecedented .
We owe it to Lord Simon 's determination to bring this matter to a successful conclusion and to his finely-honed political sense - and I would like to pay tribute to him here - as well as to the spirit of dialogue which is gradually developing between the two arms of the legislative authority .
The second point that I would like to raise relates to the active support we have received from Commissioner Monti personally in this matter .
It is sometimes said that the Commission might be uncomfortable in this conciliation procedure because it would have an unobtrusive role , to which it must be said it is not accustomed .
But I consider that the Commission cannot but give the fullest effect to the final sentence of Article 189b ( 4 ) of the Treaty .
Commissioner Monti understood this perfectly , as did Commissioner Kinnock , in connection with the Transeuropean transport networks .
I would like to thank him most sincerely for his effective contribution to lifting the dossier out of the rut into which it had sunk .
Our rapporteur and other Members have already spoken on the substance of the compromise proposal and so I will say only that , in my opinion , the ' standstill plus ' solution , in conjunction with the Commission 's very firm commitment , may well bring about the desired agreement between the parties involved .
I think that we should vote for the joint text that is before us , emphasising that it is absolutely essential that the letter and the spirit should be fully respected .
Commissioner Kinnock will without doubt restate the Commission 's commitment to it later today .
Meanwhile , Parliament will keep a watchful eye on developments .
Mr President , I wish to extend my warmest thanks to the leader of our delegation , Mrs Fontaine .
Other speakers have described the work involved .
Mrs Fontaine referred to developments in the conciliation process itself .
These will , I believe , prove significant at subsequent stages , and I would congratulate Mrs Fontaine on the key role that she played .
As has been said , the repairs clause was a focal point in the discussion .
We must not forget that this directive will lengthen the period of legal protection of designs in many Member States . It will also encourage the interest in safeguarding the right of design holders to protect the content of their work .
One aspect worries me , however .
I have been observing the situation in my own country and looking to the future . How are we going to handle goods coming into the EU without such levels of protection ?
Our customs authorities would be well advised to address this .
My group accepts that we shall have to live with the outcome on the repairs clause , although it is far from ideal .
We expect the Commission to honour its published undertaking to submit proposals for amendments .
The internal market is still not operating perfectly and Parliament 's text contains a clause to that effect .
We hope that the Commission will be vigilant , ensuring that no unjustified steps are taken to block the workings of the free market . All sides need to work together in preempting legislative changes or new practices which would violate the standstill clause .
Mr President , the framework directive dealt with in this report was intended to guarantee fair competition , to benefit consumers in particular .
Has this been achieved ?
After nearly a year of conciliation , not only have Parliament 's initial proposals not been taken up , but the agreement does not contain the repairs clause , and the inclusion of that clause was fundamental to being able to establish a framework for fair competition between spare parts manufacturers and motor vehicle manufacturers .
The agreement expressing the wish to prevent the legal position of the spare parts manufacturers worsening does not resolve the basic problem .
Nor does leaving the solution of this conflict of interests to voluntary self-regulation by the spare parts and vehicle manufacturers , because they are not all in the same position and they do not all have the same influence .
This attitude goes against the interests of consumers , and the approval of Article 10 of the directive , providing up to 25 years ' protection for designs and models , does little to help .
All I can do from here is express our disagreement with a stance which benefits the great motor industry , but does not take account of the interests of the Community 's citizens , whom we were elected to defend them .
Mr President , I would like to thank the rapporteur and Mrs Fontaine in particular for their hard work in concluding this difficult negotiation , and also my colleagues on the Conciliation Committee , who adopted a very pragmatic approach .
It is a particular pleasure for me that the agreement was reached during the first UK Labour presidency .
A member of the House of Lords , Lord Simon , could see at first hand how hard and diligently we work in the European Parliament .
This agreement is a victory for common sense .
I represent a very large car manufacturing area in my constituency .
This covers companies like Peugeot , Rover and Jaguar , to name just some .
I also have even more components firms .
So I was particularly anxious that a compromise would be reached which saved jobs and this compromise does exactly that .
Mr President , all the previous speakers have stressed the torment that has accompanied this directive .
That torment has been caused primarily by the problem of taking a balanced decision on the so-called repairs clause for spare parts for complex products , such as motor cars .
The proof of that torment is provided not just by the length of time which has elapsed between the Commission 's proposal , which dates from 1993 , and the first common position in 1997 ; not just by the delay in bringing it to the Conciliation Committee ; not just by the contrast between Parliament 's amendments and the Council 's position ; but also by the simple fact that a proposal for a regulation was presented jointly with the directive .
That regulation still has to be considered , but the Committee on Legal Affairs specifically decided to wait until the directive relating to harmonisation was concluded .
The regulation to decide on a Community design and model would then be examined .
There is nothing surprising about these difficulties , because the economic and legal problems have not been simple .
There were legal problems of establishing the criteria , the conditions for assessing innovation or originality in the design or model and defining its visibility , but over and above all that , there is the problem of determining whether , in legal terms , it is right to evaluate the aesthetic aspect in relation to an individual element or only as part of a unit .
This is a legal question which has wearied courts of appeal in the Member States and the Court of Justice itself , in a ruling from 1995 .
I leave aside the seriousness of the economic issues , involving the risk of closure for some companies , or the link between accident studies and the choice of which parts should or should not be covered by legal protection , and so on .
Ultimately , we have reached a compromise which I consider acceptable because it does actually lead to greater cooperation and hence greater commercial freedom , even if , for the time being , things can stay as they are , without any harmonisation , and each state can do what as it pleases .
So I think we should vote in favour , in the hope that the Commission will bring forward valid proposals as regards the regulation .
We can also take that path , and that is why , as rapporteur on that regulation , I take a particular interest in the matter .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , first - like my colleague , Mrs Thors - I wish to express our support for this report and our agreement with the position taken in the Conciliation Committee by both Mr Medina Ortega and Mrs Fontaine .
I had the opportunity to analyse this issue in some depth as draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy , and I should like to point out that , from an economic angle , the directive sought to respond to two objectives : on the one hand , completion of the internal market and facilitating the free movement of goods with equal protection for products in the area concerned ; and , on the other hand , protection against copies or products which might arrive from third countries and damage our industry .
Five years have gone by , and we cannot feel particularly satisfied at our failure , in all that time , to resolve two issues which have a considerable effect on European industry , in terms of both the internal market and international competition .
And what we have achieved , as has already been said , is not at all satisfactory either .
We have stopped things getting worse , and we have reached agreement on a minimum , but we have clearly not succeeded in fulfilling the initial aims of the directive .
It does give me some satisfaction that it was possible to take up one of the points proposed by the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy in my own document : the commitment to analyse the position and review it within a fixed period .
Although the slow pace of progress is quite inappropriate to protecting our industry in a highly competitive international context , we hope the matter can finally be brought to a conclusion .
Mr President , I would also like to congratulate Mr Medina and Mrs Fontaine on a good result .
As Mr Medina tells us in his report , it is certainly not the best conceivable result , but perhaps it is the best that could be achieved in the circumstances .
I think the standstill decision is a good thing .
The conflict between spare parts manufacturers and motor vehicle manufacturers will certainly continue for a long time to come .
The consultation exercise and voluntary agreements may perhaps lead to a new and final directive and put an end to the antagonism .
In my opinion , we should not be as disappointed at the outcome as the previous speaker suggested .
Especially not when we consider the scope of the directive and the multiplicity of industries to be covered .
I think it may prove to be a sensible way forward , covering the internal market and the many divergent views the Member States may take .
Mr President , I should like to add my voice to the chorus of praise that there has been for the efforts of the rapporteur , Mr Medina Ortega , and the chairman of our Conciliation Committee , Mrs Fontaine .
I congratulate both of them on their patience over a very long time in dealing with this ; after all , it is not a new proposal .
It has been on our agenda since as long ago as 1993 .
A lot of people outside this House have been expecting us to arrive at a decision long before this , particularly representatives of consumer groups , of the replacement spare part manufacturers ; even , indeed , of people like motorcycle enthusiasts .
Of course no compromise - and this is a compromise - ever succeeds in satisfying all the interested parties one hundred per cent .
But then the European Parliament is about compromise and the European Community operates on compromise .
I have no difficulty at all in supporting this particular compromise because it allows the development of the single market in such things as vehicle spare parts but at the same time it does not inhibit the development of design protection in those areas which need it .
One of the things that has rather worried me about the long delay in bringing this particular directive into force has been the harmful effects it might have had on other industries which depend on design : the fashion industry , the textile industry and so on , whose interests at some stage appeared to be subordinated to that of the car industry .
I hope that everyone outside will be pleased with the work that has been done .
I hope that we will be able to depend upon the House tomorrow to endorse the Conciliation Committee 's recommendations overwhelmingly .
Mr President , Commissioner , I have not understood the negative undertone which has come from the far left wing .
We have achieved progress and something positive here .
The fact is that 180 million car drivers and motorbike riders can breathe a sigh of relief , since the Conciliation Committee of the European Parliament has been able to prevent expensive times for them for the immediate future .
Thanks are due above all to the negotiators in this Conciliation Committee .
All independent garages and the market in spare parts with all its employees , the many small and medium-sized enterprises , can also breathe a sigh of relief , however .
Through the clear position it has adopted - not least in our plenary discussions - the European Parliament has prevented big car companies from dictating prices , which would have been the consequence if we had agreed to this proposal .
The monopoly which would have been created indirectly will therefore not come about , so the high insurance premiums which would also have arisen will not take effect .
Businesses will not go bankrupt and jobs will not be destroyed .
I sympathise with producers , because design costs money .
We must therefore find a solution which also takes into account the protection of designs and a commensurate payment for the designer .
In future there must be a free market , however , with replication under specific conditions . Three years now remain in which to find a suitable solution .
I believe that what we have achieved is a success for our citizens , consumers and the many small and medium-sized enterprises , because in future there will be original and after-market parts and independent garages and dealerships side by side , in the interest of consumers , employees and many ordinary people .
This is a successful outcome , due to the persistence of Parliament 's representatives .
Mr President , I should like to begin by thanking the rapporteur , Mr Medina Ortega , the chairman of the Conciliation Committee , Mrs Fontaine , and everyone else involved for all their dedication and hard work on this extremely difficult and intractable dossier .
The second point I should like to make is this : if you listen to the debate on this issue and read what has been written about it , you would almost think that there was nothing else in the designs directive apart from the repairs clause .
This has certainly been its most striking feature , because of all the important groups involved - the motor industry , the entire repairs sector and consumer groups - but there is more to the directive than that , which was also why the final conclusions of the conciliation procedure turned out as they did .
Parliament had already delivered a most carefully considered opinion on this infamous repairs clause , which was that there should be liberalisation but also compensation for the design holders , but unfortunately these proposals were not accepted .
Following the theory that ' half a loaf is better than no bread ' , I think we would be wise to try to find a compromise here .
I have every confidence that if the European Commission brought all the relevant parties to the table and tried to reach some sort of agreement on self-regulation with them , we could achieve the compromise we are looking for .
I think that it is up to us as Members of the European Parliament to make it clear to any critics in the Member States that it was the Council , not Parliament , which blocked the solution that we proposed .
If we work with the organisations involved to bring pressure to bear , I think a successful agreement can be reached .
Now is the time to give the issue as much publicity as possible .
My thanks once again to all those who worked on this difficult dossier .
Mr President , the Commission is very pleased that , after five years of intensive and complex discussions , agreement has been reached on the design directive within the context of the conciliation procedure .
I am sure that honourable Members will share that pleasure , particularly Mrs Fontaine and Mr Medina Ortega who , in different capacities , have been deeply involved in the issue .
Indeed , I heard Mrs Fontaine describing Mr Medina 's patience as angelic , and I could only reflect as I listened to the debate that between Lord Simon and the angel Medina the conciliation procedure must have been a particularly ethereal experience on this occasion .
I am almost jealous that I was not present .
But I then reflect on my own experience in conciliation and surrender the experience to everybody else .
The agreement on the design directive obviously marks an important step towards the completion of the internal market in industrial design , and we can be confident that it is likely to encourage investment in the manufacturing industries and , consequently , to help to strengthen competitiveness and , I hope , employment .
As honourable Members will know , during the five-year discussions on the directive proposal the repairs clause has , as several Members said in the debate , been the subject of extensive debate between all the institutions involved , and during the conciliation procedure it became clear that , in spite of all efforts , agreement on that clause is still , for the moment , beyond reach .
All the parties involved , however , recognised that the importance of the directive overall for European industrial design meant that adoption should not be prevented because of the problems relating to that single repairs clause .
The Commission , therefore , welcomes the reaching of agreement to freeze the existing legal provisions relating to the protection of the design and the use of spare parts and , meanwhile , to review the consequences of the directive in the foreseeable future .
The so-called ' freeze plus ' clause ensures that each Member State must maintain in force the provisions of its design law in relation to both the criteria for the protection of the design of spare parts and the free use of spare parts for repair purposes .
Furthermore , Member States may only introduce new provisions on the use of spare parts insofar as their objective is to liberalise the market in spare parts .
In addition , the Commission will fulfil its undertaking to launch a consultation , particularly with car manufacturers and spare-part producers in order to examine the possibilities of finding a voluntary agreement on the spare-parts issue .
Finally , in accordance with the agreement , three years after the implementation of the directive , the Commission will submit an analysis of the consequences of the directive for the motor vehicles sector in particular .
We will uphold those undertakings , and those honourable Members who have sought reassurance on that point , I am certain , will accept what I say on behalf of my colleague , Mario Monti , and my other colleagues in the Commission .
This is a necessarily pragmatic approach which allows significant progress .
I conclude , therefore , by thanking the rapporteur on the design directive , Mr Medina Ortega , who has grown older through the experience or , at least , through the years , although his appearance belies the advance of those years , and the chairman of the Conciliation Committee , about whom it can be said in the words of Shakespeare : ' Age cannot wither her , nor custom stale her infinite variety ' - in the manner of Cleopatra , of course - for the decisive role that both have played , together with their colleagues , in achieving a workable agreement on this important directive .
Thank you , Commissioner .
Perhaps for once the President of the sitting could add his congratulations to all those who have enabled this difficult report to come to fruition , in particular Lord Simon , Commissioner Monti and our rapporteur Mr Medina Ortega , as well as Mrs Fontaine , who chaired our delegation .
It did indeed require a whole company of angels and archangels to work this minor miracle .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Coffee and chicory extracts
The next item is the recommendation for second reading ( A4-0278 / 98 ) , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection , on the common position adopted by the Council ( C4-0306 / 98-96 / 0117 ( COD ) ) with a view to adopting a European Parliament and Council Directive relating to coffee extracts and chicory extracts ( Rapporteur : Mr Lannoye ) .
Mr President , we are dealing here with a breakfast product and perhaps this is not the best time of day to talk about it , especially since the political ramifications are not particularly significant .
I doubt if I shall use all my five minutes of speaking time .
I would like to remind the House , however , that this involves one of the seven vertical directives relating to food products , and that the question of coffee and chicory extracts has been dealt with on a par with that of chocolate , which has proved more controversial for other reasons .
The overall purpose of the proposal is to achieve a simplification so as to facilitate the free movement of products .
The concern of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection is that such a simplification should not be achieved at the expense of the consumer and of the quality of products .
That is why we submitted three amendments in first reading , which were rejected by the Commission and the Council .
One amendment is a very technical one and I do not think it is worth discussing here .
The other two , however , involve a matter that may be important for the consumer , since they relate to the restriction of the range of weights which can be offered by the retailer to the consumer .
When the range is entirely open , and particularly when it involves weights that are relatively close to one another , the risk of confusion for the consumer is not inconsiderable .
And it is for this reason that we wish to maintain what was in the original directive , where a range of weights was laid down which were sufficiently different from each other to avoid confusion .
We consider , therefore , following the discussion in second reading , that it is appropriate to retable these three amendments , including the technical one .
This the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection has done , by an overwhelming majority .
Indeed , I think I am correct in saying that it was unanimous , which is not something that occurs very often .
I should like to add a brief comment regarding two amendments which I have tabled , on behalf of the Green Group , without a prior debate in the Committee on the Environment , because our time there was severely limited by a number of other matters which we considered to be of greater relative importance .
I have retabled two comitology amendments seeking to restore the powers conferred on the Commission in the area of adaptation to technical progress and not , as unfortunately appears in the text of the amendments , to confer powers on the Commission in the area of adaptation to Community legislation and to general Community provisions applicable to food products , since this was rejected by Parliament in first reading .
I would therefore request that this be clarified when we vote , in order to correct a mistake for which I am entirely responsible , and for which I apologise to the House .
Mr President , the common position with a view to the adoption of a directive on coffee and chicory may appear to be a purely technical issue , but if you scrutinise the dossier in conjunction with others on foodstuffs , you will see that there are also many political aspects involved .
The rapporteur has already discussed a number of points that we still hope to settle through amendments .
We maintain the position adopted by our group in the Committee on the Environment , and we therefore wholeheartedly support the views expressed by the rapporteur here .
However , one point that I would just like to raise is the use of the comitology procedure .
At first reading , Parliament voted to accept the comitology procedure for adaptations to technical progress , but not for adaptations to the general horizontal foodstuffs directives , and we think we should keep to this line here .
We tabled an amendment to this effect which was adopted at the time , but the system adopted in the common position is the exact opposite .
The common position says no to comitology for adaptations to technical progress , but yes for adaptations to horizontal foodstuffs legislation .
We still think that we should insist on this point .
We have seen with a number of dossiers including chocolate that adaptations to general rules often involve political aspects which can trigger quite violent discussions .
We think it is important for Parliament to be involved in settling such political issues and for the codecision procedure to be used to the full .
This is the line we think we should take .
I had a few words with the rapporteur about this , and I am pleased to say that he has just told me that the amendments on the subject that were tabled very late are to be put to the vote .
I assume that we may have a split vote on them .
I would urge the other groups to support this line , to read through the amendments again very closely and to ensure that the position we adopt is a unanimous one .
Mr President , we should also like to thank Mr Lannoye .
Like Balzac , the Commission drinks coffee from the morning until late at night , in order to be able to fulfil its duties . It is therefore not unusual for us to be discussing coffee at this time .
Three of the five amendments were not adopted by the Commission at first reading .
These have now been retabled as Nos 1 , 2 and 3 , together with two new ones , Nos 4 and 5 , which we can adopt because they correspond to our original thinking .
I should like to explain briefly now why Amendments Nos 1 and 2 are not acceptable to us .
According to the amendments , the provisions on the ranges of prepackaged products are to be reintroduced as they exist in the present directive .
We cannot adopt them because the proposal for a directive , at least for the most part , deals only with questions of composition and labelling .
Ranges are therefore not included here because they do not come under this proposal for a directive .
These ranges should be dealt with under the directives on ranges of prepackaged products .
When the common position was adopted , we included a declaration which states that we are prepared to examine , in agreement with those affected , whether ranges of prepackaged products in connection with coffee and chicory extracts should be incorporated into the relevant legislation .
So that is our intention .
I hope that Parliament understands that we cannot do that here today when dealing with this proposal for a directive , because of the constraints imposed by the timetable .
Amendment No 3 tries to establish ISO standard 11292 as binding for the determination of the free and total carbohydrate content in soluble coffees .
That corresponds neither to our policy nor to the significance of ISO standards , which are by definition not compulsory , and which can of course be brought into play accordingly in announcements , advertising and so on .
They are in any event not compulsory or binding , however .
As far as the adaptation of Community analysis procedures is concerned , we have already committed ourselves to bringing the existing analysis procedures for coffee into line .
We have also referred to this commitment again in our declaration attached to the common position .
As far as Amendments Nos 4 and 5 are concerned , we should like to express our thanks .
They correspond to our positions , and so we can naturally adopt them .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Transatlantic relations / Echelon system
The next item is the statement by the Commission on transatlantic relations following the 18 May 1998 EU-US summit and the use of monitoring techniques in the field of communications ( Echelon system ) .
Mr President , with your permission , I should like to deliver two separate statements .
The first is the one which my colleague , Sir Leon Brittan , would have liked to make .
Unfortunately , this item was only placed on today 's agenda on Friday . I therefore apologise for any inconvenience caused by his asking me to take his place for this item .
However , since we do work very closely together on issues of economic policy arising between the USA and ourselves , I hope that I can also account to you for our position .
I should then like - with your consent - to deliver the second statement after we have discussed the state of relations with the USA , because I think that would be more appropriate .
First of all , then , the Commission 's statement on EU-USA relations .
We are very pleased to be able to hold an exchange of views on this important issue here with Parliament , especially as there has been a whole string of positive developments since Sir Leon spoke about the matter in plenary in November last year .
In particular , the EU-US summit of 18 May in London should be mentioned , which led to an agreement to create the Transatlantic Economic Partnership and at which agreements were also reached on the Helms-Burton Act and other issues associated with it .
The significance of the economic relations between the USA and the EU is well known .
We are both the largest investors in our respective markets .
One in every 12 factory workers in America works for a European company , and American companies employ 3 million staff in Europe .
The traditional economic relations naturally also reflect the interdependence of our economic systems , which is becoming greater every year .
Of course , this also shows that our fundamental values are in harmony .
In joining forces , we are endeavouring to promote these common interests and values in the world , by standing up for political stability , democracy , free trade , and the protection and defence of human rights .
It is repeatedly said that this is an unequal partnership , that the USA considers the European Union the junior partner in the relationship .
That is not so .
We are making our external relations increasingly coherent .
We are appearing more and more as a player on the international stage , and even when differences arise between the USA and ourselves - and they can arise without being serious - it still remains a lasting relationship between two equal partners .
Perhaps that is precisely one of the reasons why we speak openly about any differences of opinion when we have them .
We are able to do so because our relationship is based on sound foundations .
Naturally , that also means commitments for both partners .
We undoubtedly bear a great responsibility in the international community , but the USA perhaps has an even greater one at present .
We are increasingly sharing this responsibility between us , however .
The European Union and the USA have therefore been in the public eye since the beginning of the crises in Asia and Russia .
Our reactions are keenly followed , and those affected both look for and receive our support and advice .
We therefore clearly share with the USA a great responsibility for strong and coherent leadership .
That is expected of us , and it is our duty to do provide it .
In this sense , the New Transatlantic Agenda is of great importance .
We have a framework for the development of our joint role .
When we agreed the New Transatlantic Agenda barely three years ago , both sides were already of the opinion that a comprehensive framework would be needed to promote cooperation between us in many areas .
Four major areas of priority for our cooperation were established in the New Transatlantic Agenda : promoting peace , stability , democracy and development ; responding to global challenges ; expanding world trade and intensifying economic relations ; and forging links between nations .
The progress we have achieved in the past three years in all these areas is perhaps not what we might have hoped for , but it is nevertheless quite considerable .
We are continuing to extend our cooperation .
We are making progress in combating global problems , such as drugs , organised crime and trafficking in women .
We have been able to give our businesses and citizens real advantages through our cooperation in international organisations such as the WTO , as well as within the framework of our bilateral agreements .
I was here in the House last year to discuss the report which Mrs Mann presented on the New Transatlantic Agenda , together with the report by Mr Souchet on relations between the USA and the EU , and we agreed that the future potential for this cooperation is considerable .
Of course , the Transatlantic Economic Partnership will also play a decisive role in this context .
We have already achieved some tangible and satisfactory initial results here - perhaps even unexpected ones on occasion .
In January this year , the European Parliament itself called for a general blueprint - a framework , timetable , schedule and time limit - for the completion of the New Transatlantic Market .
Following this , we drew up a proposal which was discussed at length within the Council , and also with the US Government . The first result of this was that an ambitious joint declaration on the Transatlantic Economic Partnership was issued at the summit meeting in London .
We are pursuing two basic objectives : firstly , the dismantling of trade barriers which still adversely affect transatlantic trade , the removal of which means considerable new opportunities for our businesses and consumers , as well as for businesses and consumers in the USA .
Secondly , we have sought to promote multilateral liberalisation whilst improving our cooperation with the USA in multilateral trade forums , particularly the WTO , because I know that both these forms of cooperation are often also treated in Parliament as controversial and mutually exclusive options .
We are of the opinion that they can be pursued together .
Progress can be made at bilateral level , and multilateral cooperation can also be promoted at the same time .
We have therefore made it clear in the summit declaration on the Transatlantic Economic Partnership that pursuing the aims of EU and US trade policy within the framework of the WTO and together with other members of the WTO is a high priority .
Multilateral cooperation has a number of key elements : firstly , the joint commitment of the EU and the USA to negotiating broad-based liberalisation ; secondly , close cooperation so that ambitious aims can be achieved at the forthcoming GATT 2000 negotiations ; and , thirdly , reinforcing the agreement on future WTO negotiations on the reform in agriculture .
The essential element in bilateral cooperation is the large-scale removal of regulatory barriers and , as a result , opening up our markets more for both goods and services .
This also includes areas such as invitations to tender and intellectual property .
Of course , we are absolutely determined to listen to and include those involved in the dialogue when carrying out these tasks .
The success of the transatlantic business dialogue is obvious .
It has essentially ensured greater transparency in the decisionmaking process .
The immediate problems can also be better dealt with , and it is now resulting in a series of other initiatives as well , such as the global business dialogue .
So we shall naturally continue to pursue this possibility of transatlantic dialogue , so as to ensure that we can achieve our objectives with the agreement of those involved .
This week , the Commission is expected to adopt a recommendation to the Council on the Transatlantic Economic Partnership with the accompanying draft negotiating directives and an action plan .
We hope that we can finally achieve agreement on the plan and begin the process of implementation before the EU-US summit in December .
This economic cooperation is important for the whole world and is essential to strengthening the multilateral system .
Other important progress concerning the differences of opinion over the Helms-Burton and d 'Amato legislation was also achieved at the London summit .
You will be aware of the disputes .
The agreements reached in London are advantageous for Europe and European businesses , as they open up real prospects of neutralising the extraterritorial effects of the Helms-Burton Act and the Act on sanctions against Iran and Libya .
Let me be quite clear on this point : the EU has not given anything away here !
The agreements represent a package . We shall only fulfil our part when the USA has done likewise .
The EU will not implement the Understanding on disciplines for the strengthening of investment protection until waivers are made possible under Title 4 of the Helms-Burton Act .
The HelmsBurton issue is not being raised to multilateral level with this agreement .
As you know , the USA was seeking to limit trade with Cuba and investment there to a large extent through this Act , but in reality , legal investment is made easier for EU businesses through the agreement .
Only a small proportion of future investment in Cuba is affected , and only in so far as it depends on state support .
The disciplines agreed do not include a ban on investment in expropriated property , and investments already made remain completely unaffected .
In addition , the agreement represents an important step forward in investment protection policy which goes far beyond the issue of possible illegal expropriations in Cuba .
The disciplines for the strengthening of investment protection ensure unimpaired national sovereignty for the Member States , since they can both determine which expropriations were illegal and apply most of the disciplines agreed themselves .
In the declaration on the transatlantic partnership in the area of political cooperation , the US Government commits itself neither to strive for nor propose , but to counteract economic sanctions prompted by foreign policy considerations which are designed to lead European businesses to behave in a similar way to those in their own economy .
I am quoting from the agreements here .
This should largely rule out in future the adoption of legislation with extraterritorial effects , such as the Helms-Burton Act and the Act on sanctions against Iran and Libya .
As regards the d 'Amato Act or the Act on sanctions against Iran and Libya , our investors are being given legal security by the lifting of the sanctions imposed on the Total company under Section 9 © and the prospect of similar decisions for EU businesses in comparable cases .
As a result , the Act on sanctions against Iran and Libya is losing some of its terror , at any rate .
The agreement reached in London opens up great opportunities and even great advantages in competition to EU businesses in these countries .
As far as the implementation of these agreements is concerned , Mrs Albright is trying at present to convince the Congress of the need to amend Title 4 , so that waivers are possible .
It is now up to the American Government to secure the adoption of the agreements by Congress .
We shall naturally support it in this , so far as that is within our power .
Sir Leon Brittan is visiting Washington on 24 and 25 September in this connection .
Apart from all the other areas of transatlantic cooperation which I cannot go into in more detail here for reasons of time , the agreements on the Transatlantic Economic Partnership and the Helms-Burton Act show that our cooperation is intensive and constructive .
The bonds and the common values which unite our citizens and governments on both sides of the Atlantic are much stronger than any passing differences .
The Members of this House , and naturally of the Congress too , will play a central role in making these relations more intense .
At the last meeting of EU and US ministers on 3 September in Vienna , both the President-in-Office of the Council , Mr Schüssel , and Sir Leon Brittan emphasised to Mrs Albright the importance of continuing to develop interparliamentary relations between the EU and the USA .
We welcome all the efforts which have been made on your side in this area , in which many Members of the European Parliament have been particularly active : Mr Donnelly , Mr Elles , Mrs Mann and Mr Brok , to mention but a few .
Let me end with a final remark on the Transatlantic Economic Partnership .
Just four months have passed since the summit in London at which this initiative was brought into being .
During this period , the European side has worked intensively and with commitment to get the Transatlantic Economic Partnership off the ground .
I am certain that the American side is likewise trying to play its part .
These common efforts justify our expectation that the next EU-US summit will produce important and concrete results both in the interests of the EU and the USA before the end of this year , and that these will be helpful above all to those whom our daily work should concern first and foremost , in other words our citizens .
Mr President , I am very pleased that Mr Bangemann has covered the essential points in his brief statement .
I have to say quite honestly that I had hoped that we would not be debating this until November or December , when we shall be discussing the report on the Transatlantic Economic Partnership once again .
The decision would also have been taken by then in the Committee on External Economic Relations .
The die is sometimes cast differently from how one plans , however .
We know how difficult it is to have a balanced transatlantic relationship .
Our basis is a good one , reliable and stable , and we can see how important this is in view of the worldwide turmoil around us .
Europe 's citizens above all hope for stability and reliability from transatlantic relations .
We can lead the way together with the Americans on human rights and democracy , and introducing labour and social standards in the multilateral negotiated package .
The European model fits well with the American model in this respect .
Nevertheless , we are certainly experiencing some considerable differences and losses due to friction on sensitive issues , particularly in the area of trade .
An important point which you have already addressed is naturally the Helms-Burton Act .
Unilateral sanctions , as the Helms-Burton , d 'Amato and ILSA cases have made clear , have not exactly shown the best side of American economic policy and have raised the question time and again of whether economic policy is not being confused with foreign policy here .
Certainly , those who caused these conflicts were our colleagues in Congress and the Senate .
I am sure that we can only avoid this absurd dispute if we succeed in formalising parliamentary relations .
The euro will also have its part to play .
The delegation for relations with the United States , led by Mr Donnelly , has made some excellent proposals in this respect which we should then discuss in November and December in the context of the report on the Transatlantic Economic Partnership .
I welcome the proposals and the progress which you have described in this area , and I hope that we can agree with both the Commission and the Member States on this .
Many differences can be explained by the tensions between existing common interests and values and global economic competition between the EU and the USA .
This became particularly clear in the GATT negotiations and will certainly also come to light again when the new round is opened .
Besides , the Americans have a preference for negotiating unilaterally .
However , many differences also result from the very emotional competition to claim leadership in managing international conflicts .
Europe 's weakness certainly also becomes particularly apparent here .
I want us to succeed in introducing parliamentary control and establishing democratic relations between the Congress and the European Parliament in the ensuing discussions .
Then we shall be able to remove many of the difficulties .
Otherwise , I think we shall be running into the same dead end again and again .
Mr President , I am particularly pleased that Commissioner Bangemann is here for this debate and also that it has been possible to hold it .
Further to what my colleague Mrs Mann has said , I think it would indeed be desirable and appropriate if the Commissioner responsible , Sir Leon Brittan , could attend the relevant committees - the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Security and Defence Policy and the Committee on External Economic Relations - and give us some impressions of his travels on his return from the United States .
I think we can broadly agree with Commissioner Bangemann 's account of the objectives of transatlantic relations , particularly at this time of world crisis .
But there is one point about which the Commission has not been sufficiently explicit , and I should like to explore it further .
I am referring to laws with extraterritorial effect , in particular the unilateral interpretation of the agreement on the HelmsBurton Act made by the US Secretary of State , Mrs Albright , in a letter of 7 August to Mr Helms , the chairman of the Foreign Affairs Committee of the United States Senate .
Mrs Albright 's letter would seem to suggest that this agreement - reached at the transatlantic summit - assumes recognition by Europe of the Helms-Burton Act .
Certainly the agreements of 18 May are , by their very nature , complicated to read and very difficult to interpret .
But it is equally true that , both in the context of those May agreements and in repeated statements by President Santer and Commissioner Brittan himself to the Committee on Foreign Affairs , the European Union has made it clear that this is an illegitimate law , especially in terms of its extraterritorial effects .
And I wonder , Mr President - and I should like to put this to Commissioner Bangemann - whether the interpretation in the Secretary of State 's letter is a logical response to the European Union 's goodwill in dropping its claim before the World Trade Organisation , whereas in other disputes , like bananas and hormones , our North American colleagues , friends and partners have been implacable .
Mr Bangemann mentioned this just now .
The European Union ratified that agreement through the General Affairs Council , while the Clinton administration has not yet finished asking the United States Congress to amend Title 4 .
So I find it very satisfactory that Commissioner Bangemann has said that as long as it does not fulfil those requirements , the European Union will not fulfil its commitments either .
I wonder , Mr President - and I would like to ask the Commission - whether the European Union is going to continue demonstrating unilateral magnanimity as it has done up to now , when the United States is not fulfilling the commitments it has made as well .
I know this is a politically sensitive and economically important issue and I believe the European Commission should take a position on the way these agreements are interpreted in the Secretary of State 's letter to the chairman of the Senate Foreign Affairs Committee , so that any doubt on the matter is entirely dispelled .
I believe that we need to be loyal friends and partners of the United States because of the great political challenges facing the world at this time , but as I always say , when it comes to economic and commercial matters , the European Union needs to move on from the Beatitudes to the account books .

Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Commissioner Bangemann , I am very pleased that you are standing in for Sir Leon Brittan this afternoon , since it gives me the opportunity to ask you a few questions .
Ladies and gentlemen , the Liberal Group attaches great importance to the liberalisation of multilateral trade , and eliminating trade barriers between the EU and the United States is an important part of this .
The transatlantic market is the biggest in the world , not just in terms of the volume of trade and investment , but especially in terms of employment .
My group is therefore delighted at the proposals for a new Transatlantic Economic Partnership and very much welcomes the undertaking to remove trade and investment barriers in a number of areas .
A great deal of good work in this field has already been done in recent years through the Transatlantic Business Dialogue .
However , the Liberal Group would also stress the importance of having a democratic input in the development of the transatlantic market , and it therefore expects the European Parliament and the American Congress to be kept fully informed and involved in the forthcoming negotiations on the Transatlantic Economic Partnership .
I should like to ask the Commission how it intends to involve Parliament in future negotiations in order to guarantee adequate democratic controls .
Encouraging public support on both sides of the Atlantic is very important in transatlantic relations , and the ' people to people ' aspect is a significant factor here .
The Liberal Group therefore wholeheartedly supports the Commission 's budget proposals in this field , which will enable projects launched last year such as the Transatlantic Information Exchange Service ( TIES ) , the ten European institutes at American universities , scientific and technical cooperation and other social initiatives to be continued and expanded .
This was what I wanted to say about transatlantic economic relations .
My second point - and this is why I am so pleased that Commissioner Bangemann is here today - concerns the report on the Echelon network and the study carried out by the STOA group in this field .
I asked the Council on behalf of my group in February this year about the existence and impact of this American monitoring system , but the Council claimed to know nothing about it .
Perhaps the Commissioner could make a statement to the Council .
I should like to ask Mr Bangemann today whether he is aware that the United States systematically taps all telephone calls , faxes , e-mails and telexes sent in the Member States of the European Union ?
If so , is this done with the knowledge and agreement of other Member States ?
Was there widespread monitoring of communications during the GATT negotiations ?
Commissioner , I asked whether the Commission was aware of the existence of widespread monitoring between the Member States in the European Union , and I would ask you specifically what the Commission intends to do to ensure the confidentiality of Europe 's telecommunications and that the Echelon loophole is closed ?
As I see it , a high level of security in the telecommunications sector is absolutely essential if new systems are to be made acceptable to society .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Commissioner Bangemann has dealt with transatlantic relations remarkably thoroughly , but he has not really discussed the Echelon system item on the agenda .
No doubt he will do so later .
The statement that was unanimously adopted by Member States during the London summit on 18 May strengthens the Transatlantic Economic Partnership and turns it into a key instrument .
The objective is to develop a genuine transatlantic partnership , based on true reciprocity in relations of cooperation between the European Union and the United States .
This will allow us to achieve our shared objectives of democracy , peace and economic development .
In this context , the rapid advance of information and communications technologies offers access to new tools of economic monitoring and information .
These have been identified in a STOA Unit study for the Committee on Civil Liberties on the protection of citizens in connection with new control technologies , prompting me on several occasions to put a question to the Commission which we shall be able to discuss this evening .
More specifically , this report confirms the establishment and recent strengthening of world telecommunications surveillance .
We are dealing here with a network for intercepting and monitoring satellite communications which , moreover , operates entirely legally .
The Echelon network falls within the scope of a bilateral agreement between the United Kingdom and the United States , which was strengthened after the end of the Cold War and subsequently devoted to information of an economic nature .
The point here is not to call into question bilateral agreements between a Member State and the United States of America , but rather to alert the economic actors of the European Union and to provide the Union with an effective economic information system .
How does the Commission intend to counter potential abuse in connection with the use of new information control tools ?
Is the Commission taking the necessary steps to establish an economic information policy for the European Union , employing all the legal means at its disposal ?
Does the Commission intend to establish the means to protect its economic policy , to counter the disadvantages to which European industry is exposed by the Echelon system ?
Does it intend to provide better protection of confidential information in the civil sector by enhancing the access of European companies to reliable electronic encryption ?
Finally , in so doing , I believe that the Commission will thereby avoid the risk of distortion of competition , which is certainly a matter which falls within its competence .
A code of good conduct must be drawn up for electronic information , as part of the partnership between the European Union and the United States .
Mr President , last March our group opposed the draft transatlantic agreement on the deregulation of trade between the European Union and the United States .
Trade unions and associations were widely mobilised .
The French Government successfully petitioned the Council to reject the draft .
However , when we read the conclusions of the EU-US summit of 18 May , there are grounds for wondering whether the principles rejected at that time are not now back on the table .
I note from its programme that the Austrian Presidency is preparing the way for the establishment of a Transatlantic Economic Partnership , particularly in connection with the liberalisation of services , agriculture and dismantling of tariff barriers .
This would dangerously predate the signature of the MAI , discussion of which , I would point out , was postponed by the European Parliament for resumption in a few weeks ' time .
The Council , like the Commission , has strongly opposed the way in which extraterritorial legislation such as the Helms-Burton Act is applied to Europe .
Nonetheless , the principle of these laws has been approved , which is a serious matter .
We take the view that the European Union should reject any extraterritorial application of US legislation and proceed with its complaint to the WTO .
In response to questions in the National Assembly , the French Government stated that Member States are not bound by the decisions of the London summit .
That is curious , to say the least , and I should like some further information on this point .
What commitments were entered into by the Council Presidency ?
What implications do they have at national and Community level ?
I think that we should learn from experience , and firmly resist the hegemonic aspirations of the United States , in order effectively to defend and promote the interests and assets of the countries of Europe .
Mr President , I intend to concentrate solely on the Echelon system ; my party colleagues will be addressing other aspects of the Transatlantic Economic Partnership and elements in the STOA working document .
Commissioner Bangemann had not a word to say about Echelon , although it is on the agenda for discussion this evening .
My group , the Greens , finds the very idea of a global surveillance system of this kind , designed to monitor telephone , fax and e-mail communications , totally unacceptable .
Equally intolerable is the secretive behaviour of the EU . Without so much as convening Council , the 15 Member States apparently agreed , following a series of fax exchanges , to set up a similar system in cooperation with the FBI .
National parliaments and the European Parliament were kept well away from the discussion process , which has clearly been under way for many years .
I have been reading the resolutions tabled by the other political groups , some of which are rather tame in their expressions of disquiet in the face of such an interception system .
Where are the calls for open debate with the citizens of Europe ?
Or for parliamentary oversight ?
Or for proper democratic decisions and the safeguarding of civil liberties ?
It should go without saying in societies based on the rule of law that such all-embracing surveillance technologies require broad and open discussion .
Echelon is built upon the notion that all telecommunications activities should be able to be intercepted . Surely this cannot be compatible with the European Convention on Human Rights , which states that interception is justified only where a crime is suspected .
There are bound to be problems with national legislation here .
Straight implementation would be out of the question in Sweden , since a public prosecutor must specifically authorise interception .
How are the limits for Echelon to be set , and who is going to take responsibility ?
We seem to be on the way towards the kind of society described by Orwell .
I would like to hear an answer from Commissioner Bangemann .
Mrs Schörling , since both you and Mr Pompidou have referred to the Commissioner 's introductory speech , let me make it clear that the Commissioner said he would be making a special statement at the end .
Mr President , during this period of financial crisis in both Asia and Russia , we can see the extent to which the United States and Europe are bastions of economic and commercial stability .
We might dwell for a moment on what Europe 's position might have been regarding an American president experiencing difficulties if we had a genuine common foreign policy based on a powerful single currency .
But let us return to the matter of trade and the transatlantic partnership .
My group inclines towards the utmost caution with respect to these negotiations which , it seems to me , fall outside any genuine parliamentary control and are frequently conducted in informal meetings .
A return of the political dimension is called for , not only in connection with this economic partnership , but also where the OECD , the WTO and the IMF are concerned .
Some form of supervision of each of these organisations should be exercised by democratically elected parliaments .
We shall be particularly vigilant to ensure that this partnership does not extend to agriculture or audiovisual and cultural services .
We will not allow social and environmental acquis to be brought once more into question through a common investment strategy .
Where individual liberties are concerned , we are all aware that technological developments in the communications sector provide a means of allowing the flow of information and knowledge .
Such fantastic developments raise great hopes for bringing the human beings of the world closer together and strengthening friendship and solidarity across the divides of culture , religion or moral codes .
That is certainly how I see things , and my endeavour is to ensure that all scientific and technical progress is placed at the service of mankind .
However , we can only be concerned when it becomes clear that certain ill-intentioned people are seeking to use the most advanced technologies in such a way as to make our societies less and not more free .
The investigation , which has subsequently been made public , into a spy network under the control of the CIA , and hence of the United States , the United Kingdom , Canada , Australia and New Zealand , brings us all face to face with the threat hanging over the private lives of several millions of our citizens , our major industries and our very security .
We cannot tolerate this practice of compiling files on individuals , this blatant violation of individual liberty which , if we allow it to become commonplace , will inevitably lead to a form of dictatorship .
How is it that these methods have only now been made public , when the UK-USA or Echelon agreement has been operating for years without prompting a reaction by any government in any Member State ?
I personally find it most distressing that a Member State of the Union , a Trojan horse indeed , should be among the countries involved .
In my opinion , this is perhaps the greatest scandal of these closing years of the century , and therefore this matter cannot be allowed to pass unnoticed .
Here again , the political dimension should resume its due place on the international stage .
Ultimately , there are two problems here .
Firstly , this partnership puts us on the wrong footing with the WTO .
Its DirectorGeneral , Mr Ruggieri , has said himself that there cannot be several overlapping modes of dispute settlement .
Secondly , whatever anyone says , the agreement recently concluded between the European Union and the United States of America to settle their disputes in connection with the Helms-Burton Act legitimises the extraterritorial effects of the Act which are totally illegal under international law .
We cannot accept this , despite the fact that a number of European firms have won cases relating to this issue .
At this moment in time , when the Europe of monetary union is about to take its place in the world of the 21st century , let us prepare the way for the construction of a politically strong Europe which stands firm against the legal manoeuvring of the United States .
Mr President , Mr Bangemann has drawn us a very positive picture of the state of transatlantic relations , but we all know that the progress of the transatlantic dialogue to which we are all committed is being hampered to no small extent by the major disagreement as regards the extraterritorial scope of the Helms-Burton Act and the Iran and Libya Sanctions Act .
Ambiguity appears to be the hallmark of the Commission 's attitude to this matter .
Indeed , is it wise , in the name of practicality , to try to negotiate waivers to the extraterritorial implications of unilateral laws , particularly when the principle itself has not been questioned before the appropriate international bodies ?
Do the concessions obtained justify giving up the judicial remedies which are available to Europeans to assert their rights ?
Is to negotiate in this manner not to offer de facto recognition of the legitimacy of extraterritorial laws ?
Is the development of trade really to be based on inevitably fragile and readily contested waivers granted to the few , or on a clear and universal rule which is in principle to be laid down by the WTO ?
Moreover , is the negotiation process really effective ?
The progress made in relation to Cuba , as described to us , appears extremely tenuous .
And has any progress been made regarding the non-enforcement of extraterritorial provisions , not only by the federal authorities , but also by the individual states and local authorities ?
Mr Bangemann made no mention of this .
Japan has recently submitted a complaint against the state of Massachusetts regarding its extraterritorial legislation with respect to Burma .
Will the European Commission follow Japan 's example ?
These are a number of questions which occur to us and which prompt us to ask how the Commission is dealing with this issue of extraterritorial legislation , which is absolutely crucial for the future of transatlantic relations .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , as I listened earlier to Mr Bangemann 's statement , I was reminded of the words of Georgias , the man who conducted dialogues with Plato , when he was defining rhetoric .
Rhetoric , he said , is an special oratorical skill which makes it possible to build up what is small and to play down what is great .
Today we have listened to a speech which , with consummate skill , built up the advantages which the European Union might gain from the transatlantic partnership between Europe and the United States , and played down the disadvantages of this partnership between partners who are fundamentally unequal .
Where transatlantic relations are concerned , it is impossible to ignore the historical fact that one country has won three major world conflicts , the First World War , the Second World War and the Cold War .
Consequently , this country naturally occupies a position of undisputed dominance on the economic , cultural and political fronts .
It is obvious that , after these three military victories , in a world which revolves around the sword , the United States is the world 's only superpower , with all the accompanying scope for abuse in the world of today .
There used of course to be another superpower , the Soviet Union , and we were witness to the drawbacks of such a situation .
We always fought it , in the name of the freedom and human dignity which we hold so dear .
But it served to provide a balance .
However , following the collapse of the Soviet Union , we were handed over , bound and gagged as it were , to our American friends .
You say that this transatlantic agreement is feasible because it is based on a fundamental agreement between parties with common values .
You listed the four principles of free trade , democracy , freedom and human rights .
But what might one actually say about them ?
Does free trade consist of applying laws like the D 'Amato-Kennedy Act or the Helms-Burton Act , and all kinds of embargo measures that the United States imposes on countries it does not like ?
I know you said that these laws would not be enforced across the board and that Europe 's position in this respect had been strengthened by the London agreements , but I fail to see where the spirit of free trade lies in all this .
Nonetheless , the initiative behind such waivers has certainly come from the United States .
And what of democracy ? Democracy is very relative .
Even within the United States , questions might be asked about the conditions in which it operates , and about the influence exerted by certain powerful lobbies on the American Government , quite openly and publicly .
As for the countries of Europe , it is argued that the regimes we have today are more in the nature of oligarchies than democracies .
So there is a great deal that could be said on this subject .
And what of freedom ?
It seems odd to talk of freedom when , according to the agenda , the first item for discussion should have been the question of the Echelon system .
The Echelon system , as some colleagues have clearly explained , particularly Mr Sainjon , is a system for intercepting computer and telephone communications which covers the entire world , and which allows the Americans to carry out global surveillance .
Freedom , certainly , for those who are listening to us on the Echelon system .
But our own freedoms are diminished as a result .
And to this might be added the formation of cartels by the United States on the world 's markets - not to mention other phenomena imported from that country , such as rampant crime , which has increased fivefold over the last 30 years .
For the people who live in the most disadvantaged neighbourhoods of our countries , it means that freedom today is but a vestige of what they had a few decades ago .
And I think that it is somewhat insensitive to refer to human rights when the international community , at the instigation of the United States , is imposing an absurd and inhuman embargo on a country like Iraq , where thousands of children are dying for want of medicines , and nobody really dares to speak out against this outrage because it would be politically incorrect .
Indeed , in France for instance , only Jean-Marie Le Pen has had the courage to take on this taboo subject .
Democracy , freedom , human rights , free trade - not everything is bad in our Western system .
But there are many negative elements .
And where these are concerned , Commissioner , you excelled in your rhetoric , building up what was small and playing down what was great .
We could look at a number of more technical issues at some length .
You mentioned , very briefly I must say , the agricultural sector .
Well , I think our farmers know what to expect from the successive diktats of the Americans , the aim of which is to destroy or virtually destroy European agriculture .
There is talk of partnership .
Could we not be a little more frank , for once ?
Let us rather talk about a neocolonial system .
Which is not to say that the neocolonial system does not benefit both sides .
The colonial systems that were established during the 19th century benefited the home country , of course , but they also benefited the colonies .
There is no doubt about it , even if today no one wishes to acknowledge it .
So Europe could be seen as benefiting from a neocolonial system , its market shares being the crumbs falling from the American table , so to speak . And why not ?
Such a situation is defensible .
But it must be openly acknowledged , just as the political inequality of the system which we are now sanctioning has to be exposed .
Because you are indeed sanctioning this political inequality between the United States and Europe .
In fact , it is only logical ; the two great political powers that were built up in Europe after the Second World War were themselves built with American money , for the purpose of defending American interests .
I am talking about the Christian Democrats and Socialists .
There is no shortage of examples .
Of course , it is only to be expected that the Commission , which is committed to these two major currents , should likewise be committed to American interests .
For our part , we wish to recover our sovereignty and rekindle the flame of European resistance .
Mr President , the chairman of the STOA panel , Mr Pompidou , has to his credit referred here to the study carried out mainly in connection with the Echelon monitoring system .
I am astonished that Mr Bangemann made no reference at all to this matter , which is now in hand , in his opening speech .
In my view , the Commissioner would have done well to listen to the other speeches made here , so that he could comment on the Echelon system , which so far he has not done .
I do not understand how you could pass comment on us , Commissioner , when we should have been commenting on your speech on the matter .
You also appear to be keeping things from us .
I tabled a written question on this subject several months ago , to which I have still not received a reply .
It was a priority question .
The European Commission wishes to remain silent on the subject of the Echelon system and the mystery that surrounds it .
I should be grateful if you would ensure that written questions are answered within a reasonable period of time .
In this context , the issue of secretive collaboration with the USA , the French magazine Marianne has also claimed that France and Germany are engaged in similar forms of collaboration in Europe .
This is something that should be investigated .
It has now come to our attention that an agreement may have been concluded in the European Union in 1995 whereby the secret services of EU Member States would acquire the use of the Echelon system via the FBI - the American intelligence service - and the NSA .
It is now for you to tell us , Commissioner , the Members of the European Parliament , whether or not such an agreement was concluded in 1995 and , if so , what was actually agreed .
It is a requirement and the responsibility of a democratic system such as ours to get an answer to this question .
It is our duty to discover whether conversations in the European Parliament and the European Union are being listened to using ISDN digital systems .
It is only right that the Commission should answer these questions .
This is not an issue which you , Mr Bangemann , may keep quiet about , as the Commission has done up till now .
Mr President , I am extremely surprised , Mr Bangemann , that you are exploiting this joint debate so as to put the statement on Echelon at the end , thereby actually avoiding a debate on it .
The House is holding a joint debate , and I should like to hear two statements from you .
I am quite staggered that you do not find all this alarming .
You do not seem particularly concerned about the existence of a system of electronic surveillance which allows eavesdropping on telephone conversations - in fact the whole network of telecommunications between the citizens of Europe - without any protection of fundamental rights , any courts of law , parliamentary control or data protection .
This is a massive intrusion upon people 's privacy which bears the hallmark of totalitarianism .
I am quite amazed by your restraint . After all , you come from a country in one part of which a system of injustice has just been overcome and where general spying on citizens was the most significant feature .
Five English-speaking countries , including an EU Member State , are now helping to support and operate this system which originated in the USA .
Apparently , it has now been secretly decided under the third pillar , outside the Council meeting , to set up a similar system in the EU in cooperation with the FBI .
The EU sees itself as a system of values based on fundamental rights and human rights .
We believe that spying on its citizens and putting them at the mercy of spies is totally incompatible with this perception .
It may be that the American system of justice is no longer even able or willing to protect the human dignity and basic rights of its own President , according to the latest developments .
However , such an attack on the privacy of our citizens should be firmly resisted by this Parliament .
Mr President , the last thing which Mr Voggenhuber just said gives me the opportunity to explain once more what I explained at the beginning of the debate .
I am grateful to Mr Lannoye for having taken that on board , since he was obviously one of the few to do so .
I said at the start that I would make two statements , the first on general relations with the USA , which could then be discussed .
Then I would make a second statement on Echelon and that too could be discussed .
I do not believe , Mr Voggenhuber , that the Echelon affair , if that is what it is , should take up the whole debate on relations with the USA .
That would be more or less what you were just criticising with regard to the American President , namely that the leading world power is currently dealing with problems which are probably not the greatest ones facing the international community .
So much for that point .
Hopefully you have now also taken it on board .
I said it at the beginning , but perhaps not everyone was here at the start .
( Heckling from Mr Voggenhuber ) I made it absolutely clear !
You can read what I said afterwards .
I should now like to answer a number of questions which have been raised concerning general relations with the USA .
The letter which the American Secretary of State wrote to Mr Helms , the chairman of the committee , is naturally not an official interpretation of what we have agreed with the USA .
It is a letter to Mr Helms , as chairman of the committee , setting out her own views .
We do not need to concern ourselves with that .
I have told you how we understand what we have agreed with the Americans .
I have also said that , as matters take their course , we shall wait for the USA to take its commitments through the Congress first before we do anything at all .
And of course , when we undertake a legal measure , it must go through the legal decision-making process , and not least through Parliament .
Moreover , we have not abandoned our legal positions or the rights of European citizens or companies .
Nor have we abandoned or contravened the principle that there should be no extraterritorial effect .
That was our purpose from the outset .
We shall also naturally be involving Parliament in future .
We shall pass on the request to Sir Leon that he should provide a report on his visit , and he will certainly be able to do that .
Furthermore , like the Japanese , we have invoked the WTO panel procedure regarding both these issues , namely the Foreign Sales Corporations Act and the Burma-Massachusetts Act .
In other words , we have done exactly the same as Japan .
I do not wish to go into the details - not least because of the time - and you may still have questions on my statement on Echelon as well .
I should just like to say to Mr Souchet , no , the Member who quoted the Georgias dialogue : I do not wish to be the judge of that - it may be that you feel I stressed the positive aspects somewhat more than the negative ones .
I did at least have a basis for my assessment , however , whereas when you talk about free trade , you have to try very hard to find a few words of support for free trade from within the ideology of your group and party .
At least , I cannot recall hearing any .
Incidentally , you have a representative of the Commission here before you who belongs neither to the Christian Democrats nor the Socialists .
You have therefore missed the mark in your attack on these two great movements - I am not in the firing line !
Let us now turn to Echelon .
I must ask you to distinguish between two things : what we know officially as the Commission or have learnt from the Member States , and what it says in your interim report or a book by a former colleague from New Zealand or newspaper reports .
You will appreciate that the Commission cannot act on the basis of assumptions , suspicions or some book or article , but we have the responsibility to do something when we are sure that something needs to be done .
We have no indication either from the Member States , Mr Lannoye , or from anyone whose rights could be violated - a citizen , a business or anyone else - that this system exists in the form in which it has been described here .
It does not mean that such a system may exist because there was one in the past , when it may have been set up for entirely different reasons .
We know nothing about this .
So I cannot tell you definitely now whether this system exists or not .
What we do know is that the Member States have given us no indications on the matter .
A question to the Council from one Member of the House - I am not sure who - was answered as follows : ' The Council has no knowledge of the matter ' .
The Council would have to know if such a system existed , because when a Member State is affected by it , as is being claimed here , the Council would have to receive the relevant information .
That is the first point .
The second point is that we know - and this is something we encourage , not least in the interest of , and following the calls from Parliament - that there is cooperation in fighting crime , in other words organised crime and other international forms of criminality .
This is something that is agreed between the Member States and with us .
That does not concern this system , however , as it has been described here ; it concerns official cooperation , and not the violation of any rights .
If the system existed in such a form , that would naturally represent a blatant violation of rights , the individual rights of citizens , and of course an attack on the security of the Member States .
That is absolutely clear .
The Council , and naturally the Commission and the Parliament as well , would have to respond the instant something of that kind was officially confirmed .
Thirdly , what we are doing now is addressing the general issue , because the problem arose through the development of technology .
We now have far greater possibilities than five , ten or twenty years ago .
That is why we have a directive on the protection of the privacy of our citizens .
That is why we have pressed for the authorisation of encryption systems - not least with the Americans - and for only allowing them to be deciphered when there are legal grounds for doing so .
We still believe , like the rest of the world , that such encryption will for the most part remove a number of the problems which we already have to deal with in normal traffic carried on modern communications systems .
So to repeat it again , to make it absolutely clear : firstly , we have no official knowledge of this system , such as it is described in the interim report .
Secondly : there is international legal cooperation in fighting crime , and the EU and its Member States are naturally also involved in this .
Thirdly : we are doing everything possible to ensure that such information or other communications cannot be misused in this new infrastructure .
I cannot say anything more to you on the matter .
The Commission will certainly give its detailed opinion on it when the report is finally delivered .
You can gladly put questions to the Council too .
If I knew that the system existed , then the Commission would be using all its powers to persuade the Member States not to obtain information illegally in this way .
I cannot say that to the House , however .
I think there is a difference between someone who writes a book - if I may just make this point -or a Member of Parliament who is also able to say what he or she may think , and a representative of an institution which can only act in a democratic system when it knows something for certain .
We do not have that knowledge .
I have received eight motions for resolutions on this subject pursuant to Rule 40 ( 5 ) of the Rules of Procedure .

Mr President , I think we should address this subject again quite calmly , Mr Bangemann .
It makes no sense at all to discuss this in a state of panic .
I would also ask my colleagues to proceed with due caution and not to react with too much excitement to comments made in the media , however important or relevant they may be .
We could certainly accept one point as a proposal , Mr Bangemann , namely that we - meaning you , of course , rather than ourselves in Parliament - should consider with the Council whether some kind of code of conduct could not be signed , not only between the individual Member States , but also between the Member States and the United States , so that when information is received through whatever channels - and this involves above all economic information , industrial espionage - it is handled with the appropriate care .
I realise that such words or statements are a little naive .
However , such codes do also have a persuasive effect when they have been signed , and this could well be a proposal for dealing with the matter sensibly .
Mr President , because I recognise that Commissioner Bangemann treats the European Parliament with particular respect , care and consideration , I should like to have these points made absolutely clear .
One , did the Commission know about Mrs Albright 's letter unilaterally interpreting the agreements between the European Union and the Clinton Administration ? Two , does the Commission share Mrs Albright 's interpretation of the agreements in this letter , especially when she says that these agreements constitute - and I quote - ' an extraordinary vindication of the principles underlying the Libertad Act ' ?
Three , does the European Commission propose to make a public statement on its approval or disapproval of the terms of this letter ?
I must refer the honourable Member to Parliament 's own Rules of Procedure .
These state that the Commission can make a statement at any time , and I have used this privilege granted to the Commission today - and it does involve a privilege - for the reason I have given you .
I am not hiding in any way .
I believe that it would not have been appropriate to the progress achieved or to our good relations with the United States if we had debated this together with these other problems .
There is a second aspect , which was entirely in your hands .
I pointed out to the President from the outset that , with his agreement , I would first make the statement on the USA and then - you really must listen to what I say - the other statement , and this second statement can of course be debated in exactly the same way .
So to the questions : on the question of the global business dialogue , Mrs Mann , we are trying to agree on all these issues , encryption and privacy as well , in such a way that everyone , not just the United States , but all the other members of this global information society too , can come to an agreement on what needs to happen politically .
With that , Mr Salafranca , I have gone into your question , but I will not repeat it again .
Firstly , I even have the letter here with me .
Secondly , we do not share the view which was conveyed in this letter .
It is an interpretation which we do not endorse , and I have explained our own interpretation to the House just now .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
( The sitting was closed at 8 p.m. )
Approval of the Minutes
The Minutes of yesterday 's sitting have been distributed .
Are there any comments ?
Mr President , there is a clear error in the Minutes relating to Commissioner Bangemann 's speech here .
Mr Bangemann was to deliver two statements : on the Commission 's position on transatlantic relations and on the Echelon system .
Mr Bangemann did not mention the Echelon system in his speech and did not even say he intended to speak about it later .
This can be checked from the verbatim report of the sitting .
Consequently , it must be said that Mr Bangemann was in breach of parliamentary procedures when he failed to speak on the Echelon system , and only delivered one of the Commission 's statements .
Mr Bangemann was not at all prepared to speak about Echelon .
He had nothing to say on the subject .
He did not know anything about it .
For this reason , I do not think that Parliament should accept that the Commissioner made a statement on Echelon .
I propose that the Commission should be obliged to make a statement on Echelon once again , so that the issue is discussed properly and Members of Parliament can make speeches on the subject .
I would like the Minutes to be changed regarding the matter of Mr Bangemann 's speech , and the matter to be sent back to the Commission so that it can be settled .
Thank you for your statement , Mr Seppänen .
I do not actually think we are talking about violation of our Rules of Procedure , but there was a problem of communication between our services and those of the Commission , and as a result yesterday 's debate did not take place according to the agreed procedure .
So it is understandable that you and Members who were present during the debate you referred to were disappointed .
Mr President , unfortunately what Mr Seppänen said is true - there was no misunderstanding .
Reference was made three times to the necessity of having an overall debate , and then we were told that it would be split into two parts , although we all knew that this would not work .
It was only at the end that we were told that questions could be asked , and then only the two big political groups were able to have their say .
This is simply unacceptable .
We strongly protest against this procedure .
The way in which Mr Bangemann dealt with this issue yesterday was inadmissible .
Thank you .
Are there any other comments ?
( The Minutes were approved )
Amendment of Financial Regulation
The next item is the report ( A4-0308 / 98 ) by Mr Dell 'Alba , on behalf of the Committee on Budgets , on the proposal for a Council Regulation ( EC , ECSC , Euratom ) amending the Financial Regulation of 21 December 1977 applicable to the general budget of the European Communities ( COM ( 98 ) 0206 - C4-0290 / 98-98 / 0130 ( CNS ) ) .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I realise interest in this report is not exactly lively , but it is an important document for our Parliament , for the life of the European Union and for the full incorporation of the instruments of economic and monetary union into the Union 's legislation .
The Financial Regulation forms part of the basic provisions , and serves to govern relations between the institutions and the way in which , starting with the Commission , they implement the budget of the European Union .
The introduction of the euro into the EU context calls for a series of measures , on this occasion amending the Financial Regulation .
In this report , Parliament expresses its opinion on the amendments the Commission is proposing and which we approve in substance , with a series of amendments which I shall try to illustrate briefly .
The context of this report is limited , which is why the Committee on Budgets decided to go right to the end of the road signposted by the Commission . This means limiting the specific amendments to the Financial Regulation to the most urgent aspects , in other words those which allow us to implement these measures on 1 January 1999 - specifically to adapt the Financial Regulation to the euro .
It means postponing other amendments until the next , and imminent , new proposal for amendment . And I have to say , as rapporteur and on behalf of the committee , that while we may well support them entirely , we decided not to uphold those other amendments on principle .
That also applies to the amendments from colleagues who proposed broadening the scope of the amendments .
Let us look at the details .
Firstly , the euro has to be introduced into the Financial Regulation and the debit / credit mechanisms in the Union budget adapted for those countries belonging to the euro area .
Secondly , the Financial Regulation needs to be adapted to a very important provision of economic and monetary union : the system of fines .
Countries which do not respect the standards and rules for applying the common economic policy on schedule will be subject to fines .
Parliament 's amendments are not intended to record these fines in the budget , but to transfer them in accordance with the Treaty of Maastricht - using a derogation from the general provisions - to the countries belonging to the euro area .
Finally , many of these amendments relate to the implementation powers of the other institutions .
The Treaty of Amsterdam abolishes the common organisational structure between the Committee of the Regions and the Economic and Social Committee .
The amendment we are tabling seeks to adapt the text to that provision .
We are asking for the Ombudsman to be included among the institutions recognised as having powers of implementation , along with the Committee of the Regions and the Economic and Social Committee .
We think that is possible and we are proposing that amendment in my report .
Mr President , I would like to stress that the Committee on Budgetary Control unanimously approved four amendments tabled by the group to which I belong , the European People 's Party , to make it possible to produce an opinion by the Committee on Budgetary Control , because what happened was this : we made our decision after Mr Dell 'Alba 's report had been approved by the Committee on Budgets .
I would like to focus Parliament 's and the Commission 's attention on an amendment we are tabling , which relates to extending the powers of UCLAF to the control of other institutional bodies of the Community as well .
This is an addition to Article 22 ( 2 ) , enabling UCLAF to check the way parts of the budget which relate to other institutional bodies are dealt with , and I would be very grateful if that amendment were to be approved .
The other three amendments concern administrative matters related to certain programmes involving third countries , particularly candidates for membership . They concern the ability of those countries to manage Community funds on their own .
In conclusion , Mr President , I repeat that it is important for these amendments to be passed , especially the one which I told you concerned extending the powers of UCLAF so that it can check other institutional bodies and services of the European Union .
On that point , moreover , I should like to hear the Commissioner 's views , in other words whether the Commission accepts those four amendments by the Committee on Budgetary Control
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , in principle I can support the proposed amendment of the Financial Regulation .
The desire to develop European integration further and the legal bases for this - the Maastricht Treaty , the Edinburgh summit and the Amsterdam Treaty - have caused substantial changes to be made to the original Financial Regulation .
The text 's coherence needs to be restored and this amendment should , therefore , be welcomed as the first stage in a general review .
Allow me , however , to use the debate on this formal amendment above all as an opportunity to emphasise the importance of the real issues underlying it .
Amending the Financial Regulation is a small but significant step on the way to the third stage of monetary union .
Firstly , and this is something we already know from the ongoing negotiations on next year 's Union budget , the euro will replace the ecu as a currency unit in just a few weeks ' time .
The budget also has to be prepared for this .
Secondly , the rules governing the Community budget need to be adapted to take account of the pact on stability and economic growth .
This is the backbone of the single European currency .
We all remember the efforts made by individual Member States to achieve economic convergence , which constitutes the precondition and basis for a stable euro .
The stability and growth pact should ensure that excessive deficits are not permitted in the participating Member States in the future either .
The special mechanism of sanctions will also affect the Community budget , which will be the appropriate instrument for applying it .
This system is the reason why the proposed amendment is so important .
Here , and in general , our aim must be to do all we can internally to prepare for the introduction of the euro , while at the same time ensuring maximum transparency .
Mr President , what can I add to the words of our rapporteur and draftsmen ?
Very little , I believe , and I therefore hope to be brief .
However , I would first like to congratulate them and particularly Mr Dell 'Alba who has done some excellent work on a routine yet fundamental issue .
Legislative work is perhaps normally less interesting than own-initiative reports but it is just as , if not more , important .
I have no wish to argue with Mr Sarlis , who used part of his speaking time as draftsman to claim certain amendments for his own political group .
I would , however , like to remind this House that the amendment he highlighted is , in fact , a compromise amendment between the Group of the European People 's Party and the Group of the Party of European Socialists .
Moving straight on to the subject - and if there is any time left , I will look at other questions later - the PSE Group would like to emphasise two points : the updating of the regulation and the Ombudsman .
As Mr Dell 'Alba rightly said , we are now faced with updating once again the 1977 Financial Regulation .
This update includes the new elements contained in the Treaty on European Union and the Treaty of Amsterdam , or at least introduces the regulatory instruments to be used when the latter enters into force .
There is no objection to this ; the opposite is , in fact , true .
However , this is the umpteenth update .
No one knows any longer whether it is the seventh , eighth or ninth .
No one really knows .
Indeed , if the new Financial Regulation is to be formally correct , perhaps what we really need is a new Financial Regulation , with a new basis .
The European Union that is preparing to enlarge towards the East is very different from the European Economic Community of the 1970s , when the foundations of this Financial Regulation under debate were laid down .
It was a Community that did not even have a European Parliament elected through universal suffrage , and which was beginning the negotiations on the accession of the southern countries : Greece , Spain and Portugal .
We are very far from that situation .
I therefore believe that the Commission , which has told us so often that it is in favour of drawing up a new Financial Regulation , should give fresh impetus to that idea .
We understand that there are even working documents on this matter . Incidentally , we have not been sent any of these documents but we have , of course , managed to obtain some of them .
These working documents should be forwarded to Parliament and should be debated . In addition , we need to establish a dialogue on this revision of the new Financial Regulation and to do so as soon as possible .
It is absolutely urgent .
The other major political point involves giving appropriate consideration to the Ombudsman .
The European Parliament could certainly lay claim to the creation of this post , since it came about as a result of a parliamentary initiative taken up in Maastricht . However , we believe that the political and institutional body that is the office of the Ombudsman requires the specific treatment afforded it by the amendments to the proposal for a regulation .
The very independence of the Ombudsman demands that it be excluded from the European Parliament 's budget .
If the Committee of the Regions and the Economic and Social Committee are consultative bodies of the Council and are given their own section , why was the Ombudsman going to be included in Parliament 's section of the budget ?
There is no political logic here .
We therefore support the move to designate it a specific section of its own .
Perhaps half the amendments to the proposal for a regulation relate to this issue .
The remaining amendments , ladies and gentlemen , relate to other aspects of this update with which we are in total agreement : the euro , the payment of fines in connection with the stability and growth pact , the decentralised bodies , and the necessary and logical dissolution of the common organisational structure of the two committees , since it has been clearly demonstrated that the Maastricht ' invention ' was not efficient .
We agree with all of this and the amendments reflect what we could call the House 's doctrine on the issue .
I am therefore not going to go into detail in that respect .
However , I would like to say once again that we hope that the European Commission will very soon present us with a Financial Regulation already conceived for a Europe that will embrace a great deal more than its current responsibilities .
The Liberal Group also thinks that some important amendments have been proposed here .
I want to thank especially Mr Sarlis from the PPE Group for ensuring that the amendments tabled by the Committee on Budgetary Control were put forward .
As one who is very active in the PHARE area , I am of course very keen to promote amendments concerned with decentralisation , which may facilitate better management of PHARE resources and at the same time help to expedite the process of enlargement to take in the Eastern and Central European countries .
I must say how surprised I am that the Commission has not contributed any input of its own on decentralisation .
We already started this discussion last autumn , when the Commission took a very positive stance on decentralisation , which it said it wanted and was prepared to implement .
The question was also taken up in the Agenda 2000 papers . Even so , the Commission has not taken the opportunity to put forward concrete proposals in this area .
It is odd when people say one thing and do another .
Hence it is for us in the European Parliament to hold the Commission to the things it has promised and the commitments it has stated .
What is important about decentralisation is that it serves to convey a clear political will to help Eastern and Central European countries qualify for EU membership .
It is , so to speak , the precursor to the Structural Funds , and at the same time it provides a means by which the new Member States can put their administrative structures in order , gain some experience and be well prepared for accession to the EU .
In addition these are recommendations which will find favour with the Court of Auditors , because they involve changes which may help us overcome some of the problems currently experienced in the management of the PHARE programme .
I am thus happy to recommend these amendments to my colleagues and hope for their sympathetic support .
They serve to give a clear signal that we want to promote enlargement .
They may pave the way for membership and may ensure that we get a more effective PHARE programme .
Mr President , the Commission welcomes the generally favourable view which the Committee on Budgets suggests you adopt on the proposal for the eighth set of amendments to the Financial Regulation .
This is the last specific amendment proposal before the Financial Regulation is redrafted , on the subject of which , on 22 July , the Commission presented a working document intended to open up a wide-ranging interinstitutional consultation .
Mr Colom I Naval wanted the Commission to present this formally and officially to the European Parliament .
There is no problem , I will do so .
This eighth set of amendments does not seek to substantively modify the Financial Regulation .
The proposal simply seeks to bring the urgent and limited amendments required by the launch of the euro and the stability pact and the entry into force of the Treaty of Amsterdam whose sole effect on the Financial Regulation - given the removal of Protocol No 16 on the common organisational structure of the Economic and Social Committee and the Committee of the Regions - is to introduce a specific section for each of these two bodies .
The Commission can undertake to adopt several of the amendments proposed by the Committee on Budgets .
These are Amendments Nos 2 , 3 , 4 , 6 , 7 , 10 , 11 , 14 , 16 , 19 and 20 , designed to introduce a specific budget section for the European mediator , and Amendment No 22 which provides a different date for the entry into force of provisions relating to the euro and the stability pact , that is 1 January 1999 , and for provisions relating to the Treaty of Amsterdam , that is following ratification .
The Commission is not , however , inclined to adopt certain amendments , which I advise against both for the technical reasons which I will explain and for the essential reason that these are substantive amendments which will make it impossible to respect the tight deadline imposed by the launch of the euro on January 1 next .
In connection with Amendment No 21 , contrary to what this suggests , the amount of fines for excessive deficits , as at present the amount of fines for violating the rights of free competition , are not very clear at the time of drawing up the budget .
The budget is not able to include any more than an outline framework .
In connection with Amendments Nos 1 , 8 , 9 , 12 , 13 and 15 on the agencies , these have their own budget and financial regulation .
They are not to be covered by the Financial Regulation , which relates solely to the general budget , but rather by the specific regulation which applies to these agencies .
In connection with Amendments Nos 5 and 17 on interinstitutional cooperation , the Commission considers that this cooperation can be organised , as is the case at present for open competitions and purchases , by means of the administrative arrangements between the institutions .
In connection with Amendment No 18 on the Commission 's powers of inquiry , this is not a matter for the Financial Regulation but for arrangements between the institutions .
The Commission is not opposed in principle to widening the powers of the UCLAF , but this can be done through an arrangement between the institutions .
As regards the redrafting of the Financial Regulation , the corresponding amendments could , if necessary , be included at the appropriate time .
The question concerning Amendments Nos 1 , 3 and 4 by the Committee on Budgetary Control on the decentralised management of PHARE was put by Mrs Kjer Hansen .
During this month of September , the Commission will be adopting an amended proposal for a regulation on the coordination of assistance to candidate countries as part of the preadhesion strategy , in order to permit the decentralised management of PHARE .
This point will also be dealt with at the time of redrafting the Financial Regulation .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place at 12 noon .
Draft budget for 1999
The next item is the presentation by the Council of the draft general budget for 1999 .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , it is an honour for me to be here today , to inform Parliament of the results of the Council meeting on the budget , which took place on 17 July in Brussels .
Before entering into the details of the successful conclusion of our discussions , however , I should like to highlight the consistently improving level of cooperation between our institutions - Parliament , the Council and the Commission .
This was already plain to see last year , and I am very pleased that it seems to be continuing this year .
The two trilogues of 31 March and 23 June were , despite differences of opinion on the substance , characterised by a spirit of mutual understanding for each party 's respective views , concerns and priorities .
The same can probably also be said of our discussions at the Council meeting of 17 July , when the main issue was that of legal bases .
We shall be debating this under the next item on the agenda .
I should now like to turn to the draft budget for 1999 and , firstly , describe to you the principles by which the Council was guided in its deliberations .
On agricultural expenditure , we agreed to examine a letter of amendment in the autumn , in order to take account of the decisions of the June 1998 Agriculture Council and the updated estimates of requirements .
We decided to honour the commitments made in Edinburgh to guarantee the future funding of the Structural Funds .
For the remaining policy areas , we established clear priorities for the financial resources available , and set amounts for them in the budget which are realistic and yet do not hinder important Community policies .
We took account of both the criteria in the Interinstitutional Agreement of 29 October 1993 and the Court ruling of 12 May 1998 on the provision of legal bases .
In addition , we took into account minor items of expenditure , and the fact that the financial perspective ceilings leave considerable room for manoeuvre .
We approved a limited increase in all administrative expenditure , and agreed that unavoidable expenditure should not be ruled out from the very outset .
We decided against creating any new posts , apart from those needed in connection with the last enlargement or the implementation of the Amsterdam Treaty .
Furthermore , we decided not to create any additional posts in the context of the career policy , either by converting posts or increasing them in number .
In so doing , we were of the opinion that the response to practical needs must , as a general rule , be to improve specialist skills , modernise equipment and working methods , and restructure existing posts , and that this principle should only be disregarded where it can be proved that to do so is unavoidable .
Observing the principles we felt underlay the adoption of an appropriate budget led to the following results in practice . In the case of agricultural expenditure - Category 1 in the financial perspective - the Council has retained the total amount proposed by the Commission in its preliminary draft budget .
Similarly , for the Structural Funds , the Council has kept the amounts proposed by the Commission in its preliminary draft budget , so as to comply with the Edinburgh decisions .
The Council has decided to reduce both the commitment appropriations and payment appropriations for internal policies .
In the case of external policies , the Council has decided to increase the commitment appropriations and reduce the payment appropriations , so as to take account of the decisions made at Cannes .
Finally , the Council accepted a limited increase of 1 % in overall administrative expenditure .
As I have already stated , the work involved in implementing the Amsterdam Treaty - in particular , incorporating the Schengen secretariat and the analysis , early-warning and policy-planning centre under the second pillar - have made some exceptions to this rule necessary .
For the small bodies , the Council has again applied the method established last year , of granting a flat-rate total amount for routine administrative expenditure .
The effect of the Council 's decisions on the appropriations in the draft budget can be summarised as follows : commitment appropriations total EUR 96 500 million , an increase of EUR 5500 million , or 6.05 % , on the 1998 budget ; payment appropriations total EUR 85 900 million , an increase of EUR 2300 million , or 2.81 % , on the 1998 budget .
The payment appropriations thus correspond to 1.10 % of Community GNP .
For internal and external policies , there are still margins of EUR 937 million and EUR 878 million respectively beneath the financial perspective ceilings .
Finally , I should like to thank all the members of the European Parliament delegation who actively participated in our discussions at the Budget Council on 17 July .
I look forward to continuing to work in cooperation with this Parliament , and in particular with both the chairman of the Committee on Budgets , Mr Samland , and the two rapporteurs for the 1999 budget , Mrs Dührkop Dührkop and Mr Viola .
I hope that our two institutions will be able to bring the 1999 budget procedure to a successful conclusion , just as they did for the 1998 budget .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , thank you for your attention .
Mr President , the draft budget for 1999 resembles the preliminary draft budget closely .
A difference of only 0.5 % confirms that there is a broad convergence of views with regard to the 1999 Community budget .
The Commission and the Council have had to reconcile rigour with the obligations of the Union , in particular with regard to the decisions of the European Councils of Edinburgh and Cannes .
As far as compulsory spending is concerned , the Commission will submit an amending letter at the end of October to take account of the last available information for the finalization of the 1999 budget .
This will be the second application of the procedure successfully established in 1997 .
Contrary to last year , however , there may well be spending requirements if current developments on some markets are confirmed .
On structural actions , the draft budget establishes the payment credits at the level proposed by the Commission .
This should assure the correct financing of the requirements for 1999 in the light of the Edinburgh decisions .
Category 3 , internal policies , is the only category where the Commission proposals have been seriously cut , even below the 1998 level .
This is sometimes difficult to understand as some of these cuts concern Council priorities , notably Leonardo and small and medium-sized enterprises .
These cuts are explained in relation to the reference amounts of regulations but it is not in the spirit of of the common declaration of 1995 to consider these reference amounts as if they were maximum amounts .
Finally , on external policies , for the first time I can remember the draft budget exceeds the preliminary draft budget .
This is logical on the assumption that the requested reinforcement of PHARE in 1998 is not taking place and the Council was to complete the financing of the external cooperation programmes as they were decided by the European Council at Cannes .
It is commendable that the Council provides this financing mainly through additional spending and thus limits the cuts in other important areas of external cooperation .
Above all , the draft Community budget for 1999 is a constructive step in the 1999 budget procedure .
It augurs well not only for next year 's budget but also for the more far-reaching decisions which will soon have taken place on the next financial framework .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , before addressing the Council 's presentation of the draft budget after its first reading , I should like to say that the cooperation between the Council , Parliament and the Commission over the conciliation on legal bases , which we will be debating shortly , has been exemplary .
In the first place , in the nine years I have been doing this job , I have never before experienced a conciliation which started at 11 a.m. and finished at 7 or 7.30 p.m. with Parliament cooperating .
Afterwards , they even took it upon themselves to decide the budget as well .
Secondly , they can be proud , not only of a long meeting , but also of the result .
The Austrian Presidency has contributed to this and I wish it just as much skill and success in further deliberations on the budget and on Agenda 2000 .
That was the praise - and it is rare coming from me , so make the most of it - but now comes the criticism .
What does this budget tell us ?
We have stressed from the outset - and Mrs Dührkop Dührkop will also say this in her report in a moment or two - that this budget is a bridge between the expiring financial perspective , on the one hand , and the new financial perspective , which will begin in the year 2000 , on the other . We view it as such .
That is why I should like to make the following general statement on behalf of the Committee on Budgets : we will make every effort to place the 1999 budget procedure in the context of the discussions on Agenda 2000 , and the recommendations in Mr Colom I Naval 's report relating to the fundamental issue of flexibility .
We want to see progress on these aspects of Agenda 2000 , if we are to conform to a budget procedure based on achieving lowest possible expenditure , i.e. on keeping to Member States ' average expenditure at Community level .
I am only announcing this here , because it will , of course , have implications for the discussions on the budget in first and second reading in this House .
I should like to make a few comments on the results of the Council 's deliberations .
Firstly , on agriculture .
We were a little disappointed that it has not been possible to send out a clear signal on agricultural policy as early as the first reading in the Council .
But we are relying on the fact that we will all take the agreed ad hoc procedure seriously and that on the basis of a Commission letter of amendment we will achieve some results in the conciliation procedure in November .
By results , I mean that we must limit expenditure in this sector and identify procedures to allow these resources to be put to optimal use .
We tabled a proposal for a reserve last year with this in mind , and we will be doing so again .
Indeed , we have already made technical proposals .
I might remind you once again that expenditure on agriculture is ECU 1300 million in excess at present .
Had we not , in the face of bitter resistance from your 15 agriculture colleagues , cancelled ECU 1000 million of spending last year , we would now be ECU 2300 million over budget in the agricultural sector .
The experiences of this year and the last 15 years show , therefore , that we can take this step , and can do so without putting the legal provisions laid down in directives or regulations in the agricultural sector at risk .
Secondly - and this comment is also directed towards the Commission - I am yet again hearing calls from some Member States for export refunds on pigmeat , butter and milk to be increased , to rejuvenate the Russian export market , which is currently in a state of collapse .
Community policy cannot aim to control currency fluctuations outside the Community by raising export refunds .
So do not let them persuade you otherwise , Mr Liikanen , but retain the position you had in 1997 ; prevail against the six , and take the same line when it comes to securing savings in the agricultural sector for the 1999 budget .
The contents of Categories 2 , 3 and 4 are interlinked .
We have already discussed the growth of Category 2 with you many times here in this House .
The reason for this is not that the money is needed , but that this is the last year of the financial perspective ; the Structural Funds change on 31 December 1999 , and any unutilised appropriations are carried over to this year .
We have absolutely terrific rates of increase here - between 17 % and 18 % in commitment appropriations and around 10 % in payment appropriations .
There is actually an incredible amount of money to be dealt with here .
As a result of this increase , because you did not have the courage to take action on this issue - despite the fact that several Member States , such as France , actually made proposals during discussions in the Council - you are now having to cut Categories 3 and 4 by the same amount by which you have increased Category 2 .
You will see , for example , that in Category 3 you have cut funding for the Leonardo programme . That stands in direct contradiction to your own work programme , where you state that you wish to strengthen educational programmes as a means of making Europe more attractive to business .
The EUR 100 million you are cutting there is not going because it has been proved surplus to this programme 's requirements - in that case perhaps EUR 86.45 million would have been the sum withdrawn .
No , you are cutting EUR 100 million to make your sums add up , to bring the rates of increase in Category 3 down so that they compensate for the high rates of increase in Category 2 .
The second area I wish to address is external policy .
The situation here is far worse .
In Council , you did not secure the adoption of a supplementary and amending budget for 1998 , containing an additional ECU 150 million for PHARE .
If we are honest , we have to admit that PHARE will not need the ECU 150 million , either in 1998 or in 1999 , because the interim accounts for the 1998 budget year , which were released by the Commission on 30 June 1998 , reveal that in the first six months of the year , ECU 1000 million of the appropriations available under PHARE had still not been committed and , even worse , that more than ECU 2500 million had not been awarded and spent in contracts .
That means that there is ECU 2500 million on the table , ECU 1000 million of which is completely free and ECU 1500 million of which might be spent in contracts , if the contracts materialise .
And then we are supposed to increase this by a further ECU 150 million , while at the same time making cutbacks in , for instance , spending on non-governmental organisations .
This has nothing whatsoever to do with sound financial policy , but it does have something to do with ideology .
A decision was made once upon a time in Cannes and now it has to be applied at all costs .
Parliament had no hand in this , and will not , therefore , be accepting either the proposal contained in the Council draft , or the Commission proposal to achieve this through early procedures .
Neither approach is appropriate , and we need to tell the applicant countries , aspiring to become members of the Community , that if together we are not able to commit the appropriations in the time allowed - reminding them once again of the annuality of budget appropriations - then these appropriations cannot be used .
And you will see that this House will not agree to a ECU 150 million top-up in Category 4 at the expense of non-governmental organisations throughout the world .
Finally , there is the question of how research , a very important area , is going to be dealt with .
You are aware , Mr President-inOffice , that in parallel to our 1999 budget negotiations , discussions will be taking place on the total appropriation for the fifth framework programme for research , which accounts for a considerable part of Category 3 expenditure in the budget .
You will also be aware that there is a discrepancy between Parliament 's proposal , for ECU 16 300 million over five years , and the Council 's position hitherto .
I can hear the voice of your colleague now , announcing that we will certainly reach a compromise on 29 September .
I would be glad if this were so .
It is up to the Council , and certainly not Parliament , to come forward with a compromise formula . And a figure of ECU 14 000 million is not an acceptable compromise ; the figure will instead lie between ECU 14 000 million and ECU 16 300 million .
You know that this is an important decision , because it will have a major impact on the 1999 budget - over 60 % of Category 3 appropriations are allocated to research .
If we consider the issue of funding for networks , for example , it is clear that it will be possible to strike a balance between networks , on the one hand , and research , on the other , if the outcome of the agreement on the fifth framework programme for research is known .
That is why I can only repeat my request to you - and your colleagues , the Finance Ministers - to please ensure that sufficient pressure is exerted on your side , so that we reach an agreement on the budget allocation of the fifth framework programme for research for the next five years in good time , before the first reading of the 1999 budget , or at the latest before the second reading .
In the same spirit , may I venture to hope that our further discussions on the 1999 budget are productive , interesting and exciting .
I would also like to add to the praise for the Council presidency for its cooperation , which we believe has been exemplary up until now .
My speech will , in fact , be brief since the chairman of the Committee on Budgets has given a very comprehensive demonstration of the gaps that , in spite of the praise for the presidency , can still be seen in the 1999 draft budget procedure .
However , I would like to highlight several points .
First , I would like to reiterate the fact - as has already been mentioned - that the 1999 budget must represent a bridge . That bridge should not be thought of purely in terms of accounts , but should represent a crucial step forward towards an agreement for Agenda 2000 and the new financial perspectives .
I believe that , as part of that bridge , we have together forged an important element : the agreement we reached on the legal bases .
I would , nevertheless , like to emphasise that it is only one element , and I believe that we should be pleased that we have settled a dispute that had already been going on for many years .
During conciliation , the European Parliament had the chance to set out its political priorities .
I am going to refer here to one category in particular .
The chairman of the Committee on Budgets has already stated exactly what Parliament believes in relation to Category 1 and Category 2 .
We do not think that the presidency has initiated an appropriate analysis of the financial resources that would be in the interests of a healthy Community budget .
As for Category 3 , I would like to say as rapporteur that Parliament cannot agree with how it reads .
Category 3 is a true scapegoat , to use a common expression .
In this category , to ensure that its accounts are balanced within the 1999 budget , the Council has made cuts in policies that are fundamental for the European Parliament .
I call on the Council - and Mr Samland also mentioned this - to recognise its own lack of consistency .
It is strange that its priorities , as set out in Cardiff , match those of the European Parliament , yet the same Council states with regard to the Leonardo programme that - and I quote the exact English text - ' while bearing in mind the considerable success achieved by these programmes ' , it is cutting ECU 100 million .
Another interesting move relates to the global package agreed at the beginning of this year on employment policies . The importance of this agreement was highlighted by the Council itself in Luxembourg at its first reading , yet ECU 14 million are being cut from the support for SMEs , despite this being a priority , according to the Council .
Another paragraph from the Cardiff European Council , paragraph 12 , states that we are going to pay particular attention to disadvantaged groups , to ethnic minorities and to people with disabilities .
However , at the same time , the Council , as well as the presidency , which had presented these policies to the European Court of Justice in Luxembourg , are removing these programmes from the budget due to a lack of legal base .
Finally , I would like to say with regard to Category 4 that I fully agree with the approach put forward by the chairman of the Committee on Budgets , which has also been set out by Parliament in its guidelines .
We are not going to allow the PHARE programme to be implemented at the expense of other obligations the European Union has towards third countries .
As for Category 5 , Mr Ruttenstorfer , I would like to remind you that , apart from the fifth framework programme on research and development , before Parliament 's first reading we have another issue that remains to be settled : the question of pensions .
The worker has done his part ; now the employer must do his .
I would like to repeat my willingness and Parliament 's willingness to cooperate in the future in order to reach a satisfactory conclusion in terms of this bridging budget , bearing in mind , as far as possible , both your and Parliament 's priorities .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would endorse what the chairman of our committee said about close collaboration with the Council and the Commission in the trilogue and at first reading of the budget for 1999 , which was brought forward by the Council this year to 17 July to give us adequate time in view of the tasks and places of work imposed on us by the Treaties .
In this financial statement , the sum earmarked for administration amounts to EUR 4.4 billion , with a total margin of EUR 300 million as compared with 1998 .
As last year , the Council has deemed it appropriate to fix an inclusive total amount to be assigned to the other institutions for ordinary operating costs with an increase of 1 % over 1998 levels , with provision , however , for a significant margin to adjust the increase for exceptional and often justifiable cases .
This margin has been interpreted rather generously by the Council for itself , with a rise of 5.14 % , the increase for the Commission being 1.63 % , while for all the other institutions , Parliament included , it was 1.52 % .
In this context , it is worth underlining that our institution is the only one below the 1 % threshold , with a rate of increase of 0.88 % .
As regards staff , the Council has accepted the creation of new posts only if they are connected with enlargement and the implementation of the Treaty of Amsterdam , and has rejected the conversions or upgradings requested by the other institutions .
In more detail , the first reading provides for the creation of 109 posts and only 10 conversions , modification of the establishment plans of the institutions by converting some permanent posts into temporary ones , and transfer to the Commission of five posts taken from the other institutions for the medical insurance service .
In fact I am doubtful about two aspects of the staff policy adopted by the Council at first reading , and I will explain these while taking care not to go into the merits of the Council 's independent choices .
The first point is that since the Council has seized the opportunity to allow its own staff to increase by 71 to handle the implementation of the Treaty of Amsterdam and enlargement , it might have been appropriate to establish a common approach to this from the outset , given that this problem is common to so many other institutions , from Parliament itself to the Commission and the Committee of the Regions .
The second point is that frankly it is difficult for me to understand why , if the Council thought it right to award itself 71 new posts , it refused very modest demands from the other institutions , for example the Committee of the Regions , which has undoubtedly seen significant increases in its own responsibilities since the Treaty of Amsterdam .
As regards the Committee of the Regions and the Economic and Social Committee , and the consequences of the Treaty of Amsterdam , mention should also be made of the abolition of Protocol 16 , that is the common organisational structure which linked the two committees .
I believe that interinstitutional collaboration and avoiding duplication of costs wherever possible - as I have frequently stated - should be the criteria to apply in dealing with all aspects of the division imposed by Amsterdam , so that moving to full reciprocal autonomy for these two committees does not become a cause of dysfunction , jeopardising cooperation and escalating costs .
Turning to the Courts , the 1 % criterion is exceeded for the Court of Justice , resulting in the creation of 10 new posts , but the Council did not accept the Court of Auditors ' request for allocations for its building projects , where the Commission has provided for such expenditure in the financial perspective .
Here Parliament must outline the approach required for the most consistent possible attempt to limit expenditure on new buildings in Luxembourg .
Finally , as regards the European Parliament , the Council accepted our preliminary draft estimates in line with the gentlemen 's agreement .
By the same token , it also accepted the estimates for the Ombudsman , through a broad interpretation of the agreement which has essentially created a distortion between the criteria for examining the Ombudsman 's estimates and those applicable to the other institutions and associated bodies .
In this context , I wish to stress that the Ombudsman is an autonomous institution : our earlier debate on amending the Financial Regulation confirmed that .
This means there must be a specific section in the budget , and it lies outside the percentage of 20 % of the administrative costs which relates only to the European Parliament ; it means there should be a dual reading of the budget .
Moreover , the approach taken by the Council does not take account of what has already been decided here about the increase in the Ombudsman 's staff .
This decision remains our point of departure for assessing whether a further increase is needed - respecting the procedures always adopted by the budgetary authority and certainly not equal to the increase proposed by the Council at first reading .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I have listened with great attention to the views expressed by previous speakers and , in my capacity as chairman of the Budget Council , I have also taken note of what has been said .
I can assure you that I will endeavour to bring your suggestions to bear in the Council 's further deliberations .
I noted , in particular , that you agree with me that in the case of agriculture we should wait for the letter of amendment .
I also noted that you consider it appropriate to provide a reserve in the agricultural budget .
Obviously , I have also taken note of your misgivings about funds being withdrawn from the Leonardo programme .
It should be said that with the funds allocated for 1999 , the Council has actually utilised all of the budget for the whole period .
But I willingly admit that there has indeed been a sharp reduction on the previous year and that Leonardo is a successful programme .
In this context , I can tell you that the Council is currently examining a draft decision to set up a second phase of the Leonardo programme to run from 2000 to 2004 , with a considerable increase in funding .
As regards PHARE , the Council recognises the difficulties involved in implementing the PHARE programme and is , like Parliament , keen to see it managed efficiently .
Hence the Council 's wish to see a speedy conclusion to the seventh series of amendments to the Financial Regulation , since they contain , in particular , new rules on the utilisation of commitment appropriations , namely that a deadline will be set for the use of these appropriations .
We would expect to see improvements in the PHARE programme as a result .
I have also noted the importance you attach to resolving the research funding issue .
I can only assure you that the Austrian Presidency is making every effort to settle the issue of the fifth framework programme in good time , first and foremost for the sake of research , but of course also in time to draw up the 1999 budget .
Finally , I have noted the calls for a staffing policy not only for the Council , but also in more general terms , and I will try to bring these considerations to bear in further Council discussions .
I should like to conclude by once more highlighting the very good level of cooperation that we have enjoyed with the European Parliament thus far in the budget procedure , and at the same time express the wish that this will be continued in the future .
Thank you , Mr President-in-Office .
Legal bases and implementation of the budget
The next item is the report ( A4-0296 / 98 ) by Mr Christodoulou , on behalf of the Committee on Budgets , on the proposal for an interinstitutional agreement between the European Parliament , Council and Commission on legal bases and implementation of the budget .
Mr President , this is not the first time the issue of legal bases has preoccupied the European Parliament and the European Union 's institutions more generally .
If I remember rightly , we have been in a state of relative disagreement since 1981 , and now at last , after so many years , we have reached a conclusion for which congratulations are due to all those who have collaborated to achieve it .
Let me remind you that in a resolution we adopted on 12 December 1995 , we called for a provisional solution to the issue of legal bases and an end to the impression being conveyed that the European Parliament and the Council , very often with the Commission 's intervention too , are constantly at odds over issues about which Europe 's citizens are often not very aware , so that they thought we were continually debating in an atmosphere of confrontation .
Fortunately , that has now ended and we can therefore say that we will be able to make normal progress towards establishing a very serious and important procedure , which concerns the European Union 's ability to undertake new and pioneering activities that bring it much closer to Europe 's people .
Because we must not forget that the Erasmus and Konver programmes , efforts to promote the peace process in Ireland , and so on all started within a framework which we are now trying to adjust by the procedure of legal bases for pilot , preparatory and other similar actions undertaken in the context of the European Union .
We must not underestimate the importance of those actions .
The impression was often given that such activities , which had no legal base and were initiated at an experimental level , were rather exotic , in other words they involved elements of waste , they were unnecessary , and so forth .
I do not deny that perhaps some of them could be put into that category , but most by far of those actions were very fundamental and important for the promotion of the European Union 's aims .
It is very fortunate that we are now in a position which allows us to establish in law the way in which the matter is to be dealt with , and to settle for conclusions , methods and procedures which will put an end to the constant conflict that has existed between us for so many years .
The agreement as a rule makes the implementation of appropriations entered in the budget for any Community action dependent on prior adoption of a basic act , in other words a legal base , except in the case of actions relating to pilot , preparatory and autonomous actions by the Commission , and appropriations intended for the operation of each institution under its own administrative autonomy .
That possibility is not unlimited , and of course , if it is to be credible and able to hold its own and be implemented correctly , it has limitations with regard to both time and quantity .
And it is very much up to us , ladies and gentlemen , in other words to the European Parliament 's committees , through the Commission and then the Council , to promote the establishment of a legal base of that type as soon as possible so that we can achieve two things : firstly , the prompt implementation of really worthwhile programmes and actions and , secondly , the release of resources for pilot , preparatory and other actions from the time and quantity limits to which they are still subject , so that new actions of that type can be included without those appropriations being permanently committed for a very long time , as used to happen in the past .
In other words , this new agreement imposes on us a sense of absolute responsibility , and that is very important for us and we should respond in the best possible way .
Mr President , I would like to add something to what I said earlier about the basic value for the European Union 's aims of all the initiatives being undertaken and which , I repeat , result in programmes which are worthwhile and bring the European Union closer to its real aims and to Europe 's citizens .
I want to remind us that probably , in the future when this agreement becomes absolutely permanent , in other words when practical application has demonstrated that it is essential and that it operates correctly - which depends on us - that will be the time to consider adapting it .
In other words , if the future shows that there is a need for this agreement to be modified , for instance by adapting the appropriations and perhaps the time limits so as to enable the European Union to do its job more effectively in the very important areas which these initiatives deal with , I am sure that since the system has worked well , everyone will agree to adopt any decisions which will make those actions even more effective .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , our views on the issue of legal bases have diverged for many years .
Following the judgment handed down by the Court of Justice on 12 May this year , however , a solution had to be found as a matter of urgency , all the more so because the Commission was deferring the implementation of a large number of budget lines which did not have a legal basis .
At the trilogue of 23 June , new impetus was given , making it possible to bring the parties ' positions closer together .
The institutions remained in close contact up until the meeting of the Budget Council , where the majority of the discussions were devoted to this important matter .
All these efforts - and not least your own delegation 's perseverance - led to a draft interinstitutional agreement being concluded on 17 July , which should be signed shortly .
This open-ended agreement will make it possible for appropriations under budget lines which do not have a legal basis to be utilised in a way which is satisfactory to the three institutions involved .
The agreement establishes a framework for our institutions to work together in a spirit of mutual trust , something which the Court of Justice has consistently called for in cases of this kind , and which , in my opinion , should be regarded increasingly as common practice .
On 17 July , the Council also took note of the work the Commission had done - in connection with the aforementioned Court judgment - to analyse the status of the budget lines which , though entered in the 1998 budget , clearly lacked a legal basis .
The Council further agreed that the Commission might , by virtue of its powers under Article 205 of the Treaty , immediately implement a series of measures , including some of recognised political sensitivity , such as the following : measures for combating violence against children , young people and women ; measures to prevent illegal and harmful content on the Internet ; support for , and supervision of , electoral processes ; and measures in the field of human rights and democracy .
For those budget lines for which a legal basis has been proposed but not yet adopted , Parliament and the Council have undertaken to speed up ongoing legislative procedures , so that a decision on a basic instrument can be taken soon .
I can assure you that this presidency has already taken the necessary steps to bring these procedures to a speedy and successful conclusion .
As for the budget lines for which a legal basis has neither been adopted nor even proposed , the Council has taken note of the Commission 's undertaking to honour commitments entered into before 10 June 1998 , and to examine applications which have not yet led to the formal conclusion of a contract . This is being done in an effort to avoid any discrimination which might result from dossiers having to be dealt with by particular deadlines .
On the basis of this procedure , we should assume that funding will have to be guaranteed , since the selection procedures were completed and the beneficiaries formally identified before 10 June 1998 .
Finally , as far as combating exclusion is concerned , the Council believes that the ratification of the Amsterdam Treaty will make it possible for the necessary legal bases to be adopted .
I should like to thank Parliament , but also the Commission , for its cooperation in this matter .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , thank you for your attention .
Mr President , in Mr Christodoulou 's report - in the explanatory statement - there is a wonderful line that says this ' provides a long-term solution , since it has not been unilaterally denounced by any of the three institutions concerned ' - yet .
' Yet ' is my word , because Parliament has not yet voted on this report .
I am going to speak with two tongues in this debate : one - as an individual who has been involved in the debate in the negotiations , and then , as it is my responsibility to speak , in my role as coordinator for the Socialist Group .
On a personal level I welcome the report .
I think it is the best that we could achieve , and a culmination of many years of work and attempts by Parliament to get this problem resolved .
So , knowing what we have gone through in the past , I am extremely pleased with what we have got for the future .
I also have to say that when we were coming to this conclusion on 17 July , there was cooperation between ourselves , the Commission and , dare I say , the majority of the Council .
The previous presidency had given its commitment to resolving the matter .
As the British Prime Minister said from where the President-in-Office now sits , the Austrian Presidency has been committed to it , but I have to say that the length of time taken , which the chairman , Mr Samland , referred to , was because of indecision by at least one Nordic Member State .
Quite frankly , it was a pathetic performance on that trialogue to get a conclusion to this decision , which really involved a small amount of money .
I hope I never have to go through that again because it was a waste of time if nothing else .
That is my personal view .
When we were coming to these conclusions , all three institutions were of a mind that the deal on the legal basis would be fine for the future , but we still have the problem of this year 1998 .
That is why I advised caution at the beginning of my remarks .
I , and Mr Samland , Mr Colom i Naval , Mrs Dührkop Dührkop and Mr Tomlinson - those who were involved in the negotiations - have to convince our group tonight , when we discuss the issue , that this report is worthy of a yes vote .
We need some clarification , certainly from the Commission , on those lines which were considered to be problematic .
There were four areas .
Last night I received a document chart showing the lines where the problems were , and hopefully the Commission has come forward with solutions .
This will be taken to our group tonight and we will do our best to convince .
But I seek the help of the Commission now to clarify those areas of doubt which will arise when Members see this , especially over lines B5-321 - action for the economic and social areas like cooperative mutuals , etc , - where a large proportion of the money has not yet been utilised and there does not seem to be a way of utilising it .
On lines B7-611 , 851 and 852 , where sums in the region of ECU 11.5 million remain unused , what will happen to those amounts of money ?
In the areas which we did have problems with such as sport and minority languages , the bulk of the money has been used .
There will be small amounts left and it is fair to say that even without the problems we have had we could still have had those small amounts of money left .
I am therefore quite prepared to argue the case for them .
But there are those few lines which still give us concern , and I would seek help from the Commission to give us an assurance that those areas will not be left untouched - that the money will be utilised .
With that information I hope we can go forward to our group tonight and then vote positively .
One final point - we went to a lot of trouble to get this report put together and there was consensus on its content .
There are some amendments put forward - three or four by the Greens - which , while nice , are not necessary .
My recommendation to our group would be that we do not support the amendments but we stick by the report unamended .
I do not want anyone to assume that we do not sympathise with the contents of those amendments by the Greens , but we really want the report to be concise rather than elaborate .
Mr President , I should like to express the hope that we have found an eternal solution to an eternal problem , and that none of the three institutions will unravel the agreement which has been negotiated .
In resolving the legal bases issue , I believe that Parliament has proved - at least in recent years - through its work on the budget that it is not only consistent in terms of its political commitments , but also in terms of the way in which it funds these political objectives .
I should certainly like to congratulate the Austrian Presidency , therefore , on the skilful way in which it conducted the negotiations on 17 July .
Like Mr Wynn , however , I was present at the discussions , and at times I had the impression that there was no political objective at stake there , but that these were petty negotiations reminiscent of the bourgeois , about a couple of million ecus or so , and the next six months or year or so .
In parts it was indeed embarrassing , and one could not help thinking that at least some of those present were not concerned with finding a political solution , but more of an administrative , technical one .
I am inclined to believe , Mr President-in-Office , that you should not be given all the credit ; the time was , quite simply , ripe .
Parliament kept stepping up the pressure , and in the end the Council either had to , or wanted to , give in .
Admittedly , both you and we in Parliament can be happy with the result .
There is certainly no doubt about that .
We - all three partners - now know where we stand for the future and , as Mr Wynn said , we still need to convince our colleagues in the House .
Under current circumstances , however , that should not be too difficult .
As rapporteur for the 1998 budget , I thought it was particularly important that on 17 July - to comply with the Court of Justice judgment - the Commission also tabled a proposal for the 1998 budget , a workable proposal in our view .
As a Parliament , we have also indicated - and in fact this is another significant agreement - that we are prepared to comply with the Court of Justice judgment , and that we are not able to increase the political pressure in this matter .
But some services seem to be taking advantage of the present unclear situation for their own ends .
Commissioner Liikanen , I would ask you to make it clear to all your services once again that , now that a solution has been found and agreed , they should apply it for 1998 as well . This is because we need the 1998 appropriations to be implemented as soon as possible , so that the NGOs affected receive the money they were promised .
Once again , I should like to warmly congratulate Mr Christodoulou , who is , of course , an old hand , and has worked on this issue for several years .
In Germany , we say that we sit problems out .
We have someone sitting at the head of the government there who sits problems out .
Mr Christodoulou has also sat this problem out and has succeeded !
( Applause )
Mr President , in a way one might say this issue represents much ado about nothing .
In financial terms , it is 60 million for pilot projects and 30 million for preparatory actions - less than 1 % .
The political issue , of course , is much more important : it is a sign that the relationship between Parliament and the Council has finally matured and a recognition that Parliament and the Commission , as Mr Christodoulou rightly mentioned , are putting forward initiatives .
Unfortunately - with all due respect - the Council has become an impotent body .
It can do nothing if it is not put under external pressure .
It was external pressure , via your decision , Mr President , to block a couple of hundred budget lines which finally made the Council aware that it could no longer delay this issue .
This is part of the budget debate in general and we are only talking about a few hundred million here and there .
But the political significance is that the Council and Parliament are finally regarding each other as equals .
That is the final element of this institutional agreement and it confirms the fact that both the Council and the Commission recognise that Parliament has taken useful initiatives which , as Mr Christodoulou rightly said , bring Europe closer to its citizens .
I have one specific question to the Commission , a question which I put two months ago in the debate in the plenary .
If this institutional agreement is going to work in future , a lot will depend on the political imagination of the Commission .
Now that we are close to a result , can the Commissioner confirm that the Commission will always try in the future to propose a legal basis which is as useful as possible , to ensure that the codecision of Parliament is guaranteed ?
Can it say that it will only use Article 235 in exceptional cases , because that article is a negation of parliamentary democracy ?
I cannot believe that the Commission - and especially this Commissioner , who is very much a democrat at heart - will ever use Article 235 to emasculate the powers of Parliament vis-à-vis the Council .
Mr President , the legal dogmatism of the Court of Justice resulted in the Commission blocking a hundred budget lines for a total amount of more than ECU 900 million .
This has led to the abandoning of many projects run by associations and NGOs in such sensitive areas as combating poverty and exclusion , development aid , the fight against racism , democracy and human rights .
The widespread mobilisation of the associations and NGOs , which our group brought to the attention of Parliament , made a considerable contribution to the interinstitutional agreement of 17 July which resolves the issue of the legal bases .
I welcome this agreement which , moreover , is of immediate application .
I regret , however , that projects for the benefit of elderly people and certain measures to combat poverty remain blocked , and would like to repeat the request already made so many times to the Council for it to adopt a new programme to combat poverty , in cooperation with humanitarian organisations .
The argument has been put to me in this House that , as the fight against poverty is a continuing one , it is not useful to grant appropriations in this field .
I find this argument unacceptable and invalid , as many associations are selflessly engaged in fighting this scourge .
I believe that this position should be reviewed and a new plan proposed in the fight against poverty .
To conclude , I would point out that the involvement of citizens in European mechanisms makes it possible to overcome obstacles and to arrive at solutions and that Parliament plays its role to the full when it sets aside specialist discussions and becomes the vehicle for the intervention and aspirations of our citizens .
Mr President , I too should like to endorse previous speakers ' words of thanks .
I believe that this is a good agreement both for Mr Christodoulou and this House , and for the Commission and the Council .
Above all , I am pleased that Parliament was steadfast in its efforts to have the judgment of the Court of Justice recognised .
We were under extreme pressure from some non-governmental organisations to act as if this judgement did not exist .
I believe that the negotiations we had with the NGOs - the outside world in this case - on safeguarding the judgment contributed greatly to raising awareness of how we manage our money , and the fact that we do need legal bases for this .
All in all , I consider this to have been a success .
It still remains to be seen how far the agreement on legal bases will take us .
We in Parliament must now establish legal bases with the Council , and this makes us dependent , completely and utterly - as the Maastricht and Amsterdam Treaties intend - on the Commission 's right of initiative .
That is why , Commissioner and Mr Christodoulou , I have tabled amendments pointing out that this interinstitutional agreement vests the Commission , as the initiator of legislation , with a huge responsibility , and that in the future this will force us to seek maximum powers of codecision for the Council and Parliament .
I look forward to working in cooperation with the Commission on this matter .
But let me now return to concerns related to the 1998 budget , which is quite rightly not covered by the future arrangements in the agreement , but does form part of the overall compromise .
Both before , but mainly after , the summer recess , I received a substantial number of telephone calls from people saying that their money had not arrived , even though the appropriations had been released .
In addition , there is still uncertainty about some areas , for example in my case about line B3-1000 and the European Youth Parliament .
I would be grateful , Commissioner , if you could give us some reassurance today that everything in your power is being done , and that by this evening , when we discuss this with our groups , we will , as Mr Wynn requested , have precise information about the parts of the budget which you do not envisage implementing , because the judgment simply makes it impossible to do so .
I believe that we need this clarity to be able to vote in favour of the agreement .
Mr President , as the longest-serving Member of this Parliament I remember a time when even before direct elections Commissioners assured us , and through us the citizens of Europe , that the Community institutions had a human face .
That will not be the case if these budget lines are blocked - it is as simple as that .
Think of it : the Foundation for Human Rights closed , NGO funding , abuse of children , the supervision of election procedures and the protection of minority languages , a subject dear to the heart of myself and John Hume who founded the budget line .
I am embarrassed to belong to a state that put this to the Court and caused it to happen .
I am amazed when Mr Wynn talks about speaking with two tongues .
Indeed , that is what he has done , because I was looking to a new government in Britain to change this and it has not !
It seems to be a government of much the same colour and speaking with two tongues .
There are over 30 minority languages that are a precious part of our common heritage , with their own literatures .
We have two in Scotland .
Blocking this is not going to give this Community a human face .
Mr President , the confidence our citizens have in the European Union ultimately depends on how well the EU can address the real , everyday problems people have .
Unfortunately , this trust has never been great .
The decision of the Court of Justice last spring , which was followed by the Commission 's decision to freeze funds , caused this trust to slump even further .
While a legal base makes it possible to pour millions of ecus into the EMU campaign , funds for the national organisations were frozen .
Our citizens cannot understand why a legal base allows money to be spent on campaigns such as this , but does not make it possible to spend money on national organisations , the prevention of poverty , on organisations for the disabled , or for example on the promotion of minority languages , which is a very important issue .
I think it is extremely important that an interinstitutional agreement is realised soon .
I also hope that Council will listen to Parliament this time more closely than it has done hitherto .
Unfortunately , the situation has often been that it has been easier for Parliament to get agreement with the Commission than with the Council on matters that have to be dealt with .
Hopefully the Austrian Presidency will now find a solution to this difficult problem .
Mr President , I too should like to echo those who have complimented Mr Christodoulou on his report .
He has , I believe , addressed one of the most complex issues we have had to deal with for a long time , and one which is very difficult to explain to the outside world .
This is something we have also felt during discussions in committee .
I would just like to comment briefly on some of the agreement 's implications , which I would ask the Council and the Commission not to overlook , as they could affect our work in the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Security and Defence Policy , in particular our work in the field of democracy and human rights , but also our relations with Asia and Latin America .
Democracy and human rights - already referred to this morning - are , more than anything else , of central importance to the Commission 's future policies - and I am addressing the Commission directly here - precisely because this is an area where the European Union really does come into direct contact with people .
Through NGOs , it deploys citizens from a wide variety of fields , on the one hand , as it were , to work for the EU and , on the other , to help those in need , or - and this is at least as important - to raise awareness of democracy and the rule of law throughout the world .
We hope that the legal bases established will be clear enough for these programmes to continue , and when they do - this is my request of the Commission , Mr Liikanen - there should be less bureaucracy , and hence lower administrative costs ; more expertise on some individual issues ; and perhaps also less cost to the EU - in short , there should be greater transparency .
We support the Committee on Budgets ' non-selective approach in this matter , but we would like to ask you not to disregard these problems .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I am pleased that you welcome this agreement .
I should like to make one remark , however , in response to some of the opinions you have expressed . I do not agree that the Council can only come to decisions - and in this case did come to a decision - when it is under pressure .
I really must refute this ; I can tell you that the judgment of the Court of Justice put the Council in a very good position , and that the judgment was not the reason for the Council making a particular effort to resolve this issue very quickly together with Parliament and the Commission .
We felt compelled to do this for two quite different reasons .
The first was raised by many of you , namely the fact that this decision was important to many people in Europe , because the implementation of budget lines was at stake .
That is why it was a matter of concern for the Council to find a solution .
The second reason is that this has already remained an open question between Parliament , the Council and the Commission for around 15 years , and has hindered cooperation between the institutions .
It was also for these reasons , I believe , that it was high time to find a solution .
That is why I am very glad that one has been found , and I hope it will meet with your definitive agreement .
Mr President , the draft agreement on legal bases which the institutions reached on 17 July 1998 is a remarkable achievement , and not merely because it is the first agreement since the 1982 Joint Declaration , which turned out to be unworkable .
This is not because large sums of money are involved - those Members who mentioned this point were quite right .
The amounts concerned have always been a small proportion of the Community budget .
It is remarkable because progress has for once been made across the minefield of institutional competences .
The agreement strengthens interinstitutional confidence at the outset of the negotiations for the next interinstitutional agreement .
I must also congratulate the Austrian presidency for the great efforts it made on this issue .
At the same time , in this context , it is greatly to be welcomed that the British Government has decided to withdraw all pending court cases against the implementation of the Community budget .
The winners from the agreement are not only the institutions but , above all , the programmes and the hundreds of organizations concerned .
We have seen a particularly active period of non-governmental pressure groups around the Commission and the institutions.That clearly showed the importance of the actions concerned .
In the future these organisations can be sure that once an amount is entered in the budget the implementation of the budget line will not be challenged .
Some of the actions have to be redefined and not all may be continued for ever .
Such decisions in the future will be taken on the basis of clear budgetary and legislative procedures .
Our partners will be able to rely on the outcome .
The Commission is ready to sign the agreement .
The list of specific powers of the Commission annexed to the agreement is correct .
It can always be augmented in future preliminary draft budgets .
I want to emphasise this .
The autonomy of the Commission is not affected by the agreement .
As far as the budget for 1999 is concerned , the preliminary draft budget is compatible with the agreed ceilings .
With regard to the 1998 budget , the remaining budget lines have been unblocked over the last few weeks .
We have given you information on these particular budget lines .
An ad hoc agreement on 17 July permitted in addition an immediate re-opening of several particularly sensitive budget lines , e.g. the fight against violence towards women and children , actions against illegal content on the Internet and actions for human rights and democracy .
The conclusion of the legislative procedures for a voluntary youth service and for NGOs in third countries has cleared the way for the implementation of these programmes .
Adoption of further legal bases appear imminent .
With regard to the budget lines to combat social exclusion , which were at the heart of the conflict , the Commission is dealing with this issue at its meeting tomorrow .
It will decide on a communication which proposes to re-orient the lines towards preparatory actions for programmes on the basis of the Amsterdam Treaty .
With this re-orientation , which I hope will be decided tomorrow , they can be re-launched immediately .
If , after all this , an action remains blocked or partially blocked , the Commission will fully respect legitimate expectations and will also protect existing investments .
The indications from its services are that out of ECU 870m originally blocked for lack of a legal basis , only some ECU 30m may not be implemented by the end of the year for that reason .
Obviously some problems remain in the transition to the new regime .
Some are inevitable , as the ruling of the Court prevents the Commission from pretending that nothing has happened .
But joint efforts have succeeded in limiting the problems to the minimum , and from next year the implementation of the budget will be on firm ground .
I will now reply to the questions put by honourable Members .
Mr Wynn and Mrs Müller asked about budget line B-5321 on the social economy .
There is no current legal basis , but we are now considering the possibility of a transfer of these funds to budget line B-5512 ( employment initiative ) which makes possible a similar type of action .
Mr Wynn 's other two questions are not connected with budget lines B 7851 and B 7852 .
It is very easy to understand for someone who does not follow the budget .
Anyhow , these proposals for legal bases are with the Council , and I hope the presidency will make a major effort to accelerate the procedure , especially for the budget line concerning export promotion and Japan , which has turned out to be very useful .
Thirdly , in reply to Mr Tillich , our services must work on the basis of the decisions which have been taken .
I would say to honourable Members who have been contacted by organisations , etc ; please get in touch directly with the services concerned .
That is the best way to guarantee rapid action .
The basic framework concerning the Commission has now been solved .
I have good news for Mrs Ewing on the matter of minority languages and she can have some warm words for the Commission .
Today we have been able to implement the budget line for minority languages practically in full .
A sum of ECU 400 000 is still in the reserve thanks to the European Parliament .
I am ready to propose that the Commission should very soon transfer it and if Mrs Ewing can convince her colleagues in Parliament to accept that transfer the problem will no longer be there .


I would conclude by thanking the rapporteur , Mr Christodoulou , the chairman of the Committee on Budgets , Mr Samland , and the President-in-Office , Mr Ruttenstorfer , for the extraordinary efforts they have made to achieve this historic agreement .
Motor vehicle emissions - Quality of petrol and diesel fuels
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen . I believe that this is an issue where the European Parliament has bravely taken the helm , negotiated the obstacles and set a course for environmentally friendly mobility .
After hard , but honest negotiations in the Conciliation Committee , we have a result on the table .
That is why I should like to thank all those involved for their tough , but also unbureaucratic approach towards the negotiations .
It was not all hard work ; there were also some more lighthearted moments .
The Commission , too , is happy with the result .
Hence the fact that it has given Parliament the opportunity to take the helm here ; otherwise , the Commission could of course have taken the floor first to present this excellent result .
We are in fact on the right track .
We have taken the first step and successfully completed the first phase ; passenger vehicles , light commercial vehicles and fuels .
The next obstacles , the next phases , lie just around the corner : reducing CO2 emissions from cars , and then from heavy commercial vehicles - and let us not forget motorcycles either - in order to guarantee environmentally acceptable mobility .
It is a fact that 80 % of journeys are made in cars .
Whether you like it or not , that is the reality !
In the long term , we certainly need to set ourselves new targets , but for now we need ways to make cars cleaner .
I believe the result achieved by Parliament in the negotiations to be a success on two counts : firstly , from the point of view of improved air quality and employment in Europe ; secondly from an institutional point of view .
Firstly , on improving air quality : we have succeeded in introducing mandatory standards - stricter than anywhere else in the world - for passenger vehicles and light goods vehicles for the years 2000 and 2005 .
We have succeeded - and I believe that this is almost even more important - not only in making procedures for registering new vehicles more stringent , but also in making sure that cars already on the road really do produce lower emissions throughout their lives , and not only when they are first registered .
To this end , we have tightened up the provisions on the durability of emissions control devices .
They have to be effective for 80 000 km or 100 000 km respectively .
They are continually monitored by an on-board diagnostic system and , if Member States are suspicious , they may also carry out in-use tests to guarantee durability .
All of this has been arranged so that there is nothing to stand in the way of free servicing or repairs , or the activities of automobile associations .
And this means that small and medium-sized businesses can also be involved in this process .
I believe that stabilising small and medium-sized businesses in this sector constitutes a further achievement , to add to those contained in the test itself .
The legislation as a whole has side-effects on employment .
This legislation to improve air quality will have a direct and unprecedented effect on the number of jobs created in the motor vehicle industry .
The statistics capture this very well : in this field alone , up to 6 % of jobs will disappear .
In the catalytic converter industry , 15 000 new posts have been created .
This is , therefore , a success because air quality will be improved , but also because jobs will be safeguarded and the sector 's performance levels raised throughout the European Union .
I spoke earlier of a success on two counts .
This is also a success for our institution .
Parliament has bravely taken the helm in environment policy ; it has combined three complicated directives in one package , dealt with them together , and resisted many attempts by lobbyists to exert influence .
I tell you , it has passed the elk test and has not turned over , and has added essential improvements to the texts .
On a list of 22 demands , only three are marked ' no ' .
In every other field , Parliament has won through to a greater , or sometimes a rather lesser extent , but it has always won through .
We were quick , so you see Parliament not only works hard , but also quickly .
Suffice it to say that the second readings were on 17 February and , for light commercial vehicles , 30 April .
Incidentally , for the light commercial vehicles , the second reading only took one month , from 30 March to 30 April .
Today , we have the result .
Indeed , the conclusions of the Conciliation Committee were available as early as 29 June .
Parliament works fast .
Perhaps that may serve as a small example to all the European institutions .
Overall , this result is a success , a success because it will improve air quality and a success for our institution .
I am also pleased , and rather proud , that the comments about this legislation in the European press have been rather different from the usual negative headlines we are sadly so used to seeing in connection with other European matters .
A major German magazine carried an article about this legislation bearing the headline ' Good news from Brussels ' .
That 's the way it should be !
( Laughter and applause )
Thank you for that piece of good news , Mr Lange .
Mr President , I can confirm everything the other rapporteur , Mr Lange , has just said .
The conciliation was very constructive , and to some extent we even enjoyed it .
Now and then I , at least , could not help identifying with our opposing side , that is to say the Council .
So I can confirm that we worked in real partnership and both sides argued in favour of the proposals , and the discussion was at times at an intelligently high level .
I would sincerely like to thank all my colleagues for their cooperation and the spirit in which they worked to make it possible to carry forward this proposal in Parliament .
Its basis was the fact that the Commission two years ago proposed binding conditions for the quality of fuels only for the year 2000 .
Parliament has improved on the Commission 's original proposals quite considerably in cooperation with the Council .
We wanted binding conditions for quality for the year 2005 too , so that the consumer would be reassured that the air would really become cleaner , and so that industry would be able to invest with confidence .
In the end we got the proposal through .
The Conciliation Committee pushed through the proposal for binding conditions for fuel quality for the year 2005 as well .
We think this is very important because this really means that industry can concentrate on producing cleaner industrial technology .
This is vital for the car industry , as the car industry needs cleaner fuels to be able to keep up with the ever more stringent calls for cleaner exhaust emissions , but it is also important for the oil industry .
The legislative authority has now said what is expected of the oil industry by the year 2005 .
At times we had the distinct impression during the process that the oil industry wished to blame Parliament for the structural problems there might consequently be in this sector of industry .
But we succeeded in showing that in fact it was high time the oil industry was also called upon to invest in cleaner technologies .
If there was overcapacity , at least more stringent environmental demands could not be blamed for everything .
During the conciliation process , we also managed to change the Commission 's approach to the Auto-Oil programme .
Originally , we thought we would be starting with a very narrow cost-effectiveness analysis , but Parliament and various other national players brought other economic arguments to the discussion .
We were also able to show that costs sustained out of human illness have to be taken into account in the figures .
In this way we were widening the whole approach , as it were .
We believe that if the Auto-Oil programme continues in the Commission , the approach will now be crucially different from what it was at the outset .
The effects of this decision will be visible very early on , because cleaner fuels will be coming onto the market by the beginning of the year 2000 .
This is a very clear signal to the market that these cleaner fuels are actually being awaited .
During the conciliation process , we also established that the Commission should in future turn its attention more positively to the question of tax incentives , which Member States will possibly wish to employ to encourage the use of cleaner fuels .
In this way , we hope that the quality of the air will start to improve very soon after this decision has come into force .
It will also obviously affect older vehicles .
I would strongly urge the European Parliament to approve this fuels package .
Mr President , firstly I should like to congratulate the two rapporteurs and the other people who have been involved in the conciliation .
They have produced an excellent result which I hope will have the full support of Parliament today .
The proposal will ensure that this programme will make all European towns and cities better places to live and work and healthier places to bring up our children and go about our daily lives .
Towns from Aberdeen to Athens will be cleaner and healthier places to live .
In ten years ' time there will be fewer people - children and older people - suffering from asthma caused by car fumes if the targets of this Auto-Oil programme are met .
At the same time , we are going to see a significant contribution made to reducing the damage caused to crops by pollution .
This is indeed a very useful package protecting the environment and public health .
We were very ambitious right from the beginning , wanting to be sure that the motor companies made cleaner , more efficient engines and obliging the oil companies to make cleaner petrol and diesel , whilst at the same time getting rid of leaded fuel .
This proposal has many beneficial effects and , although concern has been expressed about the cost , it is not great .
We have seen various studies .
But we can best explain it if we say that for the average motorist driving the average car in Europe it will cost only Ecu 5 to Ecu 8 more every year to realise the full benefits of this package .
Surely that is a price every motorist - and we are all motorists - believes is worth paying .
From the very beginning we have been determined to ensure that the burden is fairly divided between the oil industry and the car industry .
That has been difficult to determine at times , with all the different lobbying and conflicting information .
But I am now convinced that we have reached an equitable balance .
The car industry will have to change ; it will have to bring in new models that are more efficient , cleaner and burn less fuel .
At the same time , the oil industry will produce cleaner fuels ; indeed some of them are waiting for the deadlines .
I understand some of them are already putting cleaner fuels on the market now that comply with the specification we have demanded .
It is quite clear they are able to do that .
There may be restructuring in the oil industry in the next few years , but that will take place not as a consequence of the AutoOil programme but as a consequence of more general changes in the European economy .
Finally , this is an excellent example of how , when the Council , the Commission and Parliament all work together and reach a consensus through conciliation we can make a serious legislative impact that affects the lives of all the people of Europe .
We should be proud that we have managed to achieve this in this package .
I would urge all of my colleagues to support it .
Mr President .
I should like to congratulate Mr Lange and Mrs Hautala on their reports .
I am not at all surprised to see so many Members jumping for joy today , but I do not wish to mark my agreement in such unqualified terms , because from an institutional point of view , I do not believe that this procedure was such a breakthrough .
Mr Bowe has just given me a cue , which means that I will have to restructure my whole speech .
You just said that the oil industry has announced today that it has had the fuels we are demanding for the years 2000 and 2005 for a long time .
This is the whole point .
Unfortunately , people forget all too often that , if a car is to produce clean exhaust emissions , it has to run on high-quality fuel . That is exactly what we did not manage to achieve in the Conciliation Committee , because the committee was under pressure of time .
It should all have come under consideration on 28 June ; it had something to do with the Council presidency , and of course we were happy to do our bit to bolster a Council presidency .
It was a shame , because it would have allowed us to show those responsible for fuels in the Commission that we were prepared to take them on .
We would have been able to show the lobbyists that something which they had thought was completely impossible at the time - I put that on record at the reading here - was actually possible .
You admitted as much as soon as the meeting of the Conciliation Committee was over .
We in Parliament all showed weakness in this regard .
That should not happen again .
The oil industry is experiencing difficulties , not because of European standards , but because of structural problems and many other factors .
I do believe , however , that we have taken a step forward .
There are 200 million motor vehicles in Europe , and my group is firmly in favour of mobility , in contrast to the Green Members .
They would prefer to abolish mobility .
That is the prerequisite of this single market : mobility of persons , goods , products and services .
And because this is what we want , we need highquality fuels , so that we have clean engines and clean exhaust emissions .
There have been some improvements .
On-board diagnostic systems have in no way resulted in car bonnets being locked electronically , as we had feared . This would have prevented medium-sized businesses from carrying out repairs .
I am glad that the testing procedures have been improved .
I am glad that medium-sized businesses will , in many cases , have access to this market .
All in all , the battle is won , but in the future we must show a greater willingness to take on those who are working with us on this European project , so that we can be even more successful for the sake of our children , because they need a healthy environment .
Mr President , I too must start by congratulating Mrs Hautala and Mr Lange most sincerely on this result .
It is largely thanks to them that we have achieved these results , this progress towards better air quality in Europe .
For my part , I believe this is the best thing the European Parliament has done in this area over the last four years .
We have achieved quite a lot in the last four years .
We have of course had to compromise , but the compromises reached have been more in our favour than that of the automobile and oil industry .
In other words , we have won .
Mr Lange has already outlined what has been achieved .
I shall not repeat him .
But when I look at the response of the automobile and petroleum industry to what the Council , Commission and Parliament have achieved by their joint endeavour and compare that with the attitude the industry was taking a year ago , there is a very marked difference .
The loud protest we were hearing a year ago has died down in the face of our shared determination to bring about an improvement in air quality .
That is what happens when the European Parliament speaks clearly and unequivocally .
We were able to approve the amendments by an overwhelming majority .
I shall not go into the results in detail but I would like to say just one thing : the best result of all , I think , is that we have managed to make the limit values for both fuel content and vehicle emissions mandatory for the year 2005 .
That will be a good basis for further agreements .
So we shall be more than happy to vote in favour .
Just one remark to end with , Mr President : I am less happy with the Commission , but we shall doubtless come back to that when we talk about the agreement with the motor vehicle industry concerning CO2 emissions .
That is part of the Auto / Oil programme with which I as an individual member and my group are less pleased , but as I say we shall come back to that .
Lastly , a word to my fellow members of Parliament .
I noted that a good many MEPs were absent from the conciliation procedure .
I found it humiliating to be facing a Council of 15 ambassadors , with just four , five or six people on Parliament 's side .
So this is a word of exhortation to the House .
Since we have this power of codecision , we should put in an appearance and use it .
Mr President , the Hautala dossier contains three directives , on the quality of fuels and the reduction of exhaust gas emissions from motor vehicles and light commercial vehicles .
The compromise proposed in this joint proposal was achieved following a conciliation procedure and reached after two months of negotiations .
The agreement is based on the levels adopted by the Council for the years 2000 and 2005 , but the European Parliament has managed to make them mandatory for 2005 rather than guide levels .
With regard to the Hautala report , the principal issue was the compulsory reduction in sulphur content .
The levels for the year 2000 for unleaded petrol and diesel remain the same as in the Council 's common position , which nevertheless includes a European Parliament amendment designed to increase the maximum oxygen content of unleaded petrol .
The specifications for 2005 make the Council 's levels obligatory .
For diesel , the sulphur content will be reduced to 5 ppm , a reduction which will be rendered mandatory in the year 2005 , whereas the Council simply wanted to start reducing the sulphur content from the year 2005 .
For unleaded petrol , the European Parliament has accepted the levels proposed by the Council while making them obligatory .
In addition , for these two fuels , the Council has accepted the principle proposed by the European Parliament to authorise the early introduction , in the year 2000 , of petrol and diesel fuels which satisfy the specifications which will be binding from 2005 .
In a statement appended to the text , the Commission also indicates its intention to speed up procedures authorising tax incentives for clean fuels .
On this occasion , exemptions are only authorised for sulphur content , until 2003 , by way of derogation from the specifications which otherwise apply from the year 2000 , and until 2007 by way of derogation from the specifications which otherwise apply for 2005 , while therefore respecting the minimum levels stipulated for the year 2000 .
Finally , the Commission has also issued a statement indicating that it would consider whether clean fuel is available in sufficient quantities before granting exemptions .
The joint proposal can therefore be seen as acceptable to the extent that it guarantees the presence of superior quality fuel from the year 2005 , or even from the year 2000 .
Turning to the Lange reports , the text concerns both motor vehicles and light commercial vehicles .
The maximum levels are those proposed by the Council and obligatory from 2005 .
Instruments for checking anti-pollution equipment , with which all diesel and petrol vehicles must be fitted , will be available to all garage owners , while the car industry wanted to limit access to authorised dealers .
The same applies to cold starting tests .
As we know that cold starting produces more pollution , we must remain particularly firm on this point .
To conclude , this joint proposal is acceptable to our group .
It has also been approved by all the Member States and the car industry .
Mr President , I naturally welcome this compromise text which resulted from many conciliation meetings and of course congratulate the two rapporteurs on their excellent work .
The European Parliament has shown real determination in the way it has handled this sensitive issue by pushing its environmental demands to the limit while always remaining within the realms of the possible and the realistic .
Negotiations between Parliament , the Commission and the Council , and all those involved in and concerned by this issue , should serve as a lesson to us all .
For myself , and I am by no means a newcomer to Parliament , they have served as a lesson on the conciliation procedure .
My hope is that the discussions which are now to begin on CO2 will go equally well .
I therefore propose that the House should give its full support to this text which , in itself , represents considerable progress .
Progress in reducing the sulphur content of fuels , progress in banning leaded petrol and progress in introducing engine technologies which permit the use of fuels with a low sulphur content .
All of this will bring a concrete change to the everyday lives of the Union 's citizens .
The task now is to make known these decisions which provide the beginnings of an answer to the air pollution which has become the major challenge for this turn of the century .
In our countries and our constituencies we must lay to rest certain accepted ideas .
I am thinking in particular of the poor image of diesel .
Although this image was justified in the past , we must now acknowledge the huge progress made by car manufacturers to comply with European standards .
We must consider how to make the people and the media understand that , in future , clean diesel will cause less pollution than unleaded petrol . We must do so in cooperation with the car and oil indutries .
The response to this technological challenge does credit to our engineers .
Finally , Mr President , we will not have brought any real solutions to the problem of car pollution until we have dealt with the problem of rejuvenating the fleet .
We all know that this is a major challenge as 20 % of cars are responsible for about 80 % of all car pollution .
We must therefore find new and original measures which do not repeat the mistakes made in France .
It is not a question of making aid dependent upon the purchase of a new vehicle but upon getting rid of the old one , the funding principally coming from Europe .
I am thinking of the LIFE programme for example .
This measure will boost Europe 's popularity .
Of that I am sure , being aware of its cost . But rather than constantly depleting our resources by providing a sprinkling here and there , I am convinced that it is politically important to be able , on occasion , to make a big gesture .
Mr President , sincere congratulations to Mrs Hautala and Mr Lange , the rapporteurs , who together with Mr Kenneth Collins have secured an excellent result .
Air pollution is a particularly intractable problem which needs to be tackled using an integrated , systematic and multidisciplinary approach .
It has direct implications for the health of humans , plants and animals .
In the longer term , the threat to the environment will be worldwide , as a result of acidification and climate change .
Consequently , the importance of legislation aimed at cleaner fuels and cleaner vehicles cannot be underestimated .
The outcome of the negotiations which we now have is a resounding success for a European Parliament which has singlemindedly succeeded in setting limit values for vehicle emissions and the quality of petrol and diesel fuels for the year 2005 and beyond .
The Council too , and specifically the UK Presidency , are to be congratulated on this result .
Proper arguments were brought to bear and swift progress was made .
But pleased as we are by this result , it is only one part of the problem , namely air pollution from traffic and transport ; rapidly increasing mobility will quickly cancel out the benefit gained .
That calls for a policy on mobility which is geared to sustainable development .
The automobile and petroleum industries now face the major challenge of giving further thought , together with environmental and consumer organisations , to a sustainable technology which can responsibly accommodate the need for mobility .
It is my hope and my expectation that the Council , the Commission and Parliament will be ready to stimulate the debate on this and provide funding for the research that is needed .
Mr President , introducing mandatory limit values for fuels and vehicle emissions throughout Europe will certainly make an essential contribution to keeping our air clean .
The rapporteurs are to be congratulated , above all for their persistence in gaining acceptance of their views .
Of course , the derogation clauses hurt .
In the future , we will have to press for these derogations to be as limited as possible .
Such caution is well advised , as any member of this House knows who was besieged by lobbyists in the run-up to our debates on this directive .
The agreement on the use of on-board diagnostic systems is also gratifying ; it constitutes a workable compromise between consumer interests and control systems .
The right of individual Member States to grant preferential tax treatment for earlier improvements should become a major pillar of European environment policy ; at some point in the future , this should be taken as a matter of course and no longer have to be negotiated separately .
Mr President , I too should like to congratulate the rapporteurs , and thank all those who served on the Conciliation Committee .
Their task has not been easy , and they have completed it quickly and successfully .
I would , however , like to introduce one further point into the debate .
The Auto-Oil package has , I believe , allowed us to prove for the first time that modern industrial policy is really environment policy . Only by taking account of the environment and recognising the need both to preserve the natural foundations of human life and to protect human health from possible damage can an industrial policy be formulated which will be valid for ten , twenty or fifty years , rather than just one or two .
I believe that we should take this as an example and examine the possibility of putting together similar packages in other sectors .
I think the chemical industry would be very much in favour of a one-off comprehensive regulation , which would allow it to initiate and plan its long-term development - again , not just for the next few years , but for the next ten , twenty or thirty years . It would thus develop in a way consistent with the principle of sustainability , something we have already discussed on many occasions and enshrined in all the Treaties .
A package of this kind makes it possible to balance out interests ; it makes it possible to show clearly how the various industries involved in production interact , and to weigh them up against each other ; it makes it possible to initiate developments which must , as in the case of Auto-Oil , be undertaken by the motor industry and the fuel industry together .
These are the methods we should adopt , and we should apply them to several sectors . I believe that this is the real policy of the future , industrial policy coupled with environment policy , or rather environment policy which determines industrial policy .
I should not , of course , like to miss this opportunity to note that one of the derogations granted to Austria in the negotiations was extended as part of this package . It means that we will not contravene Union legislation next year either , because we may continue to use fuels with a low benzene content .
One final comment : this was a first step ; further steps - also in the field of development and mobility - will follow . They must , for the future of our industry and , above all , for the future of our people .
Mr President , the European Union and the Member States must work closely together and liaise with Europe 's motor and oil industries at all times so as to guarantee that pollution is defeated once and for all in the near future .
If the overall social , human and environmental benefits of clean air are to be achieved then strict standards for reducing air pollution must be an imperative .
It is only right and proper that changes be introduced in a structured and coherent manner .
Europe 's motor and oil industries must be able to comply with clearly defined targets in any new legislation , to ensure that they can plan in confidence for the next generation of motor vehicles and invest in better refineries .
On reducing exhaust emissions from passenger cars , I support the proposal that systems be installed in new cars from the year 2000 onward to monitor the durability of anti-pollution equipment in passenger vehicles .
Anti-pollution devices must remain effective for at least 80 000 km or five years from the year 2000 onwards , and for at least 100 000 km from 2005 .
Tax incentives must be used to encourage the early introduction of vehicles containing advanced anti-pollution equipment .
I also support the proposed directive to improve the quality of petrol and diesel fuels in Europe .
By means of this directive no leaded petrol will be sold anywhere in Europe after January 2000 , except where severe socio-economic problems would arise .
Moreover , unleaded petrol and diesel sold after 1 January 2000 will also have to comply with the new environmental specifications .
As a result of this new directive there will be a threefold reduction in the sulphur content of petrol in cars and a seven-fold reduction in the sulphur content of diesel by 2005 .
I would like to congratulate the decision of the European Automobile Manufacturers Association to accept a timetable to cut CO2 emissions in new cars by 25 % by the year 2000 .
The fact that the Commission does not have to bring forward legislation to push this issue through is an indication that the way forward is by consultation between all the interested parties .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , thanks are due to both our rapporteurs .
I have drafted quite a few reports in my time , but I have never before experienced such a good level of cooperation , producing work with such solid technical foundations , which has been presented in such a comradely spirit !
For more than two years , since the Commission tabled its draft directive , the introduction of clean fuels has been under discussion in Europe .
Parliament has given its views on two occasions , clearly stating what is at stake .
Clean fuels directly contribute to reducing air pollution .
Clean fuels allow modern technology to be used in car engines , which will likewise lead to a substantial reduction in fuel consumption .
It will be remembered that several people were rather unwilling to accept this , and obstinately declared during the course of the negotiations that Parliament 's aspirations were unfeasible and far too expensive .
Today , it gives us great satisfaction to hear that several oil companies want to put new fuels on the market as early as the year 2000 , fuels which meet the specifications of the 2005 standard as they stand following conciliation .
Obviously , the positive outcome of the conciliation is already bearing fruit , even before entering into force .
The result of the conciliation is a good one .
Above all , the Parliament delegation has managed to gain acceptance of two important proposals .
The specifications for the year 2005 are not mere indicative values ; they are mandatory .
In addition , it is also possible to phase in more stringent specifications earlier and , as we have just heard , there are already plans to do so .
The fact that the Council presidencies vied with each other to announce the result of the conciliation can certainly be regarded in a positive light , but even so , this sort of thing should not happen again : if we run short of time , we should not allow some issues to be dropped from the agenda just for the sake of producing a result .
A proportion of 30 ppm of lubricant film in fuel is still a target we should be aiming for , and our specifying 50 ppm at this stage will certainly not delay the development of modern technologies .
That is the upper limit value , after all , and there is nothing to stop people providing better fuels .
The motor vehicle industry is now being asked to lead the way in reducing CO2 emissions in Europe .
That it should do so by means of a voluntary agreement is something which Parliament has already criticised on several occasions .
This is not so much because we are questioning whether the 120 g CO2 / km now on the table is sufficient - I think we can live with that - but because the whole procedure seems to me to be rather lacking in transparency .
We should be aware that such an agreement is replacing a proper legislative procedure , i.e. the adoption of a directive by codecision .
I am rather sceptical about whether this Europe-wide test of voluntary agreements will be successful in terms of CO2 reductions .
All those involved should realise what is at stake here .
If it became necessary to take fiscal measures to reach the targets we have agreed , then I would consider this method to have failed .
Even though we have the possibility of cooperating by adopting legislation on monitoring , we should make it clear that voluntary agreements of this kind should be the exception where the environment is concerned .
Mr President , we are now witnessing the culmination of a long process , the results of which will have a major impact on human health and the environment .
What Parliament did in tightening up the provisions of the Commission 's Auto / Oil proposal will , I am sure , be vindicated as wise and balanced . Stricter requirements are to be applied to vehicle specifications and fuel quality by the years 2000 and 2005 .
Member States will also be able to introduce economic incentives to speed progress towards a better environment .
Higher quality fuels automatically lead to lower toxic emissions and encourage the development of catalytic converters for larger diesel engines .
Huge reductions in nitrogen emissions can then be achieved .
Let me use this opportunity to congratulate the rapporteurs on their sterling work .
Mrs Hautala perhaps had the toughest task , but the outcome of her endeavours demonstrates that the EU institutions can work together in the interest of the environment . The overall result is greater than the sum of individual efforts could ever be .
Yet we cannot afford to rest on our laurels . We must build on our success and push ahead along the road towards safer and more environmentally friendly motor cars .
A pro-active approach to the question of fuel consumption can pay dividends .
It should be possible to bring about a 25 % reduction in fuel use by as early as 2005 .
In the longer term we are certain to see breakthroughs for the electric and the hybrid car - the latter running on a combination of electric power and internal combustion .
The challenge here is how to produce more electricity without creating greenhouse and other gases .
We should be looking to hydroelectric , wind and nuclear sources .
Mr President , in ten years ' time , pollution from the Community 's motor vehicles will have been reduced by a total of 70 % compared to what it was in 1990 .
That will be the outcome when the package of the Conciliation Committee , covering cars , light commercial vehicles and fuels , is adopted .
It is a major victory , first and foremost for the environment and for the citizens of Europe .
It is a legislative package which , by improving air quality in Europe , will contribute significantly to raising the quality of life of our citizens .
The package is a shining example of how the Community can achieve decisive results for the benefit of the population of Europe .
And , make no mistake , they are results which the Member States could never have achieved on their own .
The package is also a unique example of how we can succeed - if only the will is there - in combining ambitious legislation with the concern to safeguard a competitive European industry .
The package will ensure that not only will industry be able to maintain its position on the European domestic market , it will also hold its own with the best in the world .
I therefore think that it is appropriate today to congratulate Parliament 's negotiators , and that applies especially to the two rapporteurs , Mr Lange and Mrs Hautala , who have done an excellent job , but there is also good reason to thank Mrs Fontaine and Mr Collins for their efforts in the conciliation negotiations .
Such a result could - as you all know - only have been achieved thanks to a major , well targeted and competent effort on the part of all concerned , including of course the Council under the British Presidency .
Parliament has obtained quite significant concessions from the Council of Ministers in a range of important areas , such as comitology , mandatory standards for 2005 covering the main parameters , bringing forward the requirement for on-board diagnostic systems in diesel and light commercial vehicles , the early and gradual phasing-in of cleaner fuels and many other things .
In addition , it is a package which is secured for the future , a point that many speakers mentioned in the debate .
It contains provisions which will ensure that emission and fuel requirements beyond the year 2005 will be reviewed in the light of developments in air quality standards and technological possibilities offered by new fuels and propulsion systems in the future .
I must confess that , when I put forward the Auto-Oil package on behalf of the Commission two years ago , I did not think that we would make such progress in such a short time , and I have to thank Parliament for that .
The package is of course a compromise and it was therefore only to be expected that not everyone would achieve what they wanted in every detail .
Viewed as a whole , however , there is no doubt in my mind that the package represents such significant progress that it cannot but be adopted .
It is a particular pleasure for me therefore , on behalf of the Commission , to be able to recommend this ambitious package for adoption .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place at 12 noon .
The sitting will be suspended until voting time , since there would be little point in starting the next debate and then interrupting it after a quarter of an hour .
( The sitting was suspended at 11.40 a.m. and resumed at 12 noon )

VOTES
I would remind the House that the vote on the recommendation for second reading ( A4-0278 / 98 ) on coffee extracts and chicory extracts , drawn up by Mr Lannoye on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection , has been postponed to voting time on Wednesday to enable the rapporteur to reach a compromise with the political groups .
Mr Christodoulou 's report ( A4-0296 / 98 ) will also be put to the vote tomorrow , since the deadline for tabling amendments was only yesterday evening .
Report ( A4-0293 / 98 ) by Mr Monfils , on behalf of the Committee on Culture , Youth , Education and the Media , on the proposal for a Council Decision concerning the conclusion of a bilateral agreement between the Community and the Republic of Cyprus on the Republic of Cyprus ' participation in a Community programme within the framework of Community audiovisual policy ( COM ( 98 ) 0242 - C4-0428 / 98-98 / 0138 ( CNS ) )
( Parliament adopted the legislative resolution )
There is nothing new about attempts to legislate on the legal protection of designs and models , the first proposal for Community legislation dating back to 1993 .
As legal traditions in this field are very different , if not divergent , it has been very difficult to arrive at a common position of the Council .
The major practical problem was that of protecting designs of spare parts used in repairs , which created difficulties for many industrial sectors .
The questions raised were so sensitive that the Council finally gave up trying to harmonise the rules .
Whereas some saw this as the antithesis of the single market , I believe it is more reasonable to view it as indicative of the limits to harmonisation .
It is impossible to harmonise all the legislation of 15 countries with their different legal traditions , and it will become even more impossible when the European Union is enlarged to include Eastern European countries which , until recently , were governed by totalitarian communist regimes .
We must not be frightened by this .
Competition can support legislative differences and it is pure fancy to seek a total uniformity which virtually amounts to a fossilising of the law .
Remember that the United States has very different legislation in its various states , and that does not seem to have caused any particular economic weakness !
However , Parliament had wished to include in the directive a ' compensation clause ' which would have applied a system which my group and myself judged to be too complex and above all extremely difficult to implement .
This remains our position , and we considered at the time that the Council had been right to oppose this clause .
As no agreement was reached , a conciliation procedure was opened .
At the end of the day , the compensation clause was not adopted , which seems perfectly reasonable to us as it created great legal uncertainty for designers .
The solution adopted was to ' freeze ' the legal situation of the Member States while allowing them to evolve in the direction of more flexible protection .
Once the directive is amended , spare parts manufacturers and constructors will be invited to conclude a voluntary agreement on the protection of drawings and spare parts , which we believe is a better solution than compulsory uniformity .
In fact , although we did not vote for this report , this was solely because we were opposed to the compensation clause as it had been formulated . We had not in any way lost faith in what is a successful outcome to the conciliation procedure .
In any event , and although I disagree with the rapporteur on this question , I would like to pay tribute to his work and to the conviction he has shown , even if this has not convinced us that the compensation clause is well founded .
Like my colleagues , I voted in favour of the Conciliation Committee 's report on the draft directive concerning the legal protection of designs .
I would like to make it clear , however , that I regret that Parliament 's discussion was confined to the economic and financial interests of the car spare parts industry , while existing legal problems were not considered .
Although I welcome the material effect of Parliament 's proposed ' repairs clause ' as being in the interests of the consumer , introducing it would have thrown all the principles of intellectual property protection overboard .
This compromise also gives us grounds to hope for a legally sound solution in the long term .
I am in full support of effective protection of designs in the EU Member States .
It is a positive development that the legal obstacles to the free exchange of designs are now being removed .
This initiative is absolutely essential to the maintenance of free competition on the internal market .
The fact that there was nevertheless substantial opposition to the directive is due to the disagreement over freedom to protect designs for spare parts .
I myself consistently advocated the view that there should be unimpeded freedom without remuneration to produce and use nonoriginal spare parts with no time-lag for the spare-part manufacturers .
The compromise represented by the text of the Conciliation Committee does not entirely accommodate this view , but I hope that in the longer term it will be possible to achieve improved rules in the spare-part sector with a view to incorporating them into the directive .
I am relieved that agreement on this important legislation has at last been reached between our negotiators from the European Parliament and the Member State governments .
It is of course the question of a ' repairs clause ' which has proved the most thorny aspect of the new design directive .
I am glad to see that no obstacle will be allowed to hinder the free movement of the vehicle spare parts which in Britain many repair businesses use every day .
Whilst I recognise that the ' standstill plus ' formula of this compromise agreement means that other countries could stick to their practices of forcing vehicle owners to go to the manufacturer when they need spare parts , I would recommend that they consider opening up the market in spare parts to garages and the like .
The customer in Britain benefits from the competition between manufacturers and repair companies when it comes to buying vehicle spare parts .
I believe that all European drivers should be able to choose their spare part supplier in the interests of fair competition .
From Parliament 's point of view , neither the conciliation procedure itself nor its result can be said to be satisfactory .
At first , the Council was dilatory in dealing with this important bill , the Luxembourg Presidency passing it on to the British Presidency .
In the course of the negotiations , it became clear that it would not be possible to reach agreement on the contentious ' repairs clause ' .
In the light of the obvious lack of political will to find a common solution to an issue which is so important for the single market , we have to agree with the rapporteur that , on the one hand , the current proposal will allow a common EU-wide legal basis for design protection to be made available to all the sectors concerned , but that on the other hand , it will not allow the legal situation of the repairs industry to deteriorate .
My group therefore voted in favour of the Conciliation Committee 's draft decision .
Lange report ( A4-0314 / 98 )
I welcome this report and agree with the rapporteur that the importance of this legislation cannot be underestimated .
Reductions in vehicle emission are an absolute necessity and the report reflects sensible proposals which will achieve that .
I fully agree with the introduction of on-board diagnostic systems for all vehicles including diesel vehicles and light commercial vehicles .
This is exactly the sort of preventive measures which we need to put in place if we are to minimise environmental pollution .
It is also reasonable to phase in the application of on-board diagnostics .
The rapporteur has shown due regard to public concern in pushing the case for more environmentally friendly vehicles .
While we need to address the problem of how to address pollution from vehicles currently on the road , most of us would agree that the best way forward is the development of a culture of environmentally friendly vehicles .
In this regard I support the proposal for tax incentives to be introduced for the early production of vehicles which have advanced anti-pollution equipment .
Hautala report ( A4-0313 / 98 )
The Conciliation Committee is presenting a package of anti-pollution measures today which involves a series of important economic consequences .
Thanks to Parliament 's efforts , three texts have been adopted .
From these is derived a directive which is directly descended from the recent Auto-Oil programme , an operation which involved the Commission and the motor and oil industries as well as our Parliament .
The priority objective today is to improve the quality of the air that we breathe , and that includes defining a European strategy for the reduction of vehicle emissions , through the launching , at long last , of absolutely clear Community legislation , which will consequently allow industry - especially the motor industry - to plan its sectoral investment with a view to the conversion needed to produce future generations of motor vehicles .
The oil industry , with a kind of self-protective attitude , appears to exaggerate the cost of the investment it considers necessary to prepare the construction of new refineries , which it claims will be a direct burden on motorists . However , we believe that the establishment of rules which actually provide tax reductions for motorists - the main consumers in the sector - may in the end make the necessary investment possible .
The agreement between the Council and Parliament will make it technically possible to improve the quality of the air , thanks to the compulsory provision for adding oxygen to diesel fuel , reducing the content of sulphur , benzene and aromatic substances in normal fuel and reducing emissions of anhydrous carbon .
Under the terms of the directive , leaded fuel will no longer be on sale after the year 2000 , except where climatic conditions are favourable to its use or where very serious economic damage might be caused .
Furthermore , unleaded petrol and environmental diesel will have to obey stricter criteria as from January 2000 .
The terms envisaged are reasonably binding , especially as application will have to be made to the Commission , which will be very sparing in granting derogations and will only do so after duly justified requests and for a very limited period .
The Auto-Oil directives had been the subject of considerable discussion and aroused some agitation in the world of industry .
While nobody disputes the need to protect the environment , it must be admitted that this also has a cost which it would be unreasonable to ignore .
After two readings in Parliament , the common position was sent to the Conciliation Committee .
It is this proposal , unanimously adopted by Parliament 's delegation , which has been submitted to us .
The compromise achieved lies between the positions of the Council of Ministers and the European Parliament .
An extreme ecologist position , unreasonable in economic terms , has thus been avoided .
Nevertheless , it must be pointed out that the specifications adopted are significantly more severe that those initially adopted by the European Commission .
The standards adopted by the Council of Ministers for implementation from 2005 were originally for guidance purposes only . They are now to be made binding .
Most fiercely debated were the specifications for sulphur and aromatics .
It must be admitted that a major effort is being demanded of the oil and car industries .
For this reason , the European legislators must give these industries a guarantee that these standards will be stable and not embark on a race towards ever stricter standards , especially as technological innovations do not make it any easier . We must avoid creating industrial costs which are disproportionate to the benefits in terms of improvements to the environment .
As this common position represents an acceptable compromise , in terms of industrial constraints and protection of the environment , my group had no hesitation in approving it .
As I demonstrated during the debate in Parliament on 17 February this year , I am in favour of the Hautala report .
I am practically the only one who supports it among the Members from my Member State , and today I am again reiterating my support for the agreement reached between the Council and Parliament in the Conciliation Committee on the quality of fuels from the year 2000 and the year 2005 . This is because , as I have already said here in the House and am going to repeat today , cleaner fuels , that is , fuels that cause less pollution , are a crucial step forward in defending the health of European citizens .
Today , as before , my vote is going in the same direction : giving priority to health and to the quality of the air we breathe , and not to the private interests of certain oil companies .
We choose to support the common position because more stringent requirements for the reduction of vehicle emissions will lead to a reduction in air pollutants and hence will benefit human health and the environment .
The identification of the need for a strategy to reduce emissions causing air pollution , with special reference to urban areas , we think reflects a responsible environmental policy because it is in urbanised areas that these problems are particularly acute .
We also think it is a step in the right direction that individual Member States should in special cases be able to require that fuels may only be marketed if they conform to more stringent environmental specifications than those laid down in the directive .
This upholds the right of the Member States to adopt environmental measures that go further than those adopted by the Community .
The encouragement of Member States to make more active use of fiscal incentives , in the form of differentiated excise duties , we think opens up attractive possibilities for the heavier taxation of substances which are especially polluting .
We would , however , point out that there is a problem in that individual Member States cannot act to differentiate excise duties without reference to Council decisions .
The concern for a better environment must not be used as a pretext for increased harmonisation of excise duties .
This is a very positive report . It promotes the two-phase introduction of stricter mandatory emission standards by the years 2000-2005 .
Tax incentives may be used in individual member states to encourage the refitting or scrapping of older vehicles .
More stringent monitoring will be carried out of emission levels .
The ban on lead from 1 January 2000 , as proposed in the Hautala report , will improve petrol and diesel quality .
Member States will be free to introduce tougher requirements , plus a differentiated system of excise duties .
So far , so good .
I also voted in favour of the reports , but what we really need is a strategy for getting petrol- and diesel-driven vehicles off our roads .
As an alternative , we should be looking to new clean fuels such as ethanol and methanol , and to means of transport which are powered in an environmentally friendly way . Examples would be the electric car and various types of hybrid vehicle capable of running off electricity in cities and built-up areas .
González Triviño recommendation ( A4-0295 / 98 )
The report by our colleague Mr Triviño comes at a particularly painful time , and we can only express our condolences to the families affected by the Swissair tragedy .
This recent tragic event makes the report even more pertinent , and we must acknowledge that the risks of air transport apply to all airlines , without exception .
Also , although there is no such thing as zero risk , our sole objective must nevertheless be to strive towards this result , and I welcome the amendments which the rapporteur is seeking to introduce to the Council 's text .
In this respect , I share the Commission 's desire for transparency which enables the consumer to choose in full knowledge of the facts .
We must also combat deregulation and the law of the jungle on prices which lower safety thresholds .
Finally , I would like to repeat that air travel is one of the safest means of transport , if not the safest of all , and I believe the European Parliament must not lose sight of the need to legislate in other sectors , in particular road transport , in order to significantly reduce the carnage we see on our roads every year .
Remember that there are fewer than 2000 deaths a year worldwide in aircraft accidents . In France alone , there are 8000 deaths a year on the roads .
I am happy to lend my support to the efforts of both our national governments and the author of this report to make our skies safer for the travelling public , airline staff and all of us who live under the flightpaths of Europe 's busy airports .
It is only reasonable to demand that non-European aircraft using our airspace meet the highest safety standards .
This report is right to ask for swift inspections of such aircraft where the authorities have concerns that they may not meet international safety standards .
Just as important though is the call in this report for the public to be informed about those aircraft operators whose planes are grounded , as well as being told what corrective steps have been taken to put problems with these aircraft right .
Perhaps all MEPs speaking on this subject should declare an interest , as we need to use air travel to carry out our parliamentary duties at home and here in Strasbourg - but in truth all of us , whether we use air travel or not , have a vital interest in the safety of the aircraft that we see flying above our homes .
I know that the people I represent in the area around the busy Manchester Airport will want these safety proposals to be adopted as soon as possible .
( The sitting was suspended at 12.25 p.m. and resumed at 3 p.m. )

Climate change
The next item is the Commission statement on its strategy following the Kyoto Conference on climate change .
I give the floor to Mrs Bjerregaard , for the Commission .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , in the context of preparations for the ministerial meeting in Buenos Aires , I am happy to be able to speak to you today on climate change .
Of course I hope that a few more Members will be here in due course .
Both in Rio and in Kyoto the EU showed that , by taking a lead , we can secure agreement on a problem of such global complexity as climate change , even though the positions of the main participants at the start were far apart .
The EU can also deliver results when it comes to its internal obligations .
The most recent data show that the Community is well on the way to stabilising CO2 emissions in the year 2000 at the 1990 level .
Since Kyoto , the EU has dealt with the matter at the highest political level .
We have continued our lead and sought to ensure that the Kyoto Protocol will take effect .
Let me just mention four milestones .
To begin with , the EU and its Member States signed the Protocol in April this year .
Now everything is being done to persuade the other parties to sign as well .
It is of crucial significance that the American Government and the Russian Federation are showing the political will to stand by their commitments and are signing the Protocol .
That should happen as far as possible before Buenos Aires .
When I meet the American and , I hope also , the Russian ministers in a few days , therefore , I shall be pressing for an informal ministerial meeting in Tokyo .
In that connection , I was pleased at the efforts made by Parliament to persuade Members of the American Congress to ratify the Protocol .
That is an important point , and we should all work to achieve a result .
Secondly , we succeeded at the Council meeting on the environment in June in reaching agreement on sharing the burden of the EU target among the Member States .
That is also an important message to the rest of the world .
Thirdly , I published a communication on climate change in June which lays down the first steps in an outline strategy on climate change for the EU .
Fourthly and finally , I held a meeting yesterday with all the ten applicant countries in which the very subject of climate and the meeting in Buenos Aires were high on the agenda .
I am happy to report to Parliament that there is full backing for the EU 's line and that there is the political will to support it .
Many of the countries will also be ensuring that the Protocol is signed before Buenos Aires .
These four concrete actions have of course increased the EU 's credibility , and that makes it possible to continue our lead .
It is our intention to get Kyoto put into effect , so now we can concentrate on those questions which must be resolved in Buenos Aires .
What do we want from Buenos Aires ?
Well , in my opinion the meeting is of the utmost importance in securing a common action plan which will map out the basic principles for the implementation of the Protocol .
The EU must again take the strain in ensuring that we make substantial progress in Buenos Aires , even in some of the difficult areas .
I hope to return from Buenos Aires with a comprehensive and ambitious action plan , together with a timetable for solving the remaining problems from Kyoto .
In any such action plan , we must be open to those which may help us to achieve our environmental objectives over a longer timescale , including the flexibility mechanisms .
In this context , the set of principles indicated in the resolution is also particularly interesting and merits further consideration .
However , we should not foster any illusions that it will be easy to find solutions when we have the so-called umbrella group , on the one hand , headed by the USA , which is calling for unrestricted application of the flexibility mechanisms , and G77 and China , on the other hand , which are committed to a more cautious and controlled application .
We must also not forget the other controversy influencing the negotiations , which has to do with a meaningful involvement of the developing countries as a condition for ratification by the USA .
Here , as in Kyoto , it may be EU leadership that secures a result .
And here I agree with Parliament that we must grasp every available opportunity for a dialogue .
However , let me take this opportunity to stress that early action on the home front remains one of the cornerstones of the Kyoto Protocol and one of the most important contributions to the fulfilment of the parties ' obligations .
An important element in the national endeavours , not least in the EU , will therefore be joint and coordinated measures .
For that reason , I am particularly pleased that Parliament in its resolution refers to the need for economic and fiscal instruments .
In many areas , the EU is in the lead as regards energy and carbon taxes , environmental agreements with industry and the promotion of renewable energy sources .
We have already made progress in this way in combating emissions , and call on other countries to follow our example .
I am aiming to secure further progress on these issues in Buenos Aires , also on the principles we have worked out , and get them reflected in the action plan that we hope will be adopted .
In its communication on climate change , the Commission has defined a number of key principles regarding the flexibility mechanisms .
I am convinced that they can play a major role in fulfilling our commitments at least cost .
I therefore endorse the emphasis in the resolution on the need to use this flexibility .
I would , however , stress that flexibility which covers trade and other activities presupposes that the participants are able to monitor their own emissions - in other words , no trade without tracking .
It is crucial that we make progress in Buenos Aires on laying down the rules which are the precondition for flexibility mechanisms .
Let me further stress that strict supervision , hence also the possibility of imposing sanctions , must go hand in hand with the implementation of the Protocol .
If there is any relaxation in the enforcement of the Protocol , so that some get a free ride on the strength of other countries ' efforts , we shall never be able to combat the effects of climate change .
I therefore urge the participants in Buenos Aires to agree on the rules for the implementation of the agreement .
Finally , it is my firm conviction that it is incumbent on the industrialised countries first and foremost to present proposals for the solution of the climate problem in practice .
Wecreated it after all .
Once we have worked out clear rules and secured strict enforcement of the flexibility mechanisms , it will make much more sense to talk to the developing countries about their obligations .
Until then , we must work more closely with them on the questions that preoccupy them most , such as mechanisms for sustainable development and technology transfer .
In order to follow up the meeting in Buenos Aires , and taking into account the national strategies which the Member States adopt , the Commission intends to present a wider-ranging implementation strategy for climate change in the first half of 1999 .
An important step in the meantime will be for the Council to adopt as quickly as possible those proposals which are already on the table , for example the Commission 's proposal for energy taxes or the proposals for a more effective transport policy .
I also expect that the climate change question will be gradually integrated into policies in other sectors , as requested by the European Council at its meeting in Vienna .
Mr President , I will close by thanking Parliament once again for the constructive efforts it has made to disseminate knowledge of the climate change problem , and for the support it has given to the Commission with a view to implementation .
Mr President , I should like to thank you for your statement , Commissioner and , before the beginning of the debate , recall once more the five principles on which the actual rules on climate protection , agreed in Rio , are based : the principle of common but differentiated responsibility ; the principle of taking account of the special needs of developing countries ; the precautionary principle ; the principle of sustainable development ; and the principle that measures taken to combat climate change have to comply with WTO rules on avoiding unjustified discrimination .
It is this last point in particular that I wish to recall , because if we are going to talk about solidarity and fairness in this debate , and if we are going to say - and here I can only reinforce what you said , Commissioner - that it is necessary for industrialised countries who , after all , have produced and still do produce high emissions of climate-damaging gases , to work harder at reducing them and set a good example - as we are trying to do in the European Union with the ' bubble ' , where we are also taking common but differentiated responsibility - then we also have to be fair when we are dealing with the various flexibility mechanisms .
We must state clearly here , as already stated in the Kyoto Protocol , that these must be additional and not exclusive measures . We also need clear indications of how emissions trading will be monitored and measured .
The same method of measurement must be used throughout the world , to avoid the developing countries thinking that the industrialised countries want to save themselves work , at their expense as it were , for a second time .
Technology transfer is a particularly important issue , and I eagerly await the action plan , because I believe that we in the Union can only assume the role of leader here if we ourselves forge ahead with measures , which in the end not only serve to protect the climate , but in actual fact also serve to modernise our economy .
Political will is presumably the most decisive factor , and I believe - as Mrs Brundtland said many years ago - that if the politicians making today 's decisions will not be alive when the consequences of their decisions are known , then we politicians who are alive today have a duty to act differently , so that the climate does not change as much as it is feared it would do , if it was simply business as usual .
Thank you for your statement , Commissioner .
The Group Chief Executive of British Petroleum ( BP ) said yesterday that the oil companies would suffer if they continued to dismiss the evidence of climate change .
It is high time that Exxon and the other oil companies in the Global Climate Coalition realised that , if they do not change their attitude , they will have to face retaliatory measures by European consumers .
We have not acted in this way so far , but we may have to start down this road , because this group of companies is the main obstacle to the implementation of the Kyoto decisions .
Turning now to the text of the resolution which Parliament is going to adopt , it is plain that this is a very different animal from previous resolutions .
This text aims to establish a strategy for Buenos Aires , particularly with regard to the flexibility mechanisms , and does not just reaffirm our completely unaltered position on climate change .
We accept the full implementation of the Kyoto decisions , including the flexibility mechanisms or emissions trading .
However , these mechanisms must obey certain principles .
Firstly , they must be complementary and not absolute , which means that they must not under any circumstances replace domestic measures for reducing emissions .
Secondly , the overall objective of all the efforts of Kyoto and Buenos Aires is to obtain , in time , the progressive convergence of emission rights on a per capita basis among all the countries of the world .
It is right for this to be included , because the United States and Europe have a per capita share of emissions which is much higher than the per capita emissions of many of the countries of the world .
Thirdly - and this is important for Buenos Aires - it is essential to clarify the emissions trading , joint implementation and clean development mechanisms .
What is open for negotiation ?
This is not clear at the moment .
Who will do the negotiating ?
By what amount should each emission right be reduced over the years ?
Who controls the emission rights and the way in which companies comply with the obligations of the trading mechanism ?
None of this is clear to me at the moment and , so far , I have not seen any European Union positions which enlighten me as to the stance which will be taken in Buenos Aires .
It must also be made clear that the emissions trading mechanisms cannot just be full of hot air .
Commissioner , we are behind you . We support your attempts to ensure that a policy reversing climate change is adopted by the Members of the Commission .
So far this has not occurred .
The ecotaxes are at a standstill in the Council , but the Commission could already have done more .
The policy in favour of renewable energy and energy efficiency continues to exist only in statements and communications and has not yet been transformed into a mechanism , into an operational policy of the European Union .
We are behind you , Commissioner , but we are watching carefully .
Mr President , Kyoto was a great success , partly due to the powerful input of Commissioner Bjerregaard .
But now it is all to do again in Buenos Aires .
These flexible mechanisms have to be worked out .
We have to look at ' joint implementation ' , at the ' clean development mechanism ' , at ' emissions trading ' and all these flexible mechanisms , and if they can be sorted out satisfactorily this will hopefully persuade the United States to come into line on Kyoto and actually do something about the CO2 problem .
We have looked here at all manner of important questions - sinks , trading , hot air - all of which need to be resolved in Buenos Aires .
But above all , and here I agree with Mr Pimenta , something has to be done about caps .
We must ensure that countries do not use emissions trading as a way of getting round the domestic measures which they ought to take .
So this emissions trading must be subject to a ceiling .
I should like to ask the Commissioner if she will clarify her intentions in this regard .
Lastly , I note that the transport sector accounts for some 25 % of greenhouse gases and that this percentage is set to rise further .
By the year 2010 it will be 40 % .
Looking at the voluntary agreement with the automobile industry , it just is not good enough .
I should like to hear what the Commissioner has to say about the voluntary agreement she has secured here with the automobile industry concerning CO2 .
In conclusion , I would urge the Commissioner to make Buenos Aires as big a success as Kyoto was .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I do not expect you to contribute to the increase in hot air , Commissioner , but to give us clear information .
Like a number of other colleagues , I would have liked to know what the guidelines actually say .
On the one hand , you spoke about ' milestones ' and ' taking action at home ' , but on the other , you repeatedly emphasised the flexibility mechanisms .
How extensive should domestic measures be , compared with flexibility mechanisms ?
In Kyoto you talked about a ratio of 50 / 50 , and the Greens have tabled an amendment to that effect which will be put to the vote on Thursday .
I would be grateful if you could tell us clearly what the ratio is and what your position is on the amendment tabled by the Greens .
I actually believe that the Environment Committee 's motion for a resolution does not go far enough .
To us it is tantamount to an act of political bankruptcy as far as climate protection is concerned , because it means that we are bowing to the interests of industry and the United States .
Reference is in fact made here to a quantitative ceiling on flexibility , but unfortunately , Mr Pimenta , the motion never once mentions the tax on energy and CO2 emissions .
We made a proposal for specific measures and for a demonstration model .
Unfortunately , it was not supported by a majority of the committee .
On the subject of emissions trading , the motion reads as though it had been dictated by the USA .
It states that unlimited emissions trading should be possible .
That is a complete reversal of policy on climate protection in this House .
This is shameful , because to fail to set limits on emissions trading is to undermine the Kyoto Protocol .
We all know that it is cheaper for industrialised countries to buy hot air , than to implement even the simplest energy-saving measures at home .
We are opposing this about-turn on climate protection policy , because we know that giving up a consistent climate policy with its associated measures also means losing our leading role .
Without action on climate both at national and European level , emissions will have increased by at least 8 % by the year 2010 , rather than , as promised at Kyoto , being reduced by 8 % .
I too should like to endorse what Mr Eisma said , and ask the Commissioner to say a few words about the voluntary commitment made by the motor vehicle industry .
I find the current proposal absurd .
I do not believe that we can talk of success , when we are giving the industry 22 years to reduce petrol consumption by just one single litre .
That is , I believe , a failure for climate policy .
It really is high time to take action !
Mr President , let me remind you that we went to Kyoto with the goal of reducing DEU emissions by 15 % .
Let me also remind you that the IPCC says that we need a 60 % reduction of emissions by the year 2100 .
Let me also remind you that we all agreed that in the long term the emission rights all over this planet should be measured on a per capita basis .
Article 3 ( 3 ) suggests that afforestation and reafforestation measures could be taken into account in order not to reduce our quota of emissions .
On the other hand we have the clear development mechanism which allows non-Annex I countries to become partners and allows us to finance projects which are targeted to reduce emissions in non-Annex I countries - developing countries , etc .
There is a big risk : the threat to biodiversity .
Plantations in non-Annex I countries could be financed by industrialised countries .
We have seen what that has led to in Indonesia .
I should like to refer to the excellent paper of the Austrian presidency concerning forestry - the paper which was submitted to the subsidiary body for scientific and technical advice .
The Austrian presidency says that we have always to consider the biodiversity issue .
It also says that forest management should not be taken into account to meet commitments for Article 3 ( 3 ) .
This is a guarantee that no country can continue to convert forests into fast-growing plantations .
We should stick to that line and congratulate the Austrians for making this proposal .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , 15 000 US scientists recently signed a petition categorically refuting the concept of the greenhouse effect as purveyed by the media .
They claim , with the evidence to back them up , that the increase in carbon dioxide during the 20th century has had no negative impact on global meteorology , on climate and temperature , and that the predictions of catastrophe are not borne out by experience .
On the contrary , there has been a distinct acceleration in the growth rate of plants and thus in agricultural production .
However , nobody has been able to escape the global propaganda on the greenhouse effect .
The official thesis is that carbon dioxide emissions are warming the planet .
A series of misfortunes will befall us if we do not quickly close the Pandora 's box of industry .
The polar icecaps and glaciers will melt , sea levels rise , low-lying ground and many islands will be submerged , tornadoes will increase in number and in violence , tropical storms will penetrate to our own regions , rainfall patterns will be disturbed , droughts will increase and render entire countries barren , etc . , etc .
It remains to be seen , Mr President , what are in fact , behind this catastrophic vision , the true interests of the internationalist lobby which has created this global threat .
I am not speaking about the greenhouse effect , but the global socialisation of the economy , by means of ecological standards which will apply to some countries and not to others .
The developing countries which will soon be producing 50 % of greenhouse gases have been exempted , which one can understand , from any need to reduce their emissions .
Is this not , and I ask the question seriously , a new type of threat ?
The US scientists have organised a response , under the authority of Frederick Seitz , a former President of the US Academy of Sciences .
Mr President , even if your criticisms were correct , Mr Gollnisch , it would still make sense to save energy .
By so doing , we save our resources and reduce our dependence on imports .
At the end of the day , whether the climatologists are right or not is a scientific issue , and not something that can be decided in a parliament .
Here , it is more a question of taking precautionary measures .
For the first time , we politicians are faced with a very plausible-sounding hypothesis , to which we have to react , and if we do not react , then we might make the biggest mistake ever made by humanity .
That is why I think it is good that there is , after all , a relatively broad consensus in Europe in favour of reducing greenhouse gases .
Now I should like to address a few remarks to the Commission .
It was a good speech , Commissioner , congratulations , and I also believe that you meant what you said .
However , in the end , it is not the success of our speeches that will be measured , but that of our policy instruments .
We will measure to see whether we really have emitted fewer greenhouse gases or not .
And that is where I have my doubts .
Because what we are trying to do in Europe is to stabilise in an unstable situation . Take the transport sector , for example : cars are improving , but there are more cars , and in a few years ' time , CO2 emissions from cars will presumably be much higher than they are today , even though each car is consuming a little less .
Households have not seen any change at all .
Household appliances are certainly improving , that is true , but households are increasing , both in size and number , because families are becoming smaller .
You can check up on all of this .
The Commission has carried out its own investigations and has described all this itself .
I am only referring to your own data .
This means that we have to go much further than the commitments made in our papers at present .
We have to translate them into practical policy .
That quickly brings us to the question - not of recognising the issues , we are all agreed on those - but of funding .
How do we finance technology , which is of course often available , in such a way that it will be used to reduce greenhouse gas emissions ?
In my experience , at least , this raises just one question : how to fund long- or medium-term programmes .
We are in a position to finance the Channel Tunnel , in such a way that those putting in the money only see a return on it in umpteen years ' time .
Why are we not able to prefinance improvements to our buildings in Europe , thus saving huge amounts of energy ?
It would be worth it !
Even with low energy prices , we are obviously not in a position to do this .
We have often made lofty declarations on renewable sources of energy too , but I still do not know how that is supposed to work .
You have my support on this , but how can it be done , given the low energy prices we have at present and the rightly criticised lack of an energy tax ?
Ecological tax reform is a sine qua non for changing the course of energy policy .
Finally , a piece of advice for Buenos Aires . In Kyoto , the fact that the American representatives presented a united front proved to work very much to their advantage .
Would it not be possible for the Europeans to form a single team , comprising national and European members of Parliament and the Commission , and to present a united front in Buenos Aires ?
After all , our views are , to a large extent , the same .
But we could play a much greater role there if we were more organised .
That is a plea to Parliament , but also to the Commission .
Mr President , unless the Kyoto Protocol is ratified and comes into force within the next few years , we shall in all probability never see the reduction targets achieved in practice .
The reason for that is that a race against time has been built into the Protocol .
For every year that passes with emissions of greenhouse gases still rising , the need for action becomes greater and the time to take that action shorter .
In the USA , for example , the postponement of ratification by three years will mean that the annual reduction effort almost doubles .
It is thus very worrying to hear reports that the Clinton Administration is considering deferment of ratification until after the next presidential elections .
Such a decision will only serve the interests of those who want to see the Kyoto Protocol overturned .
It will not be many years before proposals for a renegotiation of the commitments can be expected to find favour .
This Parliament should not just give its formal support to the work on climate , but should also make an especially concrete contribution to seeing that the results attained are converted into progress in the real world .
I have therefore tabled an amendment with the actual wording of the Kyoto Protocol to the joint resolution , and I hope that Parliament will vote for my amendment .
Mr President , Commissioner , the EU undeniably played a decisive role at Kyoto .
Without Europe 's constructive input , the conference might well have been a failure .
We have nurtured a delicate plant ; let us now ensure that we tend it in Buenos Aires in December .
In its communication ' Climate Change - Towards an EU Post-Kyoto Strategy ' , the Commission outlines what will be required to meet the Union 's ambitious target of an 8 % reduction in CO2 emissions by 2008-2012 .
This will not be feasible in my view without some kind of economic leverage , for example in the shape of a carbon tax .
Sweden already taxes CO2 quite heavily , but the Kyoto package accorded us a 4 % increase in emissions .
The need for this demonstrates the downside of having opted to decommission two nuclear power plants - a decision I personally deplore .
Maximum efforts should be made to meet the Kyoto targets , but we still need to keep a sense of proportion . By way of illustration , the Swedish reactors earmarked for closure produce more or less the same quantity of electricity as all the world 's wind power facilities put together .
People are rightly calling for motorists to moderate their fuel consumption , but consider the following scenario .
If Sweden switches to electricity from Danish coal-fired plants as an alternative to nuclear energy from the decommissioned reactors in the south , the CO2 emitted will match the output of half of all the cars on the country 's roads . Not to mention the fact that , according to WHO , sulphur emissions in Europe alone are responsible for around ten thousand premature deaths per year .
Recently the idea of carbon sinks has been put forward . Combustion gases would be fed into underground rock formations capable of binding the CO2 permanently .
Has the Commission any plans to investigate and cost this technology in the run-up to Buenos Aires ?
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I have three observations to make in the debate .
First of all , it is important to make the point that responsibility for achieving the objectives set in Kyoto rests primarily with the Member States .
They must say how and by what measures they propose to achieve them .
The Union for its part must establish the framework within which measures can be implemented and its role is primarily to coordinate and support .
Secondly , the flexible mechanisms , including the emissions trading introduced into the Protocol by the United States , must be regarded as an additional means of fulfilling the pledges on greenhouse gas reduction .
Indeed , one of the main objectives at November 's Buenos Aires meeting will be to agree on the balance between measures which the countries must take themselves and the proportion of their emissions they can trade , for example whether the ratio should be three to four or one to four .
Flexible mechanisms can play a significant part in helping Europe keep her promises on lower costs in order to ensure the competitiveness of European industry .
From this point of view , we have to favour the use of these mechanisms , subject to certain restrictions and following the step-by-step approach proposed by the Commission .
Thirdly , climate change has to be anchored more firmly in sectoral policy .
Policy on the prevention of climate change necessitates a redefining of a whole range of European policies on energy management , and possibly of sectoral objectives too .
Lastly , as you have already indicated , Commissioner , we must press the United States to ratify the Protocol as swiftly as possible .
According to some sources the US Congress is now reluctant to ratify the Protocol because it is unwilling to cut emissions in the USA .
We must urge it to ratify as quickly as possible , without making any concessions which would turn this Protocol into an instrument which allowed the emission of greenhouses gases to continue .
Mr President , Commissioner , this debate gives us the opportunity to recall that summits often serve to enunciate major principles and to conclude major agreements , while the most arduous work remains to be done .
Often , moreover , the timetable proves extremely frustrating .
We know that New York 1997 did not fulfil the promise of Rio 1992 . This is not only because we are dealing with often wavering political commitment , but also because of objective difficulties , related in particular to different - if not opposing - perceptions on the part of the industrialised nations of the North and the industrialising nations of the South , and also because within the same major blocs there can be significantly different levels of productivity and thus of competition between individual countries .
These difficulties fuel the tendency towards pragmatism , and when you consider what can become of international negotiations on authorised CO2 emissions , there is reason to wonder if we are indeed dealing with major principles and ambitions or whether we are not moving towards progress in pragmatism and effectiveness .
Personally , I am not so sure that it is essential to decide one way or the other .
The important thing is for the debate to move forward and become richer .
We now know that standards must be imposed , but also that this is not enough .
National laws and regulations must also be passed and their application monitored . But that still is not enough .
They must be enacted at European level and their application monitored .
Yet still there is a long way to go . There is an increasing need for a pro-active and inventive European diplomacy which makes it possible both to standardise and to encourage , with the means both to penalise and to motivate .
The important thing is to understand that all economic activity has an impact on the environment and that the sooner we include the environment in international economic policy , the more we will be able to reduce its cost and preserve its capacity to create jobs .
In other words , we must on the one hand continue to enunciate our major principles , because we have no reason to give up making demands at such a level . Yet on the other hand , we must also become aware of what is at stake in terms of quality of life , our living environment , food , water and air quality , as well as in terms of public health and , quite simply , the psychological comfort of being able to live in restabilised climates .
We must also take into account the constraints , realising that production costs can include social dumping and also environmental dumping , but above all take into account the pressure which the consumerism of the North places on this level of the production cost .
It is a question of highlighting the benefits by demonstrating how the environment can bring new jobs .
The environment must therefore be included as an organic component of sustainable development , which means including it in the WTO negotiations .
Mr President . I should like to make three points on Kyoto and Buenos Aires , obviously without in any way claiming to be exhaustive .
The reduction targets are already a step backwards compared with the earlier targets set in Toronto , those set by the climate alliance and the Rio targets .
So we only have a basic level of agreement .
Secondly , we should be aware that the amount of CO2 we are emitting each day is the same as that previously emitted over 3000 years put together .
I do not need 1000 American scientists to tell me that this cannot be sensible , or that it cannot be a good thing . I do not need experts to tell me ; common sense is quite enough .
If we now recognise this , then we should also recognise that the greenhouse problem is not just any old problem , but probably one of the greatest that mankind has ever had to face .
Traditional energy policy is on a crash course .
I think most of its pilots did their training on the Titanic .
The icebergs are clearly visible , and they are all saying : ' Full steam ahead ' .
As regards the costs , when we debate energy policy and climate problems , we talk almost exclusively about funding .
I ask you , ladies and gentlemen , what chance a society has , which is prepared to invest in all kinds of things , but obviously is not prepared to invest in its own future and thus in the survival of its own species .
From an ethical point of view , I believe that it is only natural that this investment should begin with us .
Mr President , Buenos Aires is about working out the rules and implementing what was agreed at Kyoto .
The biggest political problem we still face is the lack of political will by the United States of America , as the world 's largest emitter of greenhouse gases , to ratify .
If the US does not ratify the whole thing will fall apart .
So once again it seems to me that the burden falls on the European Union to work on this political problem and to take a lead in the negotiations .
We need to remember that none of the joint implementation mechanisms can begin to work until the majority of the parties have ratified the Kyoto Protocol .
There are still enormous amounts of detail to be worked out on joint implementation and the clean development mechanisms .
We have whole rafts of questions still to be resolved such as : will there be bi-liability in emissions trading ; how will the clean technology transfer mechanism actually work ; what price would the south be paid for its emissions units ; how will carbon sinks be measured ; and how can we avoid trading super-heated air ?


One could go on for half an hour with these unresolved questions .
There are fears that emissions trading could be used by the West to avoid real cuts domestically .
That will simply not solve the problem of climate destabilisation .
If we simply go round the world trading what we already have , we will get nowhere .
I would ask any Bangaladeshi whether they are interested in the climate change problem just at the moment with two-thirds of their country under water .
It is very important that , despite the risk of annoying the US negotiators , we demand some sort of quantitative ceiling on the use of the flexibility mechanisms to ensure the majority of reductions are made domestically .
The current US thinking on trading prices is far too low and assumes that the United States will only seek to reduce its home emissions by about 3 % from the trend line .
If that is the case we have to ask if there is the political will to sustain a free market in permits .
Emissions trading must be built on the principle of equal per capita entitlements ; this is very important to bear in mind as we go to Kyoto .
To come back briefly to what Rolf Linkohr said , it seems to me that the European Union does not present itself as a team .
I do not simply mean the gap between Parliament and Commission , which meant that MEPs last time felt they were trailing around the edges and not being treated in any kind of inclusive way .
The Commission also has a responsibility to bind in the Member States so that we speak with a much more coherent voice .
In conclusion , emissions trading should be arranged in such a way as to encourage developing countries , as well as our own , to move away from fossil fuels .
We have to go with the principle of contraction and convergence over a longer period than set down in Kyoto .
Clearly , Buenos Aires will not be the end of the story .
Climate change must remain high on our agenda in the European Union and we need to return to it on a daily basis , since we are certainly not about to implement our own promises with the mechanisms we have here on our home ground at the moment .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , after ten long days of negotiations , a protocol was agreed in Kyoto to reduce the gas emissions responsible for global warming .
The Protocol was signed by 38 countries out of the 160 represented at the world summit .
For nearly all the countries , it means cutting the trend in emissions by between 20 % and 40 % .
This is a very modest step , but a positive one considering the background , and it is a first practical commitment which will have considerable repercussions at many levels .
But there are still some problems to be resolved in order to make the agreement operative : implementation of targets , definition of negotiable emission licences , application of the participation agreement between industrialised countries and developing countries , and not least , as other colleagues have said , ratification by the signatory countries .
There are various causes of emissions into the atmosphere : not just road traffic and industry , but also enteric fermentation of animals , various types of agricultural crops , the use of solvents and the destruction of the forests .
According to the forecasts , if the world continues on the current path , average global temperature and sea level will rise more rapidly than it ever has in the whole history of human civilisation .
The areas particularly at risk are those where sea level is critical : countless Pacific islands and all the small island states of the Caribbean and Africa , as we have shown in the basic report of the working group which I chair in the ACP-EU Joint Assembly , which will meet next week in Brussels .
All the most vulnerable states facing the greatest difficulties are involved and contributing .
It is vital to have a serious action programme , with the essential contribution of farmers and industry , and to publish a green paper on economic and fiscal instruments - including fiscal incentives - capable of reversing the trend of this climate change which is causing serious damage to the terrestrial and aquatic ecosystem , seasonal disturbance , erosion of coastlines and hence major problems .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , any discussion of Kyoto and Buenos Aires should of course also take account of the measures we are adopting .
There is one sector in the European Union in which CO2 emissions are increasing out of all proportion , and that is the transport sector .
Since 1990 , they have increased by 11 % .
In the first quarter of 1998 in the European Union , transport alone was responsible for pumping 179 million tonnes of CO2 into the air , which means that each of us - whether a Commissioner , MEP , baby or pensioner - consumes around 150 kilograms of petrol every three months .
We have to make a start here ; we have to do something !
We have a commitment from the European motor vehicle industry , which wants to tackle the problem .
I was even somewhat surprised by the scale of the industry 's undertaking .
To that extent , my assessment is rather different from that of Mrs Breyer .
The motor vehicle industry is offering to cut average consumption by 25 % , purely by taking technical measures .
If , in addition , we take political measures - whether it be tax incentives or car labelling - the impact could be even greater .
The approach itself is very sensible , but as so often , the devil is in the detail .
A look at the agreement and how it is to be implemented prompts a number of questions .
It states that a revision will only be possible from 2003 and that , at that time , checks will be made to see whether these technical measures are proving effective .
Unfortunately , the procedure to be applied here is not clear .
In the agreement , it states that the details will be settled in an exchange of letters between the industry and the Commission .
In spite of the high degree of confidence that we have in the Commission , we cannot regard simply having a future exchange of letters as satisfactory .
Secondly , the motor vehicle industry makes several assumptions , about fuels and about various other things , which have to hold true .
The Commission says , ' the assumptions will definitely hold true ' , but what happens if they do not ?
That is left completely unresolved .
We need clear rules to cover this eventuality .
Nor is it clear what happens if individual firms , or the motor vehicle industry as a whole , fail to comply with the agreement .
That raises the question of sanctions , namely how we can punish somebody for implementing technical measures which prove to be insufficient .
We need to improve the situation and establish rules .
A third point : how do we actually deal with non-European manufacturers , who after all also sell their cars here ?
There would certainly be a distortion of competition if the German , French or Italian manufacturers were to make reductions and others not .
They should , therefore , also be covered by the agreement .
Only when these three outstanding issues are clarified , will Parliament be able to endorse this agreement .
Mr President , as we have already heard , there are many actors involved in what we have to do in order to meet our responsibilities .
I am quite convinced that some of these actors think we do not mean what we say .
Therefore , we have to make it quite clear that if there have to be changes in behaviour and technology they must be made or else there will be penalties .
We know that at least one third of emissions come from the transport sector .
I agree with what my colleague , Bernd Lange , has said .
It is not simply a question of car manufacturers and the technology they employ ; the governments have been particularly timid in bringing forward incentives , shall we say , for people to use vehicles other than their cars so they are not persuading people to do so .
As far as energy is concerned , we have not seen any improvement in the sort of measures which should be taken : the rational use of energy , for example , and the concentration on cleaner energy sources .
I should like to know what has happened to the thinking behind the rational planning in the gas and electricity distribution sectors draft directive .
The Commission states in its communication on energy efficiency that it feels this directive is still needed .
This shows that there has to be coordination .
Even in this Parliament , if we are honest , we do not coordinate our efforts : the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection , the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , the Committee on Research , Technological Development and Energy and the Committee on Transport and Tourism are not making a cohesive policy move which would help us to meet the obligations we entered into at Kyoto .
If we cannot even do it in our own Parliament , we should not preach to others .
I would ask the Commissioner to make sure that , in her work as the lead Commissioner on this subject , she forms a team with Commissioner Papoutsis , Commissioner Kinnock and Commissioner Fischler , the Commissioners most closely concerned .
I am asking for cohesive action and for it to be made much clearer to the citizens how exactly these targets will be met - even if it is the hard way .
We could adopt the easy way .
We have been criticised on some parts of our resolution which make it look as though we favour the easy way , in other words bribing other people to take the measures .
We must take some of them ourselves .
We do not have a great deal of time .
We have seen appalling weather incidents this summer which have cost lives and caused devastation right across the world .
There is a link between that instability and our failure to take the necessary measures .
Mr President , thank you for the debate , which shows clearly that there is strong commitment on these problems in Parliament too .
Let me comment on some of the crucial questions which have been raised .
Firstly I have to say to those - Mrs Graenitz and others - who said how much they looked forward to the adoption of an action plan , so that it would be possible to see progress in connection with the Buenos Aires meeting : we are doing what we can in our preparations , and it is quite definitely also my view that it should end with an action plan staking out clear guidelines for the problems that remain .
In that connection , I do not entirely understand Mrs Pollack 's remarks on the Member States and the Commission .
One of the main reasons why the European Union was successful in achieving a result in Kyoto was that there was very close cooperation between the Member States and the Commission .
This close cooperation continues .
In my introductory presentation , I pointed out that we succeeded in securing a result on the sharing of burdens arising from the new targets set in Kyoto at the Council meeting in June , and I referred to the communication the Commission has presented which will be discussed at the Council meeting in October .
I also stressed the support from the applicant countries in Eastern and Central Europe , which I consider crucial and which may also help strengthen our position in the impending negotiations , for I share the view expressed by many that we should of course do what we can to bring the Americans on side .
This is important to achieving any result at all in this area .
It must not mean , however , that we are departing from the principle - and this is an important point that Mr Pimenta also mentioned in his contribution - that these flexible mechanisms must be supplementary .
That is emphasised very clearly in the Kyoto text , and it has been the basis of our approach in all the preparatory work .
It also means that we think it necessary to have supervision .
It is necessary to have rules governing such action , and that was why I used the phrase ' no trading without tracking ' .
Many speakers made the point that transport is one of the greatest problems and that transport accounts for a substantial proportion of total CO2 emissions .
I think Mr Eisma was the first to raise this issue , but Mr Linkohr , Mr Lange and several others followed with points to make on transport .
That was one of the reasons why we presented the communication on CO2 emissions from cars , which was based on three lines of action .
One was an attempt to get a voluntary agreement with the car industry .
We have such an agreement with the car industry , which means a reduction of 15 % .
Not 35 % , but still a significant contribution .
In addition , the communication proposed that there should be a monitoring mechanism , on which we have also presented a proposal , and that there should be a directive which would directly require fuel consumption labelling in vehicles .
Such a directive has been adopted in the Commission and will soon be before Parliament for consideration .
So we share Parliament 's view that transport is one of the areas which we must take very seriously and in which there is much to be gained , but also one of course in which there are great difficulties .
Several speakers - not least Mr Linkohr - raised the question of financing .
We have proposals on the table covering this aspect too .
I earnestly appeal to Parliament to help get some measures adopted in the Council .
We all know the sad story of the CO2 tax and of the many other proposals that have been presented along the way . I have to say that I think the Commission has shown great creativity in this area , constantly putting new proposals on the table .
What we have not had are a few more decisions in this field .
I can say to Mrs Kestelijn-Sierens that , as regards the Member States ' responsibility for implementation in this area , we are in complete agreement .
For the same reason , I wrote to the Member States at the end of July to request information on the measures they were planning to put in hand , because that would help us in drawing up the follow-up to our communication on climate change .
I said in my introductory presentation that we were planning a follow-up at the start of 1999 , and for that we clearly need knowledge on what is happening in the Member States .
I share the view expressed by Mrs Taubira-Delannon that sanctions are also needed in this area .
Finally , let me say that I also share the view expressed by Mrs McNally that it is necessary to involve other Commissioners in the consideration of ways to deal with the climate issue .
That was indeed one of the reasons why the climate problem formed part of the integration strategy which was agreed in Cardiff and which now goes ahead in the preparations for the Vienna meeting .
In point of fact it was decided that Commissioners Kinnock , Papoutsis and Fischler would all be involved in the process .
I can say that the work in the Commission is well underway in this area . I think we have excellent cooperation , and all agree that the environmental policy cannot solve these problems alone .
Cooperation with other Commissioners is needed .
Let me close by expressing my satisfaction with the debate here today .
I do not think we have an easy task ahead of us .
I think we are endeavouring to prepare ourselves as best we can , and I very much hope that we can continue to provide the same leadership in Buenos Aires as we did in Kyoto , particularly in view of the fact that I find it difficult to see who else would take on this task .
Mr President , I asked a question earlier , which I consider to be very important .
Commissioner , I do not think you need to tell us what we already know .
We are familiar with your communication .
I have even read it .
The only problem is that it does not tell us anything .
The question - posed not only by myself , but also by Mr Pimenta and Mr Eisma , amongst others - was very specific : what proposal will you be making to the Environment Council ?
What are the views around the table in the Environment Council about the ratio of flexible mechanisms to domestic measures ?
In Kyoto you proposed a ratio of 50 / 50 .
I would be interested to know whether this figure still stands .
Do you think the amendments along these lines are appropriate ?
What will the position of the Environment Council be on this ?
Are we correctly informed that 12 Environment Ministers have already jumped ship on this issue and that only three are still on board ?
Please give us straight answers to these questions .

The second question , asked by Mr Lange , Mr Eisma and others , was related to the voluntary agreements .
Labelling is all well and good , but what we were all concerned about here was the question of whether it might be appropriate , in this case , also to make legislative proposals , which would force the motor vehicle industry not merely to make a one-litre reduction over 22 years , but actually to show what it has achieved when the voluntary agreements expire .
These are fundamental questions , and I would ask you to give us some clear answers !
Mr President , I have already answered some of the questions Mrs Breyer has raised again regarding the proposals put forward .
Apart from the proposal on voluntary agreements , I mentioned quite specifically that there was a proposal on a monitoring mechanism for this area , and I mentioned that I had secured the adoption of a directive in the Commission concerned with labelling in vehicles , so that consumers would be in a position to know what the consequences would be of purchasing one car or another .
Among the preparations for both the Council meeting and the meeting in Tokyo , to which I am travelling tomorrow , there have been some discussions in the Council on how we are to use the term ' supplementary ' .
There is no doubt as to the line we are pursuing in the EU , namely that flexible mechanisms cannot be used unless something is also done on home ground .
For the moment , the discussion is centred on whether it would be best to propose what could be called a quantitative ceiling or a quantitative target or whether it would be wiser to proceed in the direction of what has been described as a quality target or quality ceiling , whereby efforts would be concentrated on setting limits to the use of flexible mechanisms .
I naturally intend to take an active part in the current deliberations , which are also an extension to those that took place in Bonn , where the Commission presented a whole series of papers detailing the use of flexible mechanisms .
So it can be said that our line in this area is , on the one hand , to say that we uphold the principle that it is first and foremost a question of what one can do internally but , on the other hand , we do not intend to leave the flexible mechanisms to other countries but wish to take an active part in this debate ourselves , and we also intend to apply them .
Thank you , Commissioner .
I have received a motion for a resolution to wind up the debate .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Thursday at 12 noon .
Effects of plans and programmes on the environment
The next item is the report ( A4-0245 / 98 ) by Mr Gahrton , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection , on the proposal for a Council Directive on the assessment of the effects of certain plans and programmes on the environment ( COM ( 96 ) 0511 - C4-0191 / 97-96 / 0304 ( SYN ) ) .
I call Mr Lannoye , who is deputising for the rapporteur .
Mr President , Mr Gahrton is indeed unable to be present , and I am all the more pleased to stand in for him as I totally share his point of view on the subject , together with that of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection .
This proposal for a directive , commonly known as the ' strategic environmental impact study ' , was favourably received by our Committee on the Environment insofar as it quite simply meets a need in regard to the European Union 's environment policy .
Since 1985 , we have had a directive on the assessment of the impact of certain public and private projects , a directive which was just recently amended . This amendment is to be transposed into national legislation by March of next year .
This represents an improvement in the situation , especially by means of an important extension in Annex I. But there is also a deficiency to the extent that there is a limit on the assessment of the project 's impact .
As a result of this , decisions which could have a considerable impact on the nature of projects and which should , in principle , take into account environmental constraints , are taken too late in the decision-making process .
This is , moreover , what the Commission says to justify its position , namely that the impact study is carried out at too late a stage in the process of planning and decision-making .
This proposal aims to ensure that the environmental impact is assessed and the results taken into account when preparing and adopting town and country plans and programmes .
It therefore usefully supplements the present legislation .
Does this mean that we find the proposal sufficient ?
Certainly we believe - and when I say we , I mean the Committee on the Environment , the rapporteur and myself , deputising for the rapporteur - that it goes in the right direction . But we also find it too restrictive .
The Committee on the Environment has adopted 33 amendments which I hope the Commission will also accept . I would now like to explain to you their principal effect .
First of all , as regards the scope of the directive , as defined in Article 2 , the Committee on the Environment is proposing that it should not be limited to town and country plans and programmes , but that it should extend to all plans and programmes with an impact on the land and marine environment .
Furthermore , we also adopted an amendment in the form of an addition which proposes a positive and non-restrictive list of plans and programmes for which a strategic impact study would be obligatory .
I believe that this usefully clarifies the situation .
I also believe that we have brought in a number of additional details and improvements .
First of all , the objective of sustainable development is more clearly explained . Secondly , the situation is clarified , since the strategic impact study must be carried out at the initial stage of the decision-making process .
We also specify that agriculture , forestry and fishing are covered by the directive .
Details are also given regarding the access and involvement of citizens .
The reasons justifying the possible absence of a strategic impact study must be made public .
Finally , the alternatives must be analysed , including the zero option .
So much for the essentials .
Four amendments have been tabled for the part-session , which is not a great many .
I should like to just briefly comment on them .
First of all , there is an amendment tabled by Mrs Jackson and Mr Florenz which proposes in the preamble to refer to Article 130 , paragraph 2 rather than paragraph 1 .


I find that this is unacceptable , since referring to paragraph 2 implies the unanimity of the Council .
I am therefore against this amendment .
A second amendment by Mrs Estevan Bolea is certainly justified in principle .
This involves imposing a limit on the time allowed to consult citizens , but I continue to believe that three months is much too short .
The very nature of the proposal therefore leads me to conclude that it is not acceptable to the Committee on the Environment .
That is my personal opinion , as the committee has not yet been able to reach a decision .
In any event , I am opposed to it .
Finally , on behalf of the Green Group in the European Parliament , I myself and Mr Papayannakis have tabled two amendments , which I believe are extremely reasonable , for policies related to the environment to be included in the strategic impact assessment procedure at the time of the directive 's first revision .
These are amendments of intent , nothing more , but which I believe bring an improvement to the directive .
Thank you , Mr President .
I also thank all the political groups which will be supporting this report and I hope that the Commissioner will view these amendments positively .
Mr President , strategic environmental impact assessment is an instrument used by governments to judge whether policy intentions , plans and projects are consistent with the concept of sustainable development .
It is an administrative policy instrument which can work well if government is convinced that it makes sense to use it . So it must not be viewed as a bureaucratic nuisance .
It helps to combine economic and environmental considerations effectively .
This avoids situations whereby certain plans and programmes are subsequently found to cause unnecessary environmental damage.Unfortunately , there is still some reluctance to allow sufficient breadth of scope to strategic environmental assessment .
The European Commission wants to restrict the directive to town and country plans and programmes . Like the rapporteur , I am in favour of having a strategic environmental impact assessment conducted at an earlier stage , rather than waiting until the local or regional impact is assessed .
Should not policy intentions , as well as plans and programmes , be subjected to an SEA ? Some policymakers in the Member States are extraordinarily inventive in avoiding the terms plan and programme .
All of a sudden , sectoral plans or structural plans are called sectoral visions or structural visions ; a programme becomes an outline .
Such practices must naturally be stopped . This requires the European Commission to be vigilant , and the option of expanding the scope of the directive to include policy intentions as well as plans and programmes must be kept open for the future .

I would refer the House to Mr Lannoye 's amendments , Nos 34 and 35 .



An essential part of the SEA lies in studying alternatives such as the zero option , which describes what the consequences will be if nothing is done , and the most environmentally friendly option .
Fundamental to the SEA is the principle of compensation .
The primary objective is to prevent damage to the environment .
Where possible , measures must be taken to preclude such damage .
But if they prove inadequate , recompense must be made as fully as possible for any damage to the environment which remains .
This is our concrete endorsement of the principle that the polluter pays .
Lastly , Mr President , I trust that the excellent piece of work which Mr Gahrton has produced , and on which I compliment him , will not be left by the Council to gather dust .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , for many years all our countries have been carrying out environmental impact studies , even before the 1985 directive was adopted .
The 1997 amendment has meant that the obligation to carry out environmental impact assessments has been extended to encompass many other projects .
However , perhaps we need to take another step forward , assessing not projects , but plans and programmes .
This is a very difficult issue .
I know , Commissioner , that it is particularly difficult for you because all our countries , without exception , are opposed to it .
Perhaps , then , ladies and gentlemen , we should ask ourselves why all our countries oppose this plan .
They oppose it because they are , in fact , afraid that the principle of subsidiarity might be violated , that the responsibilities of local and regional authorities , or those of autonomous regions , might be taken over by other institutions .
They are afraid , too , of the delays in the consultation procedures .
Mr Lannoye , you know perfectly well that in many countries , the consultation procedure and the completion of the final environmental impact report - known as the statement of environmental impact - take two years , 18 months , 16 months or 12 months .
I wonder whether we can allow building work , a project or an urban planning , energy , hydraulic or waste plan , or any other sort of plan for that matter , to be brought to a standstill for 12 months , 18 months or two years .
We therefore understand why our countries are so afraid of increased regulation in the environment sector .
I believe that a consultation procedure of three months is more than sufficient .
In any event , the Committee on the Environment has approved a series of proposals by the Committee on Research and I am very grateful for this .
One of these , in particular , is extremely important .
For years , construction has been taking place in areas close to rivers , areas that are prone to flooding .
This , Mr President , has led to real catastrophes .
The Committee on Research proposes that before authorizing construction work in urban development plans , an analysis should be carried out to determine whether or not the areas are prone to flooding . This would help prevent many deaths and many accidents ; it would prevent serious economic losses , but , more particularly , would prevent many human losses .
Moreover , if the work is done properly , we need not fear that the drawing-up of these statements of environmental impact means that building work might have to be brought to a halt .
It seems to me that this timid step that the Commission is taking whereby governments - be they national , regional or local - take account of the environmental aspects of their problems is already very important .
The directive now before the House is a very superficial one , Commissioner .
Nonetheless , you are having difficulties with the governments .
We are not going to support the majority of the amendments tabled by Mr Gahrton , because they add confusion to a directive that is already confused itself .
However , we do believe that it is very important to move forward in this area ; we are therefore going to abstain .
Mr President , the PSE Group will oppose Amendment No 35 tabled by my friends , Mr Lannoye and Mr Papayannakis .
Emotionally , I am very much in favour of it but in real terms and as I perceive environmental impact , we have to take this line because it sets the picture too widely .
It might help if I explained to those tabling Amendment No 35 the detailed reason why I have difficulty with it .
Mr Gahrton , in his otherwise excellent report , refers to the definition of an SEA as an environmental assessment of a strategic action - a policy plan or programme ; a formalised , systematic and comprehensive process of evaluating the environmental effects of that policy programme or its alternatives .
That I understand .
The difficulty is the question over policy .
I have always seen environmental impact as something which would be used as a precise tool by which those wishing to support a development could say it was a good thing and those wishing to oppose it could say it was a bad thing and pray in aid the environmental impact assessment which was part of the inquiry into that proposal .
We know , because Mr Gahrton rightly says so in his explanatory statement , that conventional project-orientated environmental impact assessments have not been entirely successful .
He mentions in that same statement the difficulties of assessing the sum of many small activities and the indirect effects of the impact of traffic routes on transport behaviour , etc .
So we all acknowledge - certainly in the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection and the PSE Group - that environmental impact assessments , as such , need attention .
The question is whether the proposal on policy would not be too wide .
I contend that it is .
The proper place for the discussion of policy is not so much in a planning inquiry about a shopping development or an airport development or any of the other items listed in the Environmental Impact Assessment Report prepared by Mr Lannoye .
The proper place for the discussion of policy , in my submission , is in a forum like the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection , in Parliament or a Commission meeting room .
That is where policies are formulated on the basis that people have been elected to discuss them .
Therefore what they need when they go to a planning inquiry , in my view , is to have recourse to a strategic environmental impact assessment as a planning tool .
Therefore , in my contention , Amendment No 35 is something that should be rejected .
We should discuss policies in the proper forum .
Mr President , the European People 's Party is in favour of the environmental impact assessment directive process which was established under the directive of 1985 .
We have problems with the directive we are now discussing .
I am not quite sure what Mr White 's conclusions were .
I imagine , from what he said , that the Socialists will be voting against this directive .
Maybe they have changed their minds since the debate in committee .
But the starting point of the directive , as given in the explanatory statement , is as follows : the Commission says it is clear that evaluation of the environmental impact of certain projects is taking place too late in the development , planning and decisionmaking process .
In effect , this has the result of removing from consideration the possible adoption of alternatives , both to the individual project under consideration as well as to its particular location or route .
Its conclusion is that the present proposal is intended to address this inherent limitation by supplementing the 1985 directive with this directive requiring the assessment of town and country planning , plans and programmes .
Why then has the Commission based the directive on the wrong part of the Treaty ?
To quote the Treaty ( Article 130s , paragraph 2 ) , by way of derogation from the decision-making procedure provided for in paragraph 1 ( qualified majority voting ) , the Council acting unanimously on a proposal from the Commission shall adopt amongst other things ' measures concerning town and country planning ' .
That is the point of the amendment that Mr Florenz and I have put forward .
This must surely come under the unanimity rule .
What about subsidiarity ?
We are very unhappy with this directive because we recognise that the Member States all have their own methods of town and country planning .
In some cases , the consideration of the environmental impact is already very complex .
In others it may be lacking , but the answer is surely to make the 1985 directive universally applicable .
Mr Gahrton takes us a long way .
He says , among other things , that strategic environmental impact assessment should apply to agricultural and livestock development programmes .
That will be music to the ears of many farmers in the European Union .
We find the text is confused and badly drafted and consequently it looks as if a European Union directive may suddenly apply from on high to quite minor plans and programmes .
The European People 's Party have proposed a fundamental amendment which must mean that this is now going to be referred to the Legal Affairs Committee .
In conclusion , I would like to extend my congratulations to the absent Mr Gahrton .
Mr Gahrton is renowned for his opposition to the European Union .
I imagine that he is now back in Sweden receiving some sort of European movement medal for proposing the acceptance of this very intrusive directive .
Perhaps he does not dare show his face here but he has certainly given the impression - through Mr Lannoye - that he is in favour of a directive which we find defies subsidiarity and will not do what it is intended to do .
Mr President , I can safely say that , on the whole , I entirely disagree with what Mrs Jackson has just said .
I think it is a directive which moves in the right direction , and it also moves in the right direction at a more primary level .
I personally cannot understand Mrs Jackson when she says that we must use the article on unanimity where this directive is concerned .
This directive relates to matters which have to be tackled in the individual countries ; it does not concern itself with any particular action to be taken at Community level .
The plans covered by the article in question must affect the Community in a different way to that referred to here .
So I think this is a good step .
I think it entirely natural that we have this directive as a follow-up to the 1985 directive , which after all has clear limitations in relation to everyday life , where planning for various installations is concerned .
It is important that we include environmental considerations at an early stage , and that is just not happening at present .
I also think that the proposals of the Environment Committee are right , and I can support them , and I think that different politicians should be involved in the deliberations , which goes somewhat further than what the Commission is saying .
I always think that , when we discuss the environmental policy , we demand incredibly little - this applies on occasion to the PPE Group - in respect of investigations to be undertaken as regards the effects of plans on the environment , compared with what we demand when the effect of plans on the economy is at issue .
Mr Florenz , I did not say that it was always the case , but it certainly is occasionally .
In this instance , I have to say that I disagree with what Mrs Jackson said .
I think that equally stringent requirements should be imposed in respect of both investigations into environmental effects and the investigation of economic consequences .
They are in fact two sides of the same question , if we really want to establish sustainable development .
Mr President , assessments of the environmental impact of various specific projects have one way or another not been very satisfactory , as Mr Gahrton points out , and I think rightly so .
We agree with most of his proposals .
Let me add that in Greece , for example , such assessments are often made after a project has begun and not before .
In other cases they are drawn up by the contractors themselves , and quite often the recommendations in the studies which relate to making good the damage to the environment are never implemented .
At any rate , until now no attention has been given to the overall and wider impact of integrated projects , groups of projects or interventions involving several individual projects .
In such cases , Mr President , we have a multiplied environmental impact , something more than the simple sum of the effects of each respective project .
That alone demands a different approach .
In place of our approach so far , which I would call ' tactical ' , we should adopt a ' strategic ' approach .
Let me give an example , which concerns the Olympic Games in Athens in 2004 .
The Games will require separate sports facilities and many other related projects , each of which poses its own threat , for example to the Schinia wetland , to the suburban green belt around Athens , and to much of the coastline near the city .
However , no overall assessment has been made of all the consequences of the planning and environmental aspects on the urban complex as a whole .
The result is that , after facing facts for the first time , changes of the siting of many facilities are already being considered .
Amendments and revisions of the initial programme are being debated , which will cost a great deal , while the real effect on the environment remains unexplored and public information is non-existent .
The responsibility borne by the Greek Government , the local government authority and above all the Municipality of Athens is substantial .
However , Commissioner , the Commission has not so far played its part satisfactorily .
It has offered us no guarantees that Community standards under environmental legislation are truly being complied with for the Olympic Games .
Following the new directive , might it be possible for the Commission , even retrospectively , to carry out a strategic assessment of the Olympiad 's environmental impact , now while work on the projects has not yet commenced ?
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , for the Green Group , strategic assessment is a milestone on the road to greater sustainability .
The proposal for a directive aims at improving environmental protection . It is also an instrument which would allow us to take environmental matters into consideration , comprehensively and early on , before the project stage .
For us - and here I would have to completely contradict Mrs Estevan Bolea - it is very important for many criteria to be reflected here .
One of these is doubtless the involvement of the environmental authorities and the members of the public concerned .
Making progress on projects in public is impossible without involving the public .
I would have thought that , as a Spaniard , this concept would be familiar to you , Mrs Estevan Bolea , since the disaster with the landfills in La Coruña could have been prevented if we had listened to the public , the environmental associations and the scientists involved .
It is regrettable that the German Government in particular , which usually leads the way , has been so negative in this process and has failed to make any constructive suggestions . It has effectively been left on the sidelines at European level .
Another important point which Mr Lannoye has also touched upon is that unfortunately we have not succeeded in including policy sectors that receive subsidies , such as agriculture , coal and shipyards . Here , public money is spent without ever once examining the effects of the plans involved on the environment .
We hope that strategic environmental assessment is not pushed to one side , and we would like to appeal to those Member States like Germany ...
( The President cut the speaker off )
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Europe 's environment policy is characterized by two weaknesses . Firstly , an excess of lengthy , theoretical declarations of intent and an attendant lack of practical implementing provisions .
Secondly , environment policy in Europe is known for the priority it gives to patching up the effects of damage to the environment , rather than actively preventing it from occurring .
This is a policy which , by its very nature , must always lag behind events .
Environment policy can only be successful if it moves beyond this stage .
The rapporteur has done an excellent job of recognising this and , in the amendments , at least improves upon these defects .
If structures are actually created that lay down strategic environmental assessment in advance , then a quantum leap in the whole of environment policy would have been accomplished .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the discussion in this House on environmental impact assessment has been an astonishing display of self-congratulation .
It was just last year that we decided upon environmental impact assessment for industrial plants , and in this directive we have defined a large number of other areas where the law is going to apply in the future .
But when it came to a Europe-wide definition of environmental impact assessment , we all backed out . We called for subsidiarity .
The result is that the problems we have now are the biggest ever , and not only for us in Germany , Mrs Breyer , where we have been practising this system for five years now .
That just shows that you are not being realistic .
The rules are just being interpreted in completely different ways .
In Germany , an assessment is carried out and if you have not passed , then you have simply failed , and the building project is not implemented .
In all other countries this is handled more flexibly , sometimes better , sometimes worse .
I do not in any way wish to judge .
I would only say to you that we have created a single market and the aim is that rules within this single market should be comparable .
They do not have to be completely identical , because geographical differences also exist .
The issue here is not doing away with the EIA , rather it is a question of doing something sensible and comparable with the EIA , something where the rules are the same .
Then we would all agree with it and , what is more , agree quite willingly .
That has been taken up in many of the speeches here .
I believe that the legal basis of this directive is wrong .
The point here is whether we concern ourselves with town and country planning , not whether this can be rejected unanimously here or not .
This question of the environmental impact assessment of land-use plans is one that quite simply has to do with town and country planning .
We need only consult the relevant articles .
The Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights is in a much better position to do this than ourselves . We should quietly wait for them to do this .
This report basically contains some good ideas , but it is not ripe .
At the moment , not a single Member State supports it .
Helmut Kohl and the French President were right to say that the Commission is meddling in too many things .
Member States are clever enough and wise enough to carry out such assessments according to their own criteria .
In due course , we should take up this report once again .
I think at best now we should abstain , although we should actually be coming out against this report .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the European Commission 's proposal for the extension of environmental impact assessment to plans and programmes is a typical route one approach , from the green table in Brussels to the offside position of practical implementation in the Member States .
Mr Florenz has already given us some indications as to how the present EIA has been faring there . The new proposal seeks to add some much more detailed elements .
It is many times more difficult than what we have had up to now , and even that was not adequately implemented .
Another attempt is being made solely to harmonise procedure and , in doing so , to interfere in the legislation and administrative authority of the Member States .
Moreover , the Commission in no way draws the obvious conclusions from the problems that have already arisen as a result of the EIA project .
I would suggest the following : before the Commission pursues this proposal any further , it should , in line with this proposal for a directive , apply the EIA to plans and programmes in its own area of responsibility , in order to gain experience with this instrument and prove that it is suitable for use .
I too am of the opinion that the legal basis is not an appropriate one .
It is the other legal basis that we need , because according to Articles 3 and 3a of the EC Treaty as amended by the Union Treaty , the EU has no legal competence for urban development , land-use plans and outline urban developments .
Since many areas of this proposal for a directive are clearly concerned with town and country planning regulations , such a proposal for a directive should , if anything , be based on Article 130s , paragraph 2 .
Mr President , I would like to start by thanking the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection , in particular the rapporteur , Per Gahrton , and now also Mr Lannoye , deputising for the rapporteur , for their contribution and their thorough treatment of this proposal .
Environmental assessments are a fundamental instrument in environmental protection , ensuring the early integration of environmental considerations into the decision-making .
The Commission 's aim through this proposal is to supplement the existing environmental assessment system at project level by introducing measures at the planning and programming stage in the decision-making process .
The proposal introduces what is in our opinion a minimal and , in reality , quite simple procedure , which consists of internationally recognised principles of strategic environmental assessment , or SEA .
But it emerges clearly from the debate here today that opinion is really divided on this proposal , as was also the case in the course of its preparation .
For that reason , a large number of amendments have been tabled , and the Commission is happy to accept almost half of them , because we think they clarify or improve the wording of the proposal , not least by adding some definitions .
Obviously we are happy to accept improvements that make the proposal clearer .
The fact that we cannot accept some of the amendments may be due to technical reasons , but it may also be due to our adoption of a different approach for the proposal .
I will now indicate what we can accept and what we cannot .
Of the 39 amendments , the Commission can accept 18 in whole , in part or in principle .
Those we can accept in their entirety are Nos 2 , 3 , 4 , 7 , 9 , 11 , 16 and 31 .
We can accept Amendment No 25 in principle , and we can accept Amendments Nos 14 , 17 , 19 , 22 , 27 , 32 , 33 , 34 and 37 in part .
It is clear from this that we cannot accept a large number of the amendments .
I should perhaps make a few comments - several speakers raised this matter - on Amendment No 39 , which concerns the legal basis for the directive .
It has been said here today that it should be Article 130s , paragraph 2 , which requires unanimity , rather than Article 130s , paragraph 1 , which requires a qualified majority .
We did of course ask the Commission 's legal service before deciding on the legal basis .
The reasons why we opted for Article 130s , paragraph 1 , are that it concerns procedures and that its main purpose is environmental protection .
In addition , it is our view that all the EU instruments covering environmental impact assessments should have the same legal basis .
As the environmental impact assessment directive , Directive 97 / 11 / EC on projects , is based on Article 130s , paragraph 1 , the same legal basis has been chosen for this proposal .
It has been pointed out in this debate that the plans and programmes we are talking about fall under the heading of town and country planning , and that Article 130s , paragraph 2 , refers to ' measures concerning town and country planning ' .
For that reason , some here have argued that this would be the correct legal basis .
That is not our view .
We regard Article 130s , paragraph 2 , as an exception to the general rule in Article 130s , paragraph 1 , which is to be interpreted restrictively .
According to the Court of Justice , it is the main aim of a directive that determines the choice of legal basis .
As has already been stated , the main purpose of this directive is to protect the environment .
It is not the intention of the proposal to intervene in town and country planning , but to give the planning authorities an instrument which they can integrate into their decisionmaking process with a view to improving it by providing a means of identifying , assessing and taking account of environmental effects .
I wanted to take a little time on this question because I have the impression that it has played quite a major role in the debate today .
I would like to comment on some other amendments which we cannot accept .
These are Amendments Nos 8 and 9 and to some extent 17 , which propose an extension to the scope of the proposal .
They are amendments which propose specific sectors , such as agriculture , forestry , fisheries or leisure activities .
We think that the first area for the introduction of an environmental impact assessment system at the planning and programming stage in the decision-making process is that of town and country planning and associated sectors .
This is because we have carried out various investigations , and we have also done some fairly thorough screening in the Member States , and have formed the impression from this that it would be best to integrate these areas first .
To add sectors such as agriculture , forestry , fisheries or leisure activities explicitly cannot be accepted because these investigations have shown that there are , generally speaking , no separate land-use plans or programmes for these sectors of the type to be covered by the proposal .
Then there was a brief discussion - and I will not go into detail on it - of including the political level .
Mr White directly opposed the amendment put forward , and Mrs Jackson also presented arguments relating to it .
I think Mrs Dybkjær said that in her opinion it was natural that it should be included .
I can perhaps go so far as to say that my own personal view - which is perhaps not so surprising - lies closer to Mrs Dybkjær 's view , but it is not taken up in the proposal as it stands .
Then there are amendments , Nos 22 and 25 , in which it is proposed that means should be stipulated to ensure the quality of the information provided in the environmental assessment .
The intention was to avoid unnecessary delays in the procedure or further costs arising from the poor quality or lack of information in the environmental assessment .
We can accept these amendments either in principle or in part .
Finally , there is the question of Amendments Nos 3 , 30 and 33 , which concern a monitoring requirement .
Here too we have looked at the provisions of the environmental impact assessment directive , and we have followed the guidelines arising from it .
In conclusion , let me say that we regard the accepted amendments as an improvement of the proposal under consideration .
I believe that this directive will enhance the protection of both man and the environment and that in practice it may also assist industry , because it will give it a more consistent framework within which to work .
I naturally hope therefore that Parliament will adopt the proposal , but also that Parliament will help us to ensure that it is placed on the agenda for a Council meeting .
Mr President , I am sure Mrs Jackson did not intend to be mischievous - that would not be in her nature - but there was a suggestion that the Group of the Party of European Socialists might vote against this in plenary , whereas we have supported it in committee .
That is not the position .
We will support this in plenary , with the exception of the reference to policy - exactly as we did in committee .
Mr President , I am even more confused because as far as I can see the whole thing refers to policy .
My question is to Mrs Bjerregaard .
She said that according to the Commission all European Union instruments which deal with the environment should have the same legal base .
Does she not accept that is impossible because the Treaty says that where measures concern town and country planning and land use , they must be subject to adoption by the Council of Ministers by unanimity ?
Does she not further accept that this directive , which is the one we are debating , says : ' Whereas the plans and programmes which should be assessed under this directive are those plans and programmes which are adopted as part of the town and country planning decision-making process ' ?
Does she not see a contradiction between what she says and what the Treaty says ?
Mr President , thank you for allowing me to speak on a personal note .
I would like to say to Mrs Breyer that she is reading the speech she has prepared and is not listening .
Mrs Breyer , I did not say that we do not hold consultations ; in fact , in Spain , the consultations are very extensive .
What I said was that the length of these consultations should be limited to three months . What we cannot do is to continue to hold consultations over a two-year period .
Nevertheless , please be assured that we do hold those consultations .
Mr President , I was referred to personally by Mr Florenz .
He is not here at the moment , otherwise I would have been very glad to give him a lesson on how environmental impact assessment works .
It simply is not the case that we wait for the result and then take the decision .
We all know what such an assessment is supposed to look like .
What is contained in the assessment is irrelevant afterwards .
Basically , the exercise is very successful for those who carry out the studies .
Finally , and this point has already been mentioned by Mr Lannoye , the zero options are missing . Let us consider for a moment what would happen if the project were not implemented .
I was also referred to by Mrs Estevan Bola . I do not think that three months are enough to bring about any serious participation by the public .
I have to stop you there , Mrs Breyer , because we are not going to have another debate .
I am very sorry .
I shall ask the Commissioner if she will respond .
Mr President , there have been several comments which have more to do with the debate itself .
I will not go into those .
In fact , I answered both Mr Florenz and Mrs Jackson quite clearly in my first response , in which I stressed that it was our clear understanding that the legal basis was Article 130s , paragraph 1 , that the matter had been examined by the Commission 's legal service and that we took the view that it was the correct legal basis , that Article 130s , paragraph 2 , constituted an exception to the general rule and that it was not the intention of the proposal to intervene in town and country planning , but to give the planning authorities an instrument which they can integrate into their decision-making process .
Hence I feel that I have made it quite clear that the legal basis should be Article 130s , paragraph 1 .
The debate is closed .
The vote will be postponed until the Legal Affairs Committee has delivered its opinion on the legal basis , which has just been discussed .
Civil subsonic jet aeroplanes
The next item is the report ( A4-0279 / 98 ) by Mr Valverde López , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection , on the proposal for a Council Directive on the registration and use within the Community of certain types of civil subsonic jet aeroplanes which have been modified and recertified as meeting the standards of Volume I , Part II , Chapter 3 of Annex 16 to the Convention on International Civil Aviation , third edition ( July 1993 ) ( COM ( 98 ) 0098 - C4-0212 / 98-98 / 0070 ( SYN ) ) .
Mr President , the Community action programme on the environment and sustainable development explicitly calls for a further reduction in noise emissions from aeroplanes by the year 2000 .
Therefore , the measure that we are debating today comes under this general objective .
In this respect , the Chicago Convention on International Civil Aviation is one of the main documents where the regulation of noise emissions from aeroplanes is concerned .
The Convention divides aeroplanes into three categories or chapters .
The first chapter covers aeroplanes that were among the noisiest at the time and may now no longer be used .
As regards the aeroplanes included in the second chapter , the 1992 European Union directive states that such planes can no longer be used in the European Union from 1 April 2002 .
These Chapter 2 aeroplanes may , however , be equipped with socalled ' hushkits ' so that they produce less noise and can be included in Category 3 .
Chapter 2 aeroplanes equipped with hushkits do not yet pose a serious problem in the European Community .
The situation in the USA , however , is very different .
There , the number of these aeroplanes will rise to about 1500 by the year 2000 .
The US Noise Act 1990 requires all large Chapter 2 aeroplanes to be taken out of service by 31 December 1999 .
It may be that , after this date , hushkitted Chapter 2 aeroplanes will be transferred from the USA to the European Community 's aeroplane registers . This should be prevented through the regulation we are debating here .
The aim of this regulation is to prevent a further increase in noise pollution in the Community due to recertificated subsonic jet aeroplanes , as I have just mentioned .
A further objective is to limit the environmental damage caused by gas emissions from aeroplanes .
Provision has been made for exemptions where aeroplanes are used for emergencies or to assist with humanitarian aid .
With regard to the amendments , the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection tabled six amendments that were adopted almost unanimously and it has tabled a new amendment for the plenary .
Following detailed study and serious reflection on my part , I am unable to accept this amendment , since it would break the political agreement we reached in the Committee on the Environment between the various groups . Moreover , it is not consistent with internal market measures nor with the urgency which this legislative measure requires .
Therefore , Mr President , I believe that we should be satisfied with this Commission proposal . We support it overall and sincerely believe that the amendments approved in the Committee on the Environment go along the same lines ; therefore , both the proposal and the amendments have our full support .
In any case , we should remember that , in coming years , it will be necessary to introduce further measures aimed at reducing noise in the air transport sector , as already provided for in the Community programme .
Mr President , I welcome this chance to continue the work of my predecessor , Mrs van Dijk , so soon and to serve as draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Transport and Tourism on the Commission 's proposal .
I am happy too to be able to say that the Commission 's proposal on reducing the nuisance of aircraft noise , presented to us by Mr Valverde López , has the full support of the Committee on Transport and Tourism .
I should add that this is a small step which will , I hope , become part of a rather more comprehensive plan to reduce noise pollution from aircraft at European level .
I have three further comments .
Firstly , I would point out once again that whilst this proposal is well-intentioned , the benefit which this kind of positive development brings will regrettably be cancelled out by the ever-increasing number of aircraft movements .
In other words , there is an increased need , in respect of the number of aircraft movements as well , to take structural measures for the longer term to reduce the nuisance of aircraft noise .
Secondly I would stress that the matter is urgent .
Mr Valverde López has made that point already , and this prompts me to reiterate the importance of Amendments Nos 1 and 2 .
Not a directive , but a regulation and in time stricter , newer standards on aircraft noise .
Thirdly , we also set great store by the rapporteur 's Amendment No 6 , the adding of a ban on night flights .
One way or another , this has to feature in the report - as soon as possible , as far as we are concerned , and it must be mandatory .
Maybe not before the year 2000 , but it has to be included .
Lastly , Mr President , I would say that I and my committee believe that the future of aviation in Europe is one of the major concerns of the future and I am glad that we are able to take this small step forward .
Mr President , I wish to begin by welcoming the report , and I can assure the rapporteur on behalf of the Socialists that we will be giving him our support .
This is an important issue .
Noise pollution is an increasingly sensitive issue and something we are becoming more and more aware of .
The Commission itself has produced a green paper on this issue and is moving forward with action .
This first step is very welcome .
Aeroplanes landing and taking off represent a major source of noise pollution in and around airports and we welcome the steps that are going to be taken internationally to get rid of the noisiest of planes .
Hushkitting , as has been described by the rapporteur , is acceptable certainly in the interim but we do not want to see hushkitting for the noisiest aeroplanes used as a pretext for taking no further action .
It is right for the rapporteur to insist that further controls and restrictions are placed on the future use of hushkitted aeroplanes .
We need to see these plans implemented as quickly as possible .
Some of us - particularly in this Chamber , who are very frequent travellers on aeroplanes - do not realise the consequences of our moving around Europe for many of the people who find themselves in the flight paths of these aircraft near the many airports around the Community .
Therefore , we give our full support to the rapporteur , and I would urge colleagues in the House to vote for these amendments as well .
May I begin , Mr President , by complimenting Mr Valverde López on his excellent report .
Secondly , I must congratulate Mr Lagendijk on his maiden speech .
It was a fine one and I am confident that he will be an asset to the House .
Mr President , noise near airports is a major problem which causes us an incredible amount of trouble , certainly in densely populated areas .
In the case of the Netherlands , one has only to look at the problems surrounding the main airport of Schipol , but smaller-scale civil aviation as well .
It is fitting that we in the European Parliament should all be keen to address the problem of noise pollution and other environmental nuisance factors caused by flying .
Two strategies are possible .
One is quiet aircraft .
We are taking a step in that direction today .
The other is restricting aircraft movements , but zoning too .
In the Netherlands , Mr President , we all too often believe , and wrongly , that by zoning we can control the environment and aircraft noise ourselves .
Nothing could be further from the truth .
Let me give you an example .
I live in Limburg .
We have an airport in Maastricht , and in Maastricht we tried the following strategy : one , redeveloping the facility ; two , limiting the number of night flights ; and three , denying landing rights to noisy aircraft .
And what happens ?
Barely 20 kilometres away , again with financial help from the European Union , a new airport gets built in Bierset , with no restrictions on night flights and access allowed to noisy aircraft .
So people living in that area are still stuck with the problem .
So what do we have to do ?
We have to seek solutions primarily at European level .
This is why I welcome today 's proposal against noisy aircraft , and I think that this tightening of the rules is a good thing .
I agree with the rapporteur that the ' hushkitting ' now envisaged for Chapter 2 aircraft must be curtailed as much as possible .
So I am happy to support his amendments .
But I wonder what we are going to do on 1 April when , as in the USA , we have a lot of aircraft which are registered here and can thus be operated too .
I wonder if the solution proposed by the rapporteur in his amendment to Article 6 will offer adequate solace ?
Lastly , Mr President , I shall certainly not support any amendments which weaken the rapporteur 's proposal .
I think that we must do our utmost in this European market to harmonise things , to achieve the highest level of environmental protection possible .
It really is crazy to compete at the expense of the environment .
Mr President , the Commission joins with others who have spoken here today in welcoming the report by Mr Valverde López .
We also very much appreciate how quickly the report was presented , because that makes it possible to get the proposal adopted within the time limits set .
So we very much wish to thank Mr Valverde López and his colleagues in the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection .
In considering the amendments proposed by the committee , the Commission feels that it is important to maintain a balance between the environmental improvements desired and the economic burdens which may be imposed on certain developing countries .
It is also important to send the right signals to ICAO , which is currently investigating the possibility of introducing more stringent standards for aircraft noise thresholds which would apply throughout the world .
I am therefore happy to say that the Commission can accept Amendment No 1 and that we can accept Amendments Nos 2 , 3 and 4 in part .
We cannot accept Amendment No 5 , because the use of aircraft with noise attenuation equipment outside the territory of the Community is explicitly covered in Article 4 , paragraph 2 .
We also cannot accept Amendments Nos 6 and 7 , because harmonised rules for the prohibition of night flights by certain aircraft are not in conformity with either the subsidiarity principle or the international obligations of the Member States .
There is also the fact that the Member States already have a procedure under Regulation No 2408 / 92 for the introduction of restrictions on aviation with a view to improving noise conditions around airports .
It is clear that there is broad agreement on this proposal , and the work done by Mr Valverde López and his colleagues means that this agreement can be translated into proper legislation at an early date .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Waste management
The next item is the report ( A4-0235 / 98 ) by Mr Campoy Zueco , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection , on the Commission communication to the European Parliament and to the Council concerning the application of Directives 75 / 439 / EEC , 75 / 442 / EEC , 78 / 319 / EEC and 86 / 278 / EEC on waste management ( COM ( 97 ) 0023 - C4-0368 / 97 ) .
Mr President , the report we are submitting to Parliament comes under the Community policy on waste management .
The Commission 's proposal is the first attempt on its part to present an assessment of the application by the Member States of the legislative framework for waste management . It covers the first generation of European law in this area , that is , the period up to 1995 .
In accordance with this legislation , the Member States are obliged to submit regular reports on the application of this framework .
It is surprising that the Commission has taken so long to carry out this task .
It is assessing the situation after 20 years .
The scenario presented by this assessment is quite dreadful , due to the lack of enthusiasm shown by the Member States in applying the current rules .
No Member State has so far incorporated the European Waste Catalogue .
Many differences exist in terms of the interpretation of the rules , due to the lack of universal agreement on concepts such as industrial waste and hazardous waste .
It is essential for uniform terminology to be adopted .
There are serious omissions on the part of the Member States concerning their obligation to keep the Commission regularly informed .
In one particular case , not a single report has been submitted in 22 years .
The application of this legislative framework leaves much to be desired . This seriously endangers public health , the operation of the internal market , sustainable development and - what is worse - the Union 's credibility , particularly as far as the applicant countries are concerned .
In December 1991 , the Commission submitted a new directive standardising and rationalising reports in order to ensure that Member States fulfilled their responsibilities for the 1995-1997 period .
The Commission will present the results of this in the middle of 1999 .
Since October 1997 , it has begun infringement proceedings .
These infringement proceedings should be initiated in a more systematic fashion .
Similarly , Community legislation on the environment must be consolidated .
Existing legislation is very fragmented ; up to 20 legal acts would need to be combined in order to improve its consistency and transparency .
We would call on the Council , when Regulation ( EEC ) No 1210 / 90 is next revised , to adopt the European Parliament 's amendments . This would enable the European Environment Agency to provide reports on the application of waste management legislation in the Member States , while increasing its cooperation with national governments .

I would like to thank Mrs Jackson , Mr Bowe and Mr Eisma for having contributed relevant points of view that undoubtedly improve the report .
As regards the three amendments tabled , I agree with the first by Mr Eisma to paragraph 7 , adding a new point .
However , while I thank Mr des Places and Mr Souchet for their interest , I unfortunately cannot accept the amendments they have tabled , Nos 2 and 3 , because they are out of place in this more general report .
Mr President , the issue we are considering is important enough to warrant a wide range of changes : firstly , a change of attitude on the part of the Member States , and , more generally , changes ranging from industrial processes to living habits and from product design to new visions of the world .
I hope that the report will be approved by Parliament and that the Commission will take up our suggestions .
Mr President , I welcome this long overdue report .
Mr Campoy Zueco has done a great deal of work on this and has been very honest , very fair and very just .
I certainly would agree with everything he has said so far .
However , we need to continue to highlight the problems of non-implementation of waste legislation throughout the Union .
There is certainly confusion about definitions within the directives and there is a need for clarification of the texts to make them more coherent .
Equally , there is a clear failure by Member States to implement a whole range of directives , whether it is waste oil , sewage sludge or toxic and dangerous waste .
There are many areas where action really needs to be taken by Member States .
We also need firmer action from the Commission , which , after all , is the guardian of the Treaty and protector of the directives .
I therefore welcome the Commission 's infringement action against some of the Member States which have not properly implemented the waste oils directive .
But more action is needed and it must be more systematic and automatic after a reasonable time period , not decades .
We also have to recognise that the Environment Agency set up in Copenhagen has a role in identifying problems and informing the Commission so that it can take rapid action .
But I feel the main responsibility lies with the Commission .
The enlargement process is going to face us with a whole series of new problems with regard to implementation and enforcement of legislation .
It seems to me that we must steel ourselves to take firmer action in this regard .
We are going to have to draw attention to the sinners who are not implementing European legislation and take fiscal action against those who are not implementing legislation .
The European Parliament is prepared to bring other elected representatives - ministers of Member States - to account and demand their presence here to explain the failure to implement legislation .
We are prepared to take action and we call upon others to do so too .
The European Union must be coherent and respect the legislation that we pass through this House .
Mr President , I would like to congratulate my colleague , Mr Campoy Zueco on his report and on the hard work that he has put in .
This is a very sad story and one which has been highlighted particularly by the British Members , and British Conservative Members , over many years .
The implementation of the directives which are examined in Mr Zueco 's report by the Member States have been appalling and , indeed , as the Commission will confirm , it has experienced enormous difficulty in getting any information at all out of some Member States .
Quite plainly , European environment legislation in this field is not working .
We are using words that have no meaning , adopting directives which are neglected .
What are we going to do about it ?
The traditional answer is to say that we should take Member States which are not implementing the legislation to the European Court of Justice .
That may not work either .
What do you do if a country simply cannot pay for the legislation which it has not put into operation ?
That is the reason the legislation is not in operation .
Infringement actions also are unlikely to be welcomed by the citizens of some Member States who feel that the decision as to whether or not they should pay certain bills should , in the first instance , be that of their national governments rather than some more distant European forum .
I have two suggestions and one will not be news to the European Commission .
First of all , we have to make sure that every single environment proposal that comes forward from the Commission has a full cost-impact assessment in it , an assessment of the kind of cost that individual citizens and their local authorities will expect to pay if they are going to put this legislation into operation .
The Commission often says this is very difficult .
It will be very difficult .
It may well be that the Commission wants to add the cost of non-action , which is fine , as a comparison , but the citizens of Europe need to know what the bill is going to be .
Only then will Member States be able to show their citizens the cost of what they are prepared to sign up to when they agree to this legislation .
Finally , we also need , as Mr White has said , an enlargement cost statement .
Do these new Member States knocking at our door really have the slightest hope of taking part in our environment legislation procedure - which we assume they will be able to do - if we are simply adding new directives that add to the costs they are going to take on .
We need a cost impact statement for the existing Member States and a cost assessment for the applicants .
Mr President , much has been achieved in recent years on the environment , yet this first-rate report by Mr Campoy Zueco shows just how limited European policy on the environment actually is .
A good environmental policy will work only if the Member States are one hundred per cent committed to it .
Sadly , the Commission 's communication reveals that the adoption , implementation and enforcement of our directives on waste leaves much to be desired .
This poor level of compliance on the part of Member States is not only lamentable ; the prospect of enlargement makes it downright alarming .
After all , we expect new Member States to respect our existing acquis .
I put down an amendment to this end which requires the granting of financial aid to applicant countries for waste management activities to be tied to acceptance of the present-day standards of the European Union .
I hope Commissioner Bjerregaard will accept the Liberal Group 's Amendment No 1 .
But it is hardly credible for us to insist that the applicant countries meet those standards if the 15 existing Member States cannot do so .
So I urge Member States to discharge their responsibilities and I expect the Commission to be more vigilant in making sure that they do .
Mr President , I support the resolution before us today .
It calls on the Commission to provide the European Parliament with a quarterly list of cases listing Member States taken to the Court of Justice in the field of waste management .
Moreover , it expresses the intention , in cases of a flagrant violation of European Union waste legislation , of inviting the responsible ministers of the relevant Member States to attend a committee meeting of the European Parliament to explain their policies .
From an Irish perspective the future of waste disposal does not lie in the continued search for more landfill sites nationwide .
This invariably has the contentious effect of arousing considerable local objections .
Local authorities the length and breadth of Ireland are still engaging in the process of finding new landfill sites for the future waste disposal programmes .
There is growing public concern about the long-term environmental impact in general of landfill sites .
Ireland is presently experiencing strong economic growth and part of our resources must be invested in alternative waste management schemes .
Investment in a clean environment in Ireland will , in the medium to long-term , justify the additional expenditure .
I strongly welcome the initiative taken by my government which has commissioned a study into the possible use of new and alternative forms of waste generation and disposal .
The implementation of the Waste Management Act ( 1995 ) is certainly a step in the right direction .
Under this legislation local authorities are required to prepare waste management plans either individually or jointly and the Environment Protection Agency is also required to prepare a national hazardous waste management plan .
However , when one considers that there was over 42 million tonnes of waste in Ireland in 1995 I am confident that the innovative proposals to deal with waste management in Ireland will receive a very favourable response from the Commission during the next round of European Union structural funding for the years 2000 to 2006 .
I compliment the rapporteur on his excellent report .
Mr President , there is no doubt as to the opportunity this Commission communication represents , nor as to how apt the report by my fellow countryman Mr Campoy Zueco is , since the communication relates to the extent to which four directives have been applied .
It could refer to many other things , and I believe that we would also come to the same conclusion : that the majority of the Member States are blatantly breaching these as well as other directives .
I believe we must welcome the infringement proceedings begun against 13 Member States that have failed to adopt waste disposal plans .
In my opinion , this is a good idea .
What is happening means that perhaps these infringement proceedings should be faster and more automatic , because they continue over a period of time and that leads to an increase in waste , something that is particularly alarming when the waste is hazardous .
The information Mr Campoy provided was very clear : more than 20 often complex legal acts are making it difficult for governments to apply the directives more clearly , transparently and quickly .
I believe that our priorities should be to consolidate the Community law on waste management , as the rapporteur proposes , to support the work of the IMPEL network and , of course , to support the European Environment Agency with sufficient resources so that it can monitor and control the application of Community legislation in this area .
When we talk here about waste management , it is as if we are talking about something vague and ethereal .
However , Commissioner Bjerregaard , knows very well , because we sometimes send her information , that the increase in waste means a disaster for health and for the environment .
This is true for waste that is toxic and hazardous , such as the five million tonnes of phosphorus containers in Huelva , and is evident from what happened in Doñana .
Similarly , we have seen it clearly this very week in León when visiting dumps connected with the exploitation of slate that are threatening the very lives of 700 people in a nearby town .
In other words , health and the environment are at risk because Community law is not being upheld .
Mr President , as the rapporteur has pointed out , one of the most obvious things about this Commission communication has been the lack of information from Member States .
Only scant information has been received .
It is clear that EU governments are failing in their obligation to provide information to the Commission .
In almost all cases Ireland , my own country , has failed to file the reports on transposition , application and the implementation of EU waste management directives which they are required to submit .
It is impossible to determine whether Member States have fulfilled their obligations under the legislation because of their failure to file reports .
This situation cannot continue .
The Commission must take immediate legal action against Member States who default on their obligations .
The Commission appears to have an extremely weak attitude towards enforcing legislation on waste management and , as a result , irresponsible countries like my own are allowed to continue with dangerous approaches to waste with the unsustainable option of landfill .
Ireland has one of lowest rates of recycling in the EU and one of the highest rates of landfill disposal .
In Ireland many dumps are on the periphery of large residential areas and , according to a recent study , are a serious threat to pregnant women .
Thousands of pregnant women living near landfill sites are running an increased risk of producing children with birth defects .
According to a study that was published recently in the medical journal The Lancet , spina bifida , holes in the heart , malformations of major blood vessels and a host of other defects are 33 % more likely in babies born to mothers living within 1.8 miles of landfill sites .
Many of these contain highly dangerous chemicals .
The Irish Government 's failure to enforce EU legislation and the failure of Member States throughout the European Union to enforce the waste management regulations is unacceptable .
Their failure to enforce it and to comply with it should not be allowed to continue .
It is clear that waste is one of the most obvious problems facing the EU in the future .
It is about time that Member States lived up to their obligation to protect the public from dangerous and toxic dumps and irresponsible waste disposal .
We need to see an inventory of what has been dumped throughout the EU .
The people have a right to know and the people responsible should be taxed .
There must be taxes on industry to ensure that toxic waste is no longer produced .
There has to be a reasoned approach to waste .
Time is very short , and I would ask Members not to go beyond their speaking time .
I am now obliged to interrupt the debate for Question Time , and there are still four speakers left .
If there are no objections and the House wishes me to continue the debate so that we can take these speakers and conclude the matter , I could be persuaded to do so .
I assume that there is quite a large majority in favour of continuing .
Mr President , if you authorise the extension of the debate , please at least restrict each speaker to about one minute .
The last three speakers exceeded their speaking time by 45 seconds .
With a firm President who wields the necessary powers , we should be able to respect our timetable .
You are quite right , Mr Herman .
I have been much too generous , and that is why we are running late .
I would now ask the last few speakers to be very brief .
Mr President , the Commission 's statement is the first step in drawing attention to the seriously deficient policy concerning waste management .
It is the first effort to record and assess the woeful situation so far .
For the first time , an attempt is being made to shed light on the situation prevailing in the Member States as regards the implementation of Community law .
The report also highlights the ineffectual application of the regulatory frameworks and Community rules worked out at European Union level .
There is a huge gulf : the European Union 's bodies vote for one thing , but what is implemented and takes place in the Member States is quite another .
It is typical that not a single Member State has properly transposed Directive 75 / 442 / EEC , and each applies it in a different way .
It should be noted that no Member State has incorporated the European listing of waste products in accordance with Directive 4 / 94 .
In each Member State , different definitions apply for the limits of hazardous substances and the maximum acceptable concentrations .
The checking procedures are also different . Moreover , there are serious problems connected with the directives on mineral oils and sewage treatment .
However , I would like to dwell on what is happening as a result of the directives on solid wastes .
The situation here is truly dramatic .
The Commission has tried to secure compliance from the Member States by bringing an action before the European Court of Justice and through the fines which Article 171 empowers it to propose .
Unfortunately , one of the transgressor countries is my own , in cases such as the Pagasitikos Gulf , the pollution of Lake Vegorritis and the River Soulos and , worst of all , the case of Kouroupito near Hania .
Consequently , despite bombastic declarations by the Member States about a Europe close to its citizens , it is the Union 's own bodies which ultimately not only stand aloof from their concerns , but even strive to protect their own rights .
We believe that the Commission should begin preparing an overall record of the situation in all the waste management sectors , with the aim of formulating a uniform Community policy .
Accordingly , the Member States must realise that the proper management of all types of waste is at the core of the Treaties and of our concerns about the quality of life .
I would like to thank our rapporteur , who has really done an excellent job .
Mr President , I share the concerns and criticisms of the rapporteur , Mr Campoy Zueco , on the subject of the considerable delays in implementing the directives on waste .
Our commitment to sustainable development and the protection of the environment obliges us to advocate a completely different form of waste management .
We must reduce waste production at source , develop upgrading and recycling methods and neutralise the final waste .
But how are we to achieve this ?
I would only go some way with our rapporteur when he stresses the need for infringement procedures .
We must take the full measure of the real obstacles to implementing waste legislation , not in order to justify present shortcomings , but in order for the legislation to be effective and workable .
Because this legislation has considerable financial implications .
We could of course reduce its costs and the Commission must submit proposals to this effect , in particular by means of tax incentives as the rapporteur proposes for waste oils .
But generally , should we not reduce VAT on waste treatment to the lowest possible level , or even create the conditions for a sufficient upgrading of recycled products which would then be able to compete with new products which are often cheaper ?
That said , given the financial costs which remain considerable , how will it be possible to mobilise the necessary resources when the public authorities are compelled to reduce their budget , when companies are facing global competition and when people have inadequate purchasing power ?
I believe there is a contradiction between the Union 's economic and monetary policies , which are backed up by strict obligations and criteria , and environment policy , where laissez-faire and laxness can dominate , as witnessed by the report which we are now discussing .
Finally , I believe that the only way out of the present situation is to combine infringement procedures with the financial measures which will make it possible to remove fundamental obstacles and , above all , allow democracy to make a greater contribution .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I should first like to congratulate the rapporteur and also express my dissatisfaction at the delay of the Member States in implementing coherent waste management policies .
Everybody knows that the way to protect an often abused environment , to reduce land , air and water pollution and to save on raw materials is to adopt better waste management - or quite simply any waste management at all - and to limit and recycle waste .
Admittedly , this initially brings additional costs , sometimes considerable , as wasting and polluting is cheaper in the short term . But in the medium term a rigorous and more economic management is essential , especially for human health .
We must therefore show greater firmness in dealing with those who fail to apply the legislation , whoever they may be .
Of course they must be punished in fiscal terms , while at the same time we must certainly help those who make every effort to implement the legislation , in particular the local authorities .
Finally , like other Members , I also note that our debate has once again raised the problem of implementing the decisions taken .
We spend a good deal of time defining standards and agreeing measures , especially in the environment sector . Yet often we then forget to take stock of what is happening and when we do so , as today , the result is so utterly distressing .
Here too , the question of the political authority of Europe and its institutions is at stake more than ever before .
It is an authority which must be strengthened .
Mr President , I will not prolong the debate unduly .
I greatly welcome the report presented by Mr Campoy Zueco today .
I have understood from the debate that there is general agreement on the urgent need for the legislation to be implemented , and that there is annoyance and disappointment over the fact that the Member States do not seem more able or do not have the political will to implement the legislation .
I hope that the resolution , which I assume will be adopted , will help to step up the debate . I am also grateful for the various pieces of good advice which have been given in the course of the debate today .
Some of that advice has , in my opinion , already been taken up to improve the situation , and I hasten to assure Parliament that we have no intention of letting the Member States off the hook as regards implementing legislation which we - it can be said - have made strenuous efforts to put into effect within the Union .
Thank you , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Question Time ( Commission )
The next item is questions to the Commission ( B4-0482 / 98 ) .
Question No 44 by Charlotte Cederschiöld ( H-0763 / 98 )
Subject : Social security in the event of moving abroad
Swedish courts have ruled on several occasions that Swedish legislation on social insurance is contrary to fundamental Community rules in requiring that a person must be resident in Sweden to receive benefits .
Despite these rulings , citizens entitled to benefit continue to be refused social security in the event of moving abroad .
Does the Commission consider that this situation is consistent with the principles concerning the freedom of movement of individuals ?
I should like to welcome Mr Monti and apologise to him for starting Question Time ten minutes late .
I would now ask him to reply to Mrs Cederschiöld 's question .
The honourable Member raises the problem of assimilation of Community law on social security in Sweden .
Council Regulation ( EEC ) No 1408 / 71 established detailed rules for coordinating Member States ' social security systems applying to European Union workers and their families resident in the Community .
The question implies that Sweden has not implemented these rules correctly , but does not actually provide enough information for the Commission to establish whether Community law has or has not been respected in a specific case .
So the Commission invites the honourable Member to describe the case in more detail to the services of my colleague , Mr Flynn , who is responsible for this matter , so that they can examine the matter in the light of Community law .
Thank you for your reply , Commissioner Monti .
This case concerns a women who , because she was working in England , was unable to draw her parental allowance .
I am pleased to hear that the Commission would like more information and I will certainly provide it .
I see a parallel here with another issue which is topical at the moment : the right to health care .
The Court of Justice refers in this regard to the Treaty of Rome .
When it comes to freedom of movement , I do not believe that the status of people with social benefit entitlements differs substantially from that of patients , whose claims are judged on an individual basis .
There is no question of arbitrary assessment , nor can reimbursement be denied . Prior authorisation is not necessary either .
If Union citizens , be they patients or social benefit recipients , find themselves denied free movement , will the Commission undertake to support them in any proceedings they may initiate against the Member States concerned ?
In this case too , I would ask Mrs Cederschiöld to be good enough to let us have further details .
I can only say - but on very general lines - that the Commission is trying to support the citizens of the European Union in the exercise of their rights , primarily with an information programme about the exact nature of those rights .
And , as the honourable Member is aware , this framework encompasses the Citizens First programme which the Commission has been carrying out with the resolute support of the European Parliament .
On the specific health care case you raise , again I invite you to provide the Commission with further details so that we can do something more specific to help .
Question No 45 by Robert Evans ( H-0764 / 98 )
Subject : Voting rights for EU citizens
Is the Commission aware that some EU citizens , living outside their own Member State are effectively disenfranchise , unable to vote in European or local elections as they should expect to do as EU citizens ?
The Belgian Government has once again shown that whilst being , ' at the heart of Europe ' , it is unable to provide nonBelgian nationals with their full voting rights , but it is not the only offender .
The case has come to my attention of EU citizens , employed for many years with the Council of Europe , who are now denied the right to vote both by their home country and by the French Government due to their ' quasi-diplomatic ' status .
What action is the Commission taking to rid the European Union of these anomalies and ensure that all EU citizens can vote , at least in local and European elections ?
I give the floor to Mr Monti to answer Mr Evans 's question .
Any Union citizen resident in a Member State who does not have citizenship there can exercise the right to vote and is eligible to stand in local and European Parliament elections under the rules laid down by the directive and incorporated into national law by all the Member States , with one exception .
Only Belgium has not yet implemented Directive 94 / 80 / EC which establishes the method of exercising the right to vote and eligibility for local elections .
Following the European Court of Justice decision of 9 July 1998 , finding against Belgium for failing to incorporate the said directive , the Commission will certainly take action under Article 171 of the EC Treaty if the defaulting Member State does not take steps to comply with the Court 's ruling within a reasonable period of time .
As regards officials of the Council of Europe , the Commission is not aware of the facts reported by the honourable Member .
As far as the Commission knows , all citizens of the European Union resident in France can participate in local and European Parliament elections if they wish to , regardless of their personal status .
The French law transposing Directive 94 / 80 / EC , which establishes the procedures for exercising the right to vote and stand for election at municipal elections , states that Union citizens are considered as resident in France if their actual domicile is there or if their residence in the country is continuous .
There are a huge number of anomalies in this legislation .
The Commissioner is quite right in what he says about the Belgian authorities .
Belgium seems to be making its own exceptions or its own regulations regarding this .
In certain communes , if 20 % of residents are not Belgians but other Europeans , they seem to waive the law and the legislation .
I hope very much that the Commissioner will do what he said in his answer to the previous question : enforce the enjoyment of their rights by EU citizens .
This raises a question : in the European elections next year , if the Commissioner was living in London he would get a vote .
It seems to me that EU Commissioners living in Brussels will not be able to vote in the European elections next summer even though they are working for Europe .
I must also draw the Commissioner 's attention to the point that I raised about people working at the Council of Europe who are - in my understanding - not eligible to vote as they are not paying full tax in France because of their status as working for the Council of Europe .
I wonder if he could give me any further information on that ?
Concerning the officials of the Council of Europe I can only refer to what I said in my initial remarks .
The French law transposing Directive 94 / 80 , which establishes the modalities for the exercise of the right to vote and stand for election at municipal elections , states that Union citizens are considered as resident in France if they have their real domicile there or if their residence in that country is of a continuous nature .
I should like to add a few words concerning Belgium , a point raised by Mr Evans in his supplementary question .
The Commission is aware that there has been some progress on this matter in recent days in Belgium .
At its first meeting in September , the Belgian Council of Ministers adopted a preliminary draft which aims to amend the legislation in force to provide for the transposition of the directive .
This draft has now been submitted for examination in the Chamber of Representatives and the parliamentary committees responsible have resumed their discussions on the reform of Article 8 of the Constitution , which is also required to extend political rights to non-national EU citizens .
Although these are indeed complex matters , the Commission hopes that on the basis of work now under way , the necessary measures will be in place in sufficient time to allow Union citizens to vote and stand as candidates in the next municipal elections in Belgium , which are scheduled for the year 2000 .
With this in view the Commission services are monitoring developments and pursuing contacts about this matter with the Belgian authorities .
Question No 46 by Willy De Clercq ( H-0793 / 98 )
Subject : Voting rights for the European elections which must be granted , pursuant to the Treaty , to all EU subjects
The resolution in the report on citizenship of the Union , adopted by the European Parliament at its sitting of 2 July 1998 , requests ' the Member States and the Community institutions particularly to ensure that the rights to vote and stand as a candidate in elections to the European Parliament are recognized and can be exercised by all citizens who in accordance with Article 8 hold the nationality of a Member State and reside in the Union ' .
The Government of the United Kingdom has declared that it recognizes as its nationals ' British Dependent Territories citizens who acquire their citizenship from a connection with Gibraltar ' ( OJ C 23 , 28.1.1983 , p . 1 ) .
Why are residents of Gibraltar still excluded from participation in the European elections , and will the Council take any action in this respect before the June 1999 elections ?
I give the floor to Mr Monti to answer Mr De Clercq 's question .
Pending the adoption of a uniform electoral procedure , the elections to the European Parliament are governed by the provisions of the Act concerning the election of representatives of the European Parliament by direct universal suffrage of 20 September 1976 , annexed to Council Decision 76 / 787 / ECSC , EC , EURATOM , by the provisions of the Treaty on European Union and by national legislation .
The act in question contains an annex , constituting an integral part of the act , whereby the United Kingdom undertakes to apply these provisions solely to the United Kingdom .
In effect , this means that Gibraltar is excluded from voting in elections to the European Parliament .
The annex was formally endorsed by the representatives of the Member States , sent to the Member States for their approval , and ratified according to the provisions of their respective constitutions .
The Treaty on European Union , in particular Article 8b , does not change this legal situation in that it is limited to granting the right to vote to citizens of the European Union residing in a Member State of which they are not nationals , under the same conditions as nationals of that state .
The definition of the area of application contained in Directive 93 / 109 / EC on the method of exercising that right is linked to the 1976 act , under which Gibraltar does not hold elections to the European Parliament .

It is significant that the provisions of Article 8b ( 2 ) expressly state that the political rights covered by it are without prejudice to Article 138 ( 3 ) and the provisions adopted for its implementation .
In any event , Article 138 ( 3 ) of the EC Treaty establishes that the Act of 1976 can be amended only by unanimous decision of the Council , after approval by Parliament and subject to ratification by the Member States .
As Mr De Clercq is aware , of course , the Treaty expressly urges the European Parliament to draw up proposals for elections by direct universal suffrage in accordance with a uniform procedure .
In view of the current legal situation , the Commission cannot take any initiative to grant citizens of the European Union resident in Gibraltar the right to vote , as sought by the honourable Member .
My question is very simple .
I understand from the Commissioner 's reply that he is not all that happy with the situation created here by the United Kingdom .
Whilst I would stress that the British Government did at the time recognise citizens of Gibraltar as British subjects , and since the European Parliament 's resolution says that all citizens of the European Union must be free to take part in European elections , it seems to me that the position of this Member State is in clear conflict with that resolution .
You say the Commission cannot take any action .
I agree with you , but I should have liked to hear your reaction .
My question is this : although you cannot take any action , can you not bring pressure to bear on the Member State in question to treat all its citizens equally , irrespective of where they happen to be ?
Indeed , Mr De Clercq , the final words of my brief reply can be seen in the context of the law we are talking about , but I mentioned that the Treaty expressly urges the European Parliament to draw up proposals for elections by direct universal suffrage in accordance with a uniform procedure , because this Parliament , and not just the Commission , has a very important role in stimulating the Member States , and that applies here .
Certainly , if we are asking what chance the citizens of Gibraltar have of securing the right to vote in the European Parliament elections , the obligatory first step is to amend the United Kingdom statement annexed to the Act of 1976 , and Council Decision 76 / 787 / ECSC , EC , EURATOM , which requires a unanimous vote in the Council .
After that , the British Government would be responsible for the way the citizens of Gibraltar exercise their right to vote , and that lies outside the Commission 's competence .
I might say for the sake of completeness that , in addition to Gibraltar , elections to the European Parliament are not held in the Channel Islands or the Isle of Man either .
The EC Treaty does not apply to the United Kingdom sovereignty zones in Cyprus , where the question of participation in the European Parliament elections does not arise .
As regards Denmark , the autonomous region of the Faroe Islands , to which the EC Treaty does not apply , and Greenland , which does not form part of European Union territory , are excluded from the elections .
Finally , I would note that Council Directive 93 / 109 / EEC is applicable to the French Overseas Territories , to Ceuta and Melilla , to Aruba and the Dutch Antilles . I mention that to give you the full picture .
As the author is not present , Question No 47 lapses .
Question No 48 by María Izquierdo Rojo ( H-0746 / 98 )
Subject : Implementation of Euro-Mediterranean policies in Algeria
What are the immediate prospects facing the Commission with regard to programmes and projects for cooperation with Algeria ?
What results can it point to in the last three years ?
I should like to welcome Mr Marín and ask him to reply to Mrs Izquierdo Rojo 's question .
As you know , Mrs Izquierdo Rojo , the Commission has agreed with the Algerian Government , as well as with the other Mediterranean partner countries , a multiannual programme for bilateral financial cooperation within the framework of the MEDA programme .
Due to the difficult social situation - according to official figures , unemployment affects around 30 % of the working population , and probably affects more in reality - efforts in this multiannual programme have been focused for the most part on this question of support for policies aimed at reducing unemployment .
And what we are trying to do , through the programme on micro-enterprises , is to help create and consolidate open-ended jobs , and to use those projects aimed at completing infrastructures and public works to develop a network of temporary jobs .
That is the objective .
The Commission is also encouraging and supporting , under difficult circumstances , community development through socalled ' local initiatives ' .
This is an area affected by questions of security and we have so far received no response from the Algerian Government , for reasons that are clearly understandable , on how to implement these local development initiatives .
The remaining issues in the current programme include aid for structural adjustment mechanisms , privatisation and modernisation of the financial sector .
We are having difficulties in developing these projects due to the problems involved in trying to employ qualified experts who are prepared to move to Algeria . However , for the moment , and with the necessary protection , we have managed to keep three teams of experts who are preparing the programmes for the privatisation of small and medium-sized enterprises and the modernisation of the financial sector .
The aim , which is under negotiation , is to be able to dedicate around ECU 100 million to these three programmes , since they are connected with the completion of the multiannual programme .
In terms of the negotiations on the association agreement , the Algerian Government , as you probably know , decided to take some time to analyse the Commission 's proposal , primarily the section relating to the period of industrial restructuring , and in principle , the Algerian Government has still not told us when it would like to recommence formal negotiations .
In exchange , we have been asked to hold a series of explanatory seminars on the Euro-Mediterranean free trade area , the problems related to the establishment of a Euro-Mediterranean internal market , with its industrial restructuring and the possible impacts on the industrial fabric of Algeria , since they believe that this is a very sensitive issue . In addition , before resuming negotiations , they would like to have as much information as we can provide .
We are naturally willing to provide such information and when the Algerian Government informs us that it wishes to continue with formal negotiations , we will thus continue with them .
Thank you very much , Mr Marín , for that response ; it satisfies my concerns over the current situation in Algeria .
However , I would like to ask you more specifically if it has already been possible to open a Commission delegation in Algeria .
I understand that there are three teams of experts , but I do not know if that point has been clarified sufficiently for me .
It is true that the situation in Algeria calls for a specific project for that country at the moment .
I believe that the Commission should ensure that provision is made within the Euro-Mediterranean process to allow us to initiate now - and especially now since early elections have been called - a specific programme for Algeria that can be implemented with a certain degree of flexibility .
In conclusion , I would like to know if the Commission is going to support policies that ensure democratic guarantees for the next elections , which President Zeroual announced would take place in February . And I would like to know , too , in what way we will be able to combat corruption and provide young people with opportunities and choices for progress .
As regards the delegation , the delegate has been appointed , as has the assistant delegate .
A building has been chosen which provides the appropriate guarantees of safety .
The security system has been negotiated with the Algerian authorities .
The only problem we have is that we have turned down , for purely legal reasons , the form of contract which the owner was offering us .
And this is the problem that , at a legal level , we are currently trying to solve .
However , the most important part of the decision has already been taken . As for international observing of the elections , you will know that in the last elections Algeria did not allow the participation of European election observers .
Observation of the elections was organised within the framework of the United Nations . And it was through the United Nations that we were able to participate , not as European observers but as observers from that international organisation .
What is the government 's decision going to be with respect to the next presidential elections ?
Will they allow this observation to take place ?
At this stage , I do not know .
As for the programme , what I have told you already clearly shows the efforts we are making to be flexible , within certain limits of course , since I have already said that we have employed three groups of experts who are working in very complicated situations .
This is basically because our problem is quite simply , as you know , that there are no employees - and unfortunately I have to say this - who are willing to do the work , particularly in certain programmes that involve security risks .
Question No 49 by Maj Theorin ( H-0747 / 98 )
Subject : Burma
The people of Burma have for several years had to live in extremely difficult circumstances .
Under the military regime , the people have suffered violent repression and forced labour , women have been systematically raped ; the Karen people has been a particular target , but not the only one .
The situation has now lasted for several years .
Since 1990 SLORC , the military regime , has been brutally and ruthlessly exploiting the country .
Parliament has adopted a number of resolutions condemning violations of human rights , and a report which recommended the removal of general customs preferences in industry and for agricultural products from Burma .
Unfortunately there seems to be no prospect of any change for the better for the Opposition and the Burmese people ; on the contrary , reports of fresh excesses and violations of human rights are continually coming in .
The permanent International Criminal Court in Rome , which the EU played an active part in setting up , gives the international community a new instrument against genocide , crimes against humanity , war crimes and aggression perpetrated during international conflicts or civil war .
Does the Commission plan to use this new instrument to start proceedings against the Burmese military government ?
I give the floor to Mr Marín to answer Mrs Theorin 's question .
Thank you , Mrs Theorin , for your continued presence on issues concerning Burma , because I think that we need to show a political presence in the difficult situation which that country is experiencing .
Relations with Burma went through an extremely difficult period during the last meeting we had with the ASEAN group in Manila , in the Philippines .
At that time , as you will know , a serious incident had taken place concerning the leader of the opposition , Aung San Suu Kyi , and certain ethnic minorities . I was a witness to the political dialogue with the Burmese Government , and I can assure you that it was a very difficult situation .
We are monitoring the development of the situation and are negotiating with the ASEAN group to ensure that the European Commission 's position on the situation in Burma is very clearly defined .
In terms of the situation that has been created in the wake of the International Criminal Court being approved , I must point out to you that it is still not possible to use this as an additional instrument .
You know that the Commission was present as an observer and actively supported the European Union 's position in favour of establishing this Court .
As you are aware , for the International Criminal Court to become operational , the provisions require ratification by a minimum of 60 countries so that it can be established .
This has still not happened .
In addition , the modus operandi defined at the meeting in Rome means that the right to refer matters to this Court belongs to the member countries , the Security Council and the national prosecuting authorities .
However , the system of jurisdiction concerning non-member countries - as will presumably be the case for Burma , since I do not believe that Burma is going to sign the protocol on the International Criminal Court becoming operational - is a mechanism which , as the Convention states , will normally have to be set in motion by the Security Council .
My question has to do with the establishment of the new international court .
Like Mrs Maij-Weggen , I too would be interested to hear what steps the Commission has already undertaken , or intends to undertake .
I appreciate that a minimum number of countries must ratify before the Court can become operational .
The question was , however , whether there were any plans to utilise this new instrument to initiate proceedings against Burma 's military government .
The case would clearly fall within the Court 's remit , since this encompasses genocide , crimes against humanity , war crimes and acts of aggression committed during international conflict or civil war .
With this new institution , we have one more instrument available to us .
I believe that very strong pressure has to be kept up on Burma 's military government .
Restricting investment would be one way in which the European Union could exercise influence in its own right .
As I already said , to make use of the International Criminal Court , the protocol on it becoming operational must be ratified by 60 countries .
When those 60 countries ratify the protocol , it will be possible to include the Burmese case .
But , as I said in my response , the right of initiative to request the intervention of the International Criminal Court , as stated in the protocol , belongs only to the member countries , the Security Council and national prosecuting authorities , and that was an integral part of the protocol .
As such , the European Commission will have no authority to initiate any proceedings in the International Criminal Court .
Those who will be able to do so when it becomes operational - and that is the issue here - are the Member States meeting in the framework of the Council of Ministers .
So this is an issue that both Parliament and the Commission will have to consider , firstly when the protocol enters into force and , secondly , when a decision has been taken by the countries themselves because - and I repeat - the Commission has no authority in this respect .
As the author is not present , Question No 50 lapses .
Question No 51 by Bernd Posselt ( H-0772 / 98 )
Subject : Christians in East Timor
What measures does the Commission intend to take to support the oppressed Christians in East Timor following the political changes in Indonesia ?
I give the floor to Mr Marín to answer Mr Posselt 's question .
The Commission has often expressed its concern over the situation in East Timor in the meetings held with the Indonesian Government , and we are urging that government to find a peaceful and lasting solution for the area .
In addition , at the last meeting held within the ASEAN group , statements were made by the Indonesians which could be described as innovative ; we shall soon see what results they bring . They related to an offer made to the other European country that feels it is directly affected - Portugal - concerning an avenue currently being explored in the United Nations under the responsibility of Kofi Annan , the Portuguese Government and the Indonesian Government .
Their aim is to reach a decision that could be accepted at international level , while clearly taking into account , of course , the interests of the people of Timor .
Moreover , a visit has been made by the troika , while the European Union heads of mission in Jakarta have also visited East Timor .
And the General Affairs Council of 13 September adopted certain conclusions on the region 's future .
In terms of aid , the European Commission , as you know , is providing a specific programme for East Timor .
In May of this year , an assessment mission took place and the relevant organisations are currently trying to determine the best method of implementing this specific programme for humanitarian , food and development aid that was presented by the Commission to the Council of Ministers .
Commissioner , I just wanted to ask exactly what this idea of the EU actually involves , and I wished to come back on two points in particular .
The first is a proposal from Bishop Belo on the demilitarisation of East Timor . Is that being discussed ?
The second relates to our programme for democracy .
Completely new parties are forming there and the danger exists that fanatical tendencies are also developing .
Is this newly emerging political spectrum also being monitored by ourselves in the context of the programme for democracy ?
That debate is , in fact , still open .
During the meeting in the Philippines , the Indonesian Minister for Foreign Affairs very surprisingly , in my opinion , presented an offer to the ASEAN group relating to the East Timor problem .
One of the elements contained in this offer was , in fact , the withdrawal of the Indonesian military presence in East Timor and an offer to negotiate a status of autonomy .
This offer has been discussed among the Secretary-General , Mr Annan , the Portuguese Minister for Foreign Affairs , Mr Jaime Gama , and Indonesia 's own Minister for Foreign Affairs , Ali Alatas .
As far as I remember , this meeting took place in New York at the end of August .
I do not have any information from either of the two parties involved , so I do not know what conclusions this meeting produced .
This is logical to a certain degree , since I imagine that they will be very delicate and difficult bilateral negotiations .
In any case , this is the first time that the Indonesian Government has publicly demonstrated its willingness to proceed to the withdrawal of its military presence and to negotiate a status of autonomy . This must be looked on as a step forward towards finding a possible solution to the conflict .
However , I myself , on behalf of the Commission , do not have any information on these bilateral negotiations .
Question No 52 by Glenys Kinnock ( H-0781 / 98 )
Subject : Cambodia
What does the Commission consider the appropriate response to be on the elections held in Cambodia on 26 July this year ?
What will be the criteria which will have to be met by the Cambodian authorities if any future cooperation agreements are to be discussed ?
I give the floor to the Commissioner to answer Mrs Kinnock 's question .
First of all , I should like to thank Mrs Kinnock for her work as a special representative of the European Union at the Cambodian elections on 26 July .
I thank you , in particular , because I could tell that it was not exactly an easy task and that you performed it - in my opinion and in that of international observers - effectively and extremely well . You thus allowed us to consolidate the European Union 's credibility and its participation in the electoral process , despite working in a political framework marked by the distrust of Cambodian politicians .
You also helped to assert Europe 's presence within the joint group of election observers .
As you know , the assessment carried out by the Commission is still in keeping with the declaration issued on 27 July by the joint group of international election observers . This stated that the elections had been free and fair , and that they were a credible reflection of the will of the Cambodian people .
We believe that the overall process has been acceptable , although it is true that - as you could see - certain problems relating to both the voting and the counting were identified during the electoral campaign .
And , in principle , those problems are being investigated and resolved .
The problem of the elections as such does not worry me , Mrs Kinnock , as I think they can be justified .
What does worry me , and I am sure it concerns you too , is the situation that has been created since the elections when something happened that everyone , including yourself , believed to be the greatest risk : that the losers might not accept the result of the elections , since it is presumed that the winners always accept the result because they have won .
Unfortunately , that is what has happened and it is creating a difficult situation that does not allow for political arbitration .
I must inform you - although you are probably already aware of this - of the request that has been forwarded to us by the head of the observation group . It asks that we withdraw the European Union representatives on the ground from Cambodia for reasons of security and stability , that is , if we had decided to maintain the European Union presence in the region for a period so that an international presence might be guaranteed .
We are going to assess this week whether or not the situation in the area does , in fact , warrant the withdrawal of our observers because the security conditions are not being met .
Secondly , I must tell you that the President-in-Office of the Council has confirmed that the European Union agrees with the decision taken by ASEAN to send the Thai Deputy Minister for Foreign Affairs to Phnom Penh to meet the King . He is currently working over there , and we hope that he will be able to determine whether it is possible to send international mediators back to the country to try to restore governability .
Consequently , and in conclusion , I would first like to thank you for your excellent and very difficult work .
Secondly , with the exception of some imperfections that must be corrected , the elections and their result can be justified at an international level .
Thirdly , we must currently look at what we are doing to ensure that a government can quickly be formed and that we do not return to a situation often experienced in that country , a country that has already suffered enough because certain political leaders can never come to an agreement .
This issue is a very important one , Mrs Kinnock , because we must not forget a fundamental point : this is the second time that the international community has been involved in organising free elections .
Elections were previously organised that led to the establishment of a government and sparked off a coup .
To correct this situation , the international community has returned in order to organise new elections .
The risk as far as Cambodia is concerned is that the international community might believe that it is a lost cause and that , as such , there is no point in putting any more effort into it .
I therefore emphasised to the Council of Ministers the importance of avoiding this situation of international fatigue that occurs when things are not working out .
Cambodia cannot be considered a lost cause .
That would be a terrible situation , and that is our opinion on the matter .
I thank the Commissioner for his kind words and the personal support that he gave me in what he acknowledged was a quite difficult task in Cambodia .
As he says , the protests continue and Prince Ranariddh said only yesterday that he feared the whole thing could shortly spin out of control .
I am very worried to hear you say that there is a likelihood that our observers will pull out because that will send a very serious message to the people of Cambodia who are clearly going through very difficult times .
There is a likelihood of a summit between Mr Hun Sen and Prince Ranariddh and Sam Rainsy .
I wonder how much you believe that this is a serious prospect ?
I also wonder how likely it is that the hardliners in the government will call for a severe crackdown on dissent in order to stamp it out once and for all .
Thirdly , it is interesting that Thailand is involved in trying to broker peace .
I would like to ask where is the European Union ?
It has invested resources and interest in Cambodia .
Is the Council likely to invest a little more at this time in terms of presence on the ground in Cambodia ?
Mrs Kinnock , I have formally received the request from the head of observation to order the withdrawal of the observers , due to the security conditions .
Naturally , I shall first consult all of the Member States and this is something that we want to do on Friday .
We wish to take the final decision on Friday morning .
In this situation we are faced with something that often occurs : we have to assess the safety of the observers , the situation on the ground and the political damage that might be caused by withdrawing the observers .
But you have worked with them yourself , and you will understand that not even I can ask our observers to be heroes .
And if their head believes that at any stage the observers could find themselves in a serious situation , then it is very difficult to ask them - particularly those in the northern provinces whom you visited with me - to remain in an area where they could be killed or kidnapped , or where anything might happen to them .
In any event , I have told my services to prepare a draft decision for Friday , which we are going to submit to the Member States .
And I can tell you that the European Union has accepted the leadership of the ASEAN troika to try , in fact , to initiate this meeting on political cooperation among themselves . The aim of this is to see if the King finally takes the initiative , since that is the only possibility that remains , and to see if some kind of formula can be found .
Because what I truly fear is that , after the efforts the European Union has made in terms of representatives , observers and hard work , and after having spent USD 12 million , the situation might repeat itself .
I have already experienced other situations that have ended in fatigue , in fatalism , in ' there is nothing we can do ' .
And when that happens in places such as Cambodia , then we can fear the worst .
Consequently , on Friday , I am going to take on my responsibility to make a decision one way or the other , and we shall see if the Council of Ministers provides us with a solution .
Mr President , Commissioner , in Cambodia , the genuine efforts to bring about peace have failed .
My question to you is the following : was the observation really as good as is being claimed today ?
The problem supposedly lay in the fact that it began too late , and that particularly as far as the media over there were concerned and the political developments in the run-up to the elections , fair conditions were not in place .
I believe that your colleague , Mrs Kinnock , could answer that much better than I could .
I think that the circumstances were very risky .
It was very difficult to work , and the work that was done was , in my opinion , quite extraordinary .
There were obviously flaws in terms of access to the media and , in that difficult context , there were certain circumstances that prove to be unacceptable when analysed from a European point of view of what elections mean in Germany , the United Kingdom , Spain or France .
Were those elements sufficiently extreme to mean that the elections could not be justified ?
I do not believe that they were .
Given the difficulties , these elections produced some reasonable results .
And what is happening now is something we discussed many times with Mrs Kinnock , with the ambassadors and with all the observers .
The problem with these elections is not organising them , which is difficult in itself .
The problem with them is ensuring that whoever wins is generous enough to find a solution that involves national consensus , while those who lose the elections must accept that they have lost .
And the problem is that those who have won have not been generous enough to look for national consensus and those who have lost say , on the basis of those arguments , that the elections are not valid .
In other words , it is a situation that , unfortunately , is a repeat of previous situations in Cambodia .
We have now come to the end of the time set aside for questions to Commissioner Marín , whom I would thank for his replies .
Questions Nos 53 and 54 will receive written answers .
Question No 55 by Astrid Thors ( H-0739 / 98 )
Subject : Commission communication on pan-European geographic information
EU ministers asked the Commission to investigate the status and role of pan-European geographic information ( GI ) in 1994 .
DG XIII of the Commission initiated a wide consultation process which should lead to a communication to the Council and Parliament called GI 2000 : Towards a European Policy Framework for Geographic Information .
The Commission first promised to deliver this important Communication in November 1996 and that date has been followed by several subsequent promises as to delivery dates , but to date the Communication has not been presented .
What is the Commission going to do to ensure that the Communication is presented as soon as possible ?
I give the floor to Mr Bangemann to answer Mrs Thors 's question .
Mr President , the Commission had intended to adopt this communication in autumn 1998 and then to pass it on to the Council of Ministers , the European Parliament and the Economic and Social Committee .
Over the last few years , we have received a number of letters from Member States supporting GI 2000 and requesting the Commission to take a pan-European initiative .
We therefore discussed this with the different players and at last a consensus has emerged as to pan-European activity .
It was for that reason that we set out the preparatory measures and projects within the INFO 2000 programme .
Some years ago , we made sure that industry banded together to set up a European umbrella organisation , and that happened , but in the past we have often been forced to the conclusion that , in spite of the importance of the subject and our efforts to support it in the research programme , European industry was not sufficiently interested .
That now seems to be changing , so we shall be presenting this communication very soon .
Thank you for that information , Commissioner .
I trust it was a language problem when you said the Commission thought that the communication would be forthcoming in the autumn .
I hope it still thinks so .
This is indeed an important sector and the communication would be a logical follow-on to the standardisation work already done to assist job creation in Europe .
But I am concerned that so much time has passed since the first plans were put forward in 1994 . Perhaps we do not need a communication .
Why not set up a high level working group directly ? That would seem a more practical way forward .
I also wonder whether any appropriations have been earmarked in the Commission 's budget for promoting this unified approach to boosting European competitiveness .
The Commission 's own work would certainly gain from a more uniform starting-point .
We shall be presenting this communication .
I believe it is necessary to do so , as we must now recapitulate our position .
Of course we will not stop conducting our other activities ; they will be continued .
I have already said that we have taken a series of steps in the INFO 2000 programme to construct European databases and directories .
Those are , if you like , the first building blocks for a geographical information infrastructure .
We have a website at any rate , in which over 300 players are involved .
We have introduced the concept of GI 2000 time and again at conferences , and these programmes will be continued in the context of the fifth framework programme of research , as part of the new projects aimed at creating a user-friendly information society .
That therefore means that we have a whole series of activities that will , of course , be going on .
But ultimately these are all incentives .
Industry must itself take over and show greater interest than it has done hitherto .
That is why I believe that a communication of this type certainly does have a role to play .
As the author is not present , Question No 56 lapses .
Question No 57 by Mark Watts ( H-0791 / 98 )
Subject : Safer car fronts
When does the Commission expect to come forward with the proposal for a Directive requiring safer car fronts for pedestrians and cyclists which is anticipated for introduction in 1998 in the Commission 's Second Action Programme for Road Safety ?
I give the floor to Mr Bangemann to answer Mr Watts 's question .
Mr President , together with Parliament , the Commission pointed out at a very early stage that when it comes to head-on collisions , especially those involving cars and pedestrians but also those involving cars and other road-users , we need to take better precautions , and that technical regulations reduce the dangers associated with car fronts in an accident .
We presented a first proposal for a directive in 1996 to experts from the Member States , industry , consumer organisations and to those bodies responsible for traffic safety . In this document , we followed the testing specifications and performance requirements of the European Enhanced Vehicle Committee .
The consultations have shown that the opinions of those who participated are very diverse .
There are also many Member States which find that the costs are disproportionate when compared to the benefits .
Others are of the opinion that something should nevertheless be done .
That is why we have commissioned an independent expert with the task of examining the issue , particularly this contentious question of the cost-benefit ratio .
As soon as these results are available - and also , by the way , the final report which is expected in December - the Commission services will agree on a final version of the proposal for a directive , so that we should be able to discuss it in Council and Parliament at the beginning of next year .
Thank you Commissioner for that very comprehensive and helpful answer .
Obviously I would urge you to expedite that research but I also draw your attention to three independent studies already conducted by the UK 's Transport Research Laboratories , the German Federal Highway Research Agency and the Dutch Institute for Road Safety Research .
All conclude that up to 2 000 lives a year could be saved and 20 000 serious injury accidents could also be prevented if this new directive to make cars safer when involved in collisions with pedestrians and pedal cyclists becomes law .
I believe that the burden of proof really does exist , that this measure is required and every month , every week and every day that we delay allows people to be unnecessarily injured on our roads .
I hope the Commissioner can confirm that we shall see this directive on the table within this Parliament so that we can expedite the matter early in the New Year .
I can confirm what I said as to the dates : we will try our best - provided we get the study in December - to propose to you early next year the necessary amendments to our original draft .
But the two or three studies you mentioned were exactly the reason why we have asked the EEVC again to incorporate them into their own studies so that we are at the level of the latest scientific findings .
That is the reason why we want to wait until December - so that the position can be given to us and we can then act accordingly .
Question No 58 by Niall Andrews ( H-0830 / 98 )
Subject : Malicious telephone calls
According to available figures , malicious telephone calls are on the increase across Europe .
Telecom Eireann last year dealt with some 30 000 formal complaints from customers .
In Ireland such calls are considered as a criminal offence with fines and / or prison sentences available for malicious calls .
Can the Commission indicate to what extent this matter has been considered at EU level and , if so , how does the Commission consider this type of crime can be effectively dealt with ?
I give the floor to Mr Bangemann to answer Mr Andrews 's question .
Mr President , we have a legal basis to prevent such telephone calls in so far as is possible .
This is Directive 97 / 66 / EC of 15 December 1997 , on the processing of personal data and protection of privacy in telecommunications .
This directive stipulates that telephone users who are disturbed by malicious or annoying telephone calls are entitled to help from their telephone companies to trace the calls back to their source .
Member States are required in the directive to provide a means of legal redress and sanctions in cases where the rights of subscribers to and users of telephone services are not respected .
While we are on the subject , in the recently adopted directive on voice telephony , Member States are asked for the dates on which calling line identification will be introduced . This will enable users , before they pick up the receiver , to see from the number displayed whether the caller is someone they know , and whether they wish to take the call .
Experiments with this system in the USA have shown that malicious or annoying telephone calls can be reduced by 25 % .
We can of course go further , because such a display could lead to the telephone user never wanting to take any calls if they did not know the caller .
If the caller were to withhold their telephone number , then in accordance with the directive , it should be possible for the subscriber to decline the call automatically .
This means that if a telephone call were to come in and the number of the caller were not passed on , then it could automatically be refused , if that is what the subscriber wished to do .
I think that essentially that should be sufficient protection against such calls .
Thank you , Mr Bangemann .
Mr Andrews is indicating to me that he appreciates the information which you have given him .
That brings us to the end of the questions to Mr Bangemann , whom I should like to thank for his replies .
Question No 59 by Jonas Sjöstedt ( H-0734 / 98 )
Subject : EU membership and EMU
In an interview in the Swedish media the head of the Swedish National Bank , Urban Bäckström , recently discussed possible Swedish membership of the third stage of EMU .
According to him , Sweden could in future be obliged to choose between full participation in EMU and leaving the EU .
Does the Commission believe this to be a correct assessment of the situation ?
Has the EU any means of forcing out a country which does not wish to use the common currency ?
If Sweden chooses to stay outside EU exchange rate cooperation , would it still be able to join in the single currency ?
I should like to welcome Mr de Silguy and ask him to reply to Mr Sjöstedt 's question .
Sweden , like any Member State , has undertaken to satisfy the conditions for entry to economic and monetary union .
The Treaty states that a Member State which fails to fulfil the conditions for entry to the third stage of economic and monetary union will be granted exemption . That is the situation of Sweden .
It nevertheless remains a member of the European Union . On this point there is no doubt .
In its report on convergence of 25 March 1998 , the Commission recalled that the Swedish currency has never participated in the exchange rate mechanism .
In the course of the two years under review , the Danish krone fluctuated against the currencies participating in the exchange rate mechanism , reflecting , among other things , the non-existence of a target exchange rate .
The Commission therefore rightly concluded that Sweden did not satisfy the convergence criteria referred to in the third indent of Article 109j ( 1 ) of the Treaty .
On 2 May last , the European Council accepted this Commission recommendation .
This conclusion remains pertinent and the Commission repeats that the conditions for entry to economic and monetary union will be strictly the same for the second-wave countries as for countries which adopt the euro on 1 January 1999 .
I am deputising for Jonas Sjöstedt in putting his question . I wish him luck in the Swedish elections , and the same to all good anti-Union candidates in Sweden .
I want to ask whether it is not right that Sweden , regardless of the terms of the Treaty , should enjoy the same status as Germany following the Karlsruhe judgment , under which Germany acquired the right through a decision of the Bundestag to decide for itself whether it wanted to participate in the third stage of monetary union or not .
That right , enjoyed by Germany , should surely also apply to Sweden on the grounds of equal treatment .
No , I would very clearly point out that the Treaty is extremely explicit .
For two countries , namely Denmark and the United Kingdom , there is what is known as an opt-out clause , which means that even if the conditions for switching to the euro are fulfilled , these countries can and must state whether or not they wish to participate in economic and monetary union .
For all other European Union countries , the criteria apply as from the moment when the conditions are fulfilled .
Participation in economic and monetary union is automatic and there is no discrimination between Member States .
The Treaty is clear on this point . It was strictly and unanimously applied by all the Heads of State and Government on 2 May last .
Question No 60 by Esko Seppänen ( H-0735 / 98 )
Subject : Coordination of EU countries ' economic policies
The monetary policy of the countries signing up to EMU is the preserve of the European Central Bank ( ECB ) which is subject to no political supervision and has no political responsibility .
It has a monopoly of monetary policy .
The stability pact drawn up at Dublin and confirmed at Brussels is monitored by the Council , which has a monopoly of the coordination of the EU countries ' finance policies .
Thus the EU 's economic policy appears to fall outside the area of the Commission 's responsibility .
What is the Commission 's role in decision-making on EU economic policy , and what does it think could be done to rectify the democratic deficit in monetary policy ?
I give the floor to the Commissioner to answer Mr Seppänen 's question .
I thank Mr Seppänen for his question , which allows me to explain that , as in the case of the switch to the euro , the Commission 's role in the management device for economic and monetary union is central .
The particular responsibilities of each institution , including those of the Commission , are defined in the Treaty .
First of all , the Commission plays a major role in coordinating economic policy , and will continue to do so as from 1 January next year .
The Commission fully assumes its power to submit proposals when deciding the principal direction of Member States ' economic policy , pursuant to Article 103 of the Treaty .
I would remind you that this document constitutes the framework instrument for coordinating economic policy in the Union .
Subsequently , the Commission is responsible for multilateral follow-up and monitoring , whether of the developing budgetary situation or the debt of Member States .
In this respect , the procedure in the event of excessive deficits , as laid down in Article 104c of the Treaty , cannot be implemented without a specific recommendation from the Commission .
I would also draw your attention to the stability and growth pact , which clearly confirms this essential Treaty provision .
Finally , the Commission has the power of recommendation in the field of exchange rate policy , pursuant to Article 109 of the Treaty .
I can assure you that on all these points the Commission will continue to fully discharge its tasks , as required by the Treaty .
At the same time , the Treaty confers responsibility for deciding and implementing monetary policy on the European Central Bank , and guarantees its independence .
I would remind you that , in order to ensure maximum coordination of economic and monetary policy , the responsible Member of the Commission , in this case the Commissioner for Economic and Monetary Affairs , can attend meetings of the Central Bank 's Governing Council , even if he is not entitled to vote .
I can assure you that I for one will be attending all these meetings .
The President of the Council of Finance Ministers , ECOFIN , can also attend the Governing Council on the same basis and , as is the case for the Commission , the General Council of the ECB .
On the more specific subject of democratic control of economic and monetary union , a subject which has been frequently debated in this House - and rightly so - the Commission has always considered that independence and dialogue not only can but must go together , and that an ongoing dialogue between the institutions , which respects their individual competences and tasks , is the only way to develop a mix of balanced , flourishing policies which are favourable to growth and employment .
Mr President , I would like to thank the Commissioner for a theoretical answer that was , to my mind , extremely comprehensive .
I would propose , as a follow-up question , a practical problem : how to determine the exchange rate between the euro and the US dollar under this decision-making procedure , and what the Commission 's role would be in the matter .
I do not know if the Commission is very competent in the matter , but if there is one field in which neither the Commission nor the Council nor governments can impose their will or desires , it is that of exchange rates , since it is by definition the markets which determine the relative value of currencies the one against the other .
So we are ultimately unable to say at the outset whether the euro will be strong or weak compared to the dollar , as nobody in the world today is able to guarantee the stability of exchange rates .
It is simply the markets which make an assessment on the basis of an economic situation .
What is a country 's budgetary policy ?
What is its monetary policy ?
What are the wage trends ?
Once these data are known , they are compared to those for other countries , the currencies are compared and a relative idea obtained .
That is how markets operate .
The important thing for the Commission is to ensure that the euro is a stable currency which can be used for most of our trading and which will therefore protect us against exchange rate fluctuations and make us less dependent on movements in the dollar .
For the rest , pursuant to Article 109 of the Treaty , the Commission will assume its full responsibilities , especially when it comes to defining Europe 's joint positions and its representation on international bodies .
In accordance with the Treaty , it will make the necessary recommendations to ensure that the Council can take decisions and to ensure that , during major international negotiations , whether monetary or otherwise , the European Union is represented and able to defend its interests as well and effectively as it would wish .
Question No 61 by Paul Rübig ( H-0737 / 98 )
Subject : Denominating EURO banknotes
Now that all the basic decisions for the introduction of the common currency have successfully been taken , it is now more important than ever to make sure that these decisions are properly implemented .
The issue of EURO coin denominations was thoroughly debated at Parliament 's part-sessions of November and December .
However , many users are now faced with the problem of the new banknote denominations .
Almost half of all Austrian banknotes currently in circulation are 20-and 50-schilling notes .
On the other hand , the smallest EURO banknote ( 5 EURO ) is roughly equivalent in value to 70 schillings .
What is more , the stamping of ' EURO-Cent ' on the smaller currency units could lead to confusion with the EURO coins .
If , as experts fear , there is a fourfold increase in the present coinage , should consideration should not be given to the subsequent introduction of 1 and / or 2-EURO banknotes , and how might citizens be prepared for this situation ?
How does the Commission feel about these matters ?
I give the floor to Mr de Silguy to answer Mr Rübig 's question .
Here is a very practical question , of direct concern to our citizens .
In reply to Mr Rübig 's question , I should first like to remind you that the denominations of the euro coins and notes were decided in 1995 by common agreement between the Council of Ministers and the central banks .
At the time , that is three years ago , this agreement took into account likely developments up until the date when the notes and coins would be effectively introduced .
This agreement was officially approved by the Board of the European Monetary Institute and the Council of Ministers and has never been called into question since .
In certain countries there are notes which have a value of less than five euro .
In other countries there are also coins in circulation worth substantially more than two euro .
That said , following an in-depth study , the Commission concluded that these notes and coins I have just mentioned have a relatively limited circulation . As low value notes are not distributed in large quantities and high value coins are not generally accepted by vending machines , their practical use is limited .
It has also been decided not to have notes and coins with the same face value so as not to burden the management of the money supply .
As you know , the Commission does not intend to speak for the European Central Bank and the Council , which must assess the situation .
However , it does consider the 1995 agreement to be fair , for the reasons I have just mentioned .
On the basis of the initial estimates of the Member States , a summary of which I requested in order to be able to answer your question , it seems that there should be no increase in the number of coins in circulation in the euro zone compared to the present time .
I would even say that , on the contrary , the development of modern alternative forms of payment , such as electronic payment - and especially for small amounts - should help reduce the number of coins in circulation in Europe .
Generally speaking and to conclude , it is the responsibility of the Member States to instruct European citizens in the use of euro coins and notes , even if the Commission does make recommendations and even if , with the support of the European Parliament , we have launched information campaigns in order to increase public awareness .
But given the national competence in this area , the Commission has recommended the creation of local observatories which will be able to respond to consumer concerns on the ground and to monitor the introduction of notes and coins during the transitional period .
Mr President , at the moment I am giving a great many lectures on the euro , and I see that it is above all the small companies which are afraid that the circulation of coins is going to increase dramatically .
It is not only that we in Austria are going up from six coins to eight , but also that in the EU at present there are only two countries which have banknotes of a higher denomination .
The other countries are used to dealing in banknotes and do not have so much hard cash in day-to-day circulation .
That is why the question arises of whether we should not consider introducing a one euro note in future . If one looks at America for instance , there they have a one dollar note without which life could not be imagined .
This needs to be discussed .
I should like to answer honourable Members very frankly .
We are not here to conceal the truth .
I believe that we are engaged in a process in which decisions have been taken and in which we now have a considerable technological and industrial mechanism to implement .
For example , there must be around 75 billion coins to be minted in the European Union and some 10 billion notes to be printed .
That must represent 300 000 tonnes of metal - a considerable task .
The decisions have been taken , and today we are at the stage of implementation .
Some countries have already started minting the coins and are to start printing the notes at the beginning of next year .
I do not believe it is either realistic or reasonable to call into question at this point the decisions taken by common agreement by governments three years ago and which , in technical terms , are designed to meet a real industrial challenge .
All coins , whether minted in Austria , France or Germany , must be the same , be accepted everywhere , have the same security and be accepted by all vending machines .
This is therefore a major technical undertaking and the priority now must be to successfully complete it .
On the other hand , the honourable Member is right in saying that we have a great deal of information to provide and a lot of explaining to do .
A compromise was obtained between the different positions of the Member States .
It is now up to us , in each of our Member States , to explain the changes .
I believe that European citizens are sufficiently intelligent , developed and cultivated to understand and to adapt .
I also believe it is true that there is a need for a great deal of information in order to overcome the resistance of which you spoke and to resolve the real problems which that could pose .
We have three years in which to do it and I believe that this is a task for each and every one of us .
I must say I was a little surprised here .
Almost ten years after the Berlin Wall came down , I find Mr Lindqvist 's question rather surprising .
Why ?
First of all , because the euro has already had positive effects .
The efforts made to improve our economies and finances in preparation for the euro are beginning to bear fruit .
I would remind you that public deficits fell from a European average of 6.1 % of GDP in 1993 to 2.4 % in 1997 and that growth , which was negative in 1993 , at minus 1 % , stood at 2.6 % last year and is set to increase to 2.8 % this year .
The employment situation is also improving .
Two and a half million jobs should be created in Europe by 1999 , and this is the result of the economic policies being pursued .
Another positive effect is that the euro , even before it is created , before its real legal birth , is already fully assuming its role of protecting Europe against the financial crisis in Asia and Russia .
I believe we will have the opportunity to discuss this during tomorrow 's sitting .
Finally , I note that it is the countries in the euro zone which have the healthiest economies in Europe today .
The confidence of manufacturers and consumers is at present stronger in the euro zone than in the rest of Europe .
Growth in the euro zone is also 0.2 % higher .
So rather than erecting a new wall , I believe that the euro will facilitate the integration of the candidate countries .
They all wish to participate in the euro , and the European Council in Copenhagen established the principle that the candidate countries will adopt the acquis communautaire of EMU , even if they do not participate in the euro immediately they join the European Union .
Also , at the time of joining , the candidate countries will enter stage two of EMU and thus by adopting the acquis they will also acquire the means to progressively meet the conditions required for their participation in the euro .
I believe that far from erecting a wall , economic and monetary union is participating in this inclusive process of bringing together the countries and peoples of Europe .
Thank you very much , Commissioner de Silguy , for your answer to my question .
I concede that it was phrased rather provocatively , but that was really the idea .
What I was driving at with this question was the following . Those of us who are in favour of broader European cooperation - and I take it that Commissioner de Silguy counts within our ranks - fear that it could take a very long time before the countries of Central and Eastern Europe are ready to join up to closer cooperation in the shape of EMU - partly because the demands on new EMU members will be high , and partly because years of communism have left the CEEC economies so far behind .
Incorporating them into a system of broader European cooperation might therefore be a lengthy process ; they could find themselves waiting on the doorstep for a good while .
If we seriously want wider European cooperation , this issue just has to be addressed .
Very briefly , since I do not want to prolong your sitting , I would say that Mr Lindqvist made a comment rather than asked a question .
It is a way of looking at things , a way perhaps of drawing attention to the dangers of a situation .
But it is the same as with every coin , which has its other side .
That does not mean that the other side cannot be dynamic .
The Maastricht Treaty lays down the principles of economic policy , the implementation of which has proved positive for the European Union , and I believe that the candidate countries , that is the Central and Eastern European countries and Malta , will ultimately reap the rewards of applying the formulas which have produced good results for us .
For the rest , I believe we should not confuse the exercises . There is accession to the European Union and there is the switch to the euro .
I believe it was wise not to require these countries to fulfil the conditions for switching to the euro when joining the European Union .
The distinction between the two is a factor of progress and will have a revitalising effect on the continuing process of European integration .
Question No 63 by Wayne David ( H-0757 / 98 )
Subject : Future of the British Royal Mint
Recently , the British Government announced that a new public / private partnership would be introduced at the Royal Mint , based in Llantrisant , South Wales .
Given the importance of the Royal Mint to actual and potential customers throughout the European Union , would the Commission like to express any views about future developments regarding the Royal Mint ?
As we enter the final straight , Commissioner , I would ask you to reply to this last question and allay Mr David 's fears regarding the future of the Royal Mint .
I do not know if I can allay Mr David 's fears .
What I can say is that I would make the following observations in reply to his question .
First of all , even with the introduction of the euro , the minting of coins will remain largely a national matter , that is within the competence of the Member States .
Community competence relates solely to defining , and possibly modifying , the technical characteristics and the European side of the coins .
We have debated these two subjects and you delivered an opinion .
It was decided to keep the present principle for the minting of euro coins : each Member State will mint the coins it issues and , failing a sovereign decision by a Member State in the euro zone to have its coins minted by the Royal Mint , the latter will not be directly concerned by the launch of the euro .
The Commission is not therefore competent to comment on the possible future status of the Royal Mint , or indeed of any other national monetary institute .
However , it may be observed that while the issuing of coins is a prerogative of the public authorities , their manufacture is a traditional industrial activity , as is the production of notes .
In some countries this production is entrusted to the public sector , while in others it is entrusted to the private sector . It is for each Member State to decide .
I was rather hoping too that the Commissioner would allay my fears , but I am afraid he has not .
There is a very real concern here , not just in terms of the local economy in South Wales but also , I would suggest , in terms of the European Union as a whole .
At the moment we have an indication that five of the eleven Member States who are joining the first wave of EMU will have at least some of their coin blanks minted in Llantrisant , South Wales .
One of the reasons they have decided to go to South Wales is because of the certainty of production and the very competitive price which is available there .
If there is a change of ownership , whether it is privatisation or some kind of public / private partnership , there must , I would argue , be a question mark over the costing arrangements and the certainty of supply which currently exists .
I suggest , therefore , that it is not simply a domestic issue , there is also a European dimension to it as well .
I can perhaps try to allay the honourable Member 's fears .
You are right to say that there may be problems comparing costs between various issuing bodies or between different companies which manufacture coins and notes .
Having said that , the decision which has been taken is that each Member State will manufacture the stock of notes or coins which it needs for its country .
For example , let us just at random say that a given country has three billion coins and 200 000 notes in circulation .
That country will then manufacture the three billion coins and 200 000 notes in euros .
It will be its sovereign decision how to mint these coins and print these notes .
So , at least when launching the euro and when manufacturing the first stock of notes and coins , everyone remains free to proceed as they wish , and it is true that in strictly economic terms we have not taken into account comparative advantages or competitiveness .
While this may be regrettable from a strictly economic point of view , politically , given the present situation , I believe that your fears should be allayed .
Thank you , Mr de Silguy , for attending and for your responses .
Ladies and gentlemen , we have reached the end of Question Time . We have run over our allotted time by 13 minutes , and that means that we have provided more work for our colleagues , in particular the interpreters .
I would like to thank them all and ask them to excuse this lack of timing in our work .
Since the time allotted for questions to the Commission has come to an end , Questions Nos 69 to 107 will receive written answers .
That concludes Question Time .
( The sitting was suspended at 7.15 p.m. and resumed at 9.00 p.m. )

Comitology
The next item is the statement by the Commission on comitology .
If ever there was a controversial issue within the Community 's system , and one which gives rise to a great deal of debate in interinstitutional relations , it has to be comitology , although from a strictly technical point of view the system has worked well .
Only in a small number of cases have difficulties arisen over the adoption of a decision , thus requiring it to be referred back to the Council - for regulatory procedures , only in 32 of the 3000 legal acts over the last five years .
The number of decisions finally approved by the Council and not by the Commission is well below 5 % .
In quoting these figures , I do not wish to suggest that I am satisfied with the situation .
Please do not assume that is the case , I am simply relaying data .
Nevertheless , it is fair to say that two aspects have not always been taken sufficiently into account .
Firstly , transparency .
This has been lacking , due essentially to the complexity of the system , the variants of each type of committee and the uncertainty surrounding the choice of committee to be used for different areas .
Next , democratic control .
In particular , control by this Parliament of the decisions adopted , a problem which has become much more serious following the introduction of the codecision procedure .
Nevertheless , the shortcomings of the system - and clearly these do exist - should not lead us to overlook the role of comitology , which is crucial to the operation of the Union .
The aim is to ensure better preparation for the many important executive decisions entrusted to the Commission , through consultation with representatives from the national administrations .
Historically , comitology was devised to ensure that executive decisions adopted by the Commission could be integrated efficiently into the national systems .
After all , in most cases , it is the national administrations who eventually implement such decisions on the ground .
These close links between administrations are now even more important following the enlargements and the granting of new powers .
Committee meetings have therefore become forums for the exchange of ideas , which has doubtless proved most useful to both the Commission 's services and those of the Member States .
Secondly , in accordance with the Treaty , the Council - and I should remind you that until 1993 it was , for all practical purposes , the only genuinely legislative body - delegated powers to the Commission , and was therefore entitled to regulate the activity of the latter .
The only significant issue arising was how far this called into question the political control exercised by the European Parliament under the Treaty .
The first function , integration into national systems , is still essential , because at present , the acceptability of Union regulations calls for even greater transparency and for much wider consultation .
The Commission makes every effort to respond to these requirements to the best of its ability , within the limits imposed by the procedure , which is - I would stress - extremely complex .
On the other hand , the achievement of greater transparency has been the key issue in the exchange of notes between the Commission and the Parliament since 1988 , and also in the modus vivendi of 20 December 1994 .
As regards the second function , a change has taken place , due in part to the increase in the competences of the Union and in the powers of the European Parliament . Currently , in addition to relations with the Member States , we are confronted with the crucial issue of democratic control of executive decisions at European level .
This is the fundamental problem arising , particularly in the area of codecision , because any procedure from which such democratic control was excluded would obviously be unacceptable .
Indeed , this is one of the key problems raised by this Parliament .
I should remind you too that at present , in many instances where technical advances and rapid changes in the markets call for adjustment , the Commission has the power , within the framework of comitology procedures , to adapt or implement important aspects of Community legislation .
I am well aware of the confusion which sometimes arises in the Parliament as a result of such decisions , but I believe that this flexibility of regulation is a great advantage in a rapidly changing world , preventing the legislative paralysis which can set in all too easily nowadays .
I shall now proceed to present the Commission 's proposal .
In accordance with the decisions taken at the Amsterdam European Council and the agreements entered into with the European Parliament and the Council during the drafting of the modus vivendi , the Commission has just submitted a proposal for reform of the Council 's decision of 1987 .
Essentially , we have attempted to deal with three problems .
First , the structure of comitology procedures has been simplified , reducing them to three as against the five variants which exist at the moment .
Secondly , the use of these procedures has been streamlined , and the type of committee to be used for each type of decision will be determined in the decision on comitology . Lastly , information and democratic control of the decisions adopted is guaranteed , taking into account the Parliament 's new powers whilst allowing for the distinction between executive and legislative power .
The first point is simplification .
Any simplification will necessarily involve problems for the Commission , which has agreed to question practices to which it had become very accustomed , but which are now so complex and so difficult to understand that radical change is called for .
The procedures are therefore to be reduced to three main types , without the current variants .
The same applies to the safeguard procedures of which - as you know - there is currently one only .
I should like to stress the radical nature of the reform which the regulatory procedure is undergoing .
If the committee and the Commission cannot reach agreement , the measure at issue may only be approved by the legislative authority , that is to say , under the codecision procedure of the European Parliament and the Council .
I should also like to comment briefly on the streamlining .
We feel that this has been achieved because , for the first time , it is proposed to relate the choice of procedure to the nature of the decisions to be adopted .
Procedures in the management committee will guarantee a speedy decision on matters of financial and agricultural management , whilst granting the committee a significant right of investigation .
It is anticipated that the regulatory committee will deal with general issues relating to key aspects of legislation , and it will be much stricter with the Commission .
The issue of adapting to technical progress is a good example .
The procedure should , obviously , be much stricter for the Commission , and should allow the legislative authority plenty of scope to intervene .
Lastly , the advisory committee will deal with all other issues which the legislative authority considers straightforward .
We do believe that the proposed arrangements will result in greater transparency and will confirm and enhance the information available to the European Parliament , particularly in the area of codecision .
In this context , I feel it will be necessary to review the transmission and reception of information on the issue . There is a good deal of it , and it is certainly often of little use to the European Parliament .
I shall conclude with what I consider to be a key consideration .
This proposal requires the Commission and other institutions to adapt the current procedures to those outlined in the new decision , from the time it comes into effect .
The question we must ask ourselves - and which I am certainly asking myself - is this : how is the role of Parliament to be affected ? Leaving aside , of course , the consultative role it plays in the approval of the proposal for a decision .
In its proposal , the Commission has sought to maintain and enhance the information procedures contained in the modus vivendi .
The Commission awaits Parliament 's proposals , in the hope that an agreement can be reached which would be part of the decision itself . Alternatively , it would form part of the agreement between Parliament , the Commission and the Council or , if appropriate , of an agreement between the European Parliament and the Commission .
In an attempt to launch negotiations towards such an agreement , the Commission has circulated the draft declaration , which recognises that the European Parliament has an important part to play .
It is clear to us that the role of the European Parliament should be greater in those areas where the basic legal act has been adopted under the codecision procedure .
At no stage in the procedure should the European Parliament 's control be excluded .
It is also clear to me that the Parliament must not assume an executive role .
I am sure it has no intention of becoming some kind of alternative power , or of taking part in an activity which must remain entirely within the Commission 's competence if it is to be useful and efficient .
It is for the Commission to use its initiative and fulfil its responsibilities , studying each individual case and ruling on the legitimacy and appropriateness of adopting an executive decision .
It follows from these principles that it is for the Commission to rule whether , on the contrary , a new legislative procedure should be initiated .
As regards the relationship between the European Parliament and the Commission , no long-term clash is anticipated , except for a potential motion of censure . I am therefore of the opinion that any failure to agree with the Commission 's proposals should only be expressed through strict procedures guaranteeing the involvement of the whole Parliament .
In my view , we should ideally establish procedures aimed at strengthening the relationship of trust between Parliament and the Commission , instead of carrying out such detailed and , in extreme cases , bureaucratic control of the Commission 's action .
Written and public practice of this nature will promote transparency , as public opinion or , where appropriate , expert opinion will be able to make its voice heard .
I shall conclude there , Madam President .
It is the Commission 's earnest wish that the debate and negotiations to be conducted prior to the approval of the new decision on comitology , proposed in July , should have three aims in mind , within the context of the measures to implement the Amsterdam Treaty . Interinstitutional relations need to be strengthened and improved , and our system of adopting decisions must become more transparent to the citizens of the Union and to national institutions , and also more acceptable to the latter .
We need to be seen to operate a more democratic and efficient system of implementing regulations and to be capable of adapting it to the current situation .
I trust you will be guided by these aims as you make decisions and proposals , and also in the discussions leading to an agreement . We shall then be able to rid ourselves of the long-standing difficulties we have experienced in establishing a clearly defined relationship between the institutions in this complicated area of the implementation of Community legislation .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , it seems to me that , in the introduction given by Commissioner Oreja , there may perhaps be an excess of optimism as regards the proposal presented by the Commission .
I believe that we too have it at heart to improve the legislative mechanism and the mechanism of executive proposal , but it appears to me that even if a few steps forward have been taken with this proposal , the main concerns and requests from the European Parliament have been somewhat sidestepped .
The European Parliament 's initiative on comitology stems from problems of transparency and respect for legislative procedures raised by the current system , all the more unacceptable today with a Treaty of Amsterdam which has redefined the role of the European Parliament in the codecision procedure , bringing it up to parity with the Council .
It is therefore evident , not least in the absence of a modification to Article 202 , formerly Article 145 - which refers to the acts adopted by the Council and not the acts adopted jointly by the European Parliament and the Council - that comitology is a grey area , with virtually no rules .
In the framing of new rules , it is necessary to bear in mind the increased responsibility of the European Parliament , which has indeed been recognised by the Commissioner .
In particular , I believe that responsibility for the delegation of executive power to the Commission and the controls on executive activity should be shared equally by the legislative authority , in other words by the European Parliament and the Council in the area of codecision .
When the Commissioner says that all will be improved by parliamentary control and information , I think that perhaps he is restricting the control function a little .
The European Parliament has decided to act at two points : to begin negotiations with the Council and the Commission as soon as possible on the basis of the resolution we are discussing today and - with the negotiations started or indeed swiftly completed - to express its final opinion on the Commission 's proposal .
A satisfactory conclusion of the negotiations also depends on the willingness of the Commission and , above all , the Council to discuss Parliament 's requests openly and without hindrance , as well as the willingness of Parliament to understand the reasoning of the Commission and the Council .
But it seems to me that there are fundamental principles lacking from the Commission 's proposal and which the Committee on Institutional Affairs intends to raise in the negotiations .
The first principle is to guarantee full respect for the legislative procedure , in order to avoid a legislative act being adopted outside the regular codecision procedure .
This is something which all those who want the process to be transparent and democratic have at heart .
From this point of view , the definition of an executive act which is given in the Commission proposal is worrying , because it goes in the opposite direction to respect for the need for a more precise determination of the respective roles : the executive role of the Commission , on the one hand , and the legislative role of the Council and the European Parliament on the other .
In contrast to the Commission , we believe that an implementing rule cannot be amended , adapted or updated , these being the key elements of the basic legislative acts , including the annexes , and when we talk about ' technical adaptations ' , we know perfectly well that , very often , key elements of the legislation are dealt with in the annexes .
I think that if confusion remains in the executive sphere which is codified in the new decision , it will be inevitable that the basic acts become increasingly general rules - and this is a risk for everyone , not just the European Parliament - and that the committees see their role in the defining of key elements of legislation increasingly strengthened , which is what we are seeking to overcome .
The other essential principle for a correct and democratic balance between the different institutions is that the European Parliament should have the possibility of exercising real control over the implementing rules , in other words of intervening within a limited period to possibly contest the legitimacy or the procedural substance of the rule .
This would obviously mean that the Commission may have to revoke or change that rule , but it will be able to discuss the most appropriate way of achieving control by the European Parliament without this involving any interference in the executive role of the Commission or a slowing-down of the executive process in such a way as to prejudice citizens ' rights .
We are very aware that these two points are essential in the framing of the new decision and the procedure for implementing legal acts .
Finally , as regards the principle of genuine control by the European Parliament , I believe that this is very strong and must remain so .
We hope that the Commission and the Council are ready to engage in dialogue and do not undervalue the role and the responsibility acquired by the European Parliament , whose legitimacy derives from the direct vote of the European people .
I hope that the dialogue will have a positive outcome , and I believe the European Parliament has every intention of asserting its position .
Madam President , Commissioner , I think it is right , especially after Amsterdam , to claim legislative parity for the European Parliament with the Council .
Starting from that parity , we need to define the elements of a new balance between the institutions of the legislative authority .
This is the great political , historical and legal context in which we have to operate .
Above all - and I say this very clearly to our rapporteur , Mrs Aglietta - we must not allow comitology to become an obstacle to or diminish legislative parity .
That is the political point .
I think the Treaty of Amsterdam did something else too , which may make the definition of this problem easier : it guaranteed a new effectiveness , through a procedural simplification , giving new responsibility to all the institutions of the legislative authority .
That is the framework in which we are operating .
The Commission has produced a text .
I think we should broadly support the judgement of the rapporteur , who is working extremely well in our committee , but I should like to emphasise one or two points .
We trust that the Commission 's text will be capable of providing fresh impetus , and we call on both the Commission and the Austrian Presidency to reach an interinstitutional agreement rapidly .
I should like to highlight one interesting point : some common positions require amendment of certain annexes in codecision rather than in comitology , and there are not many precedents for this .
Where the committees act , we must of course work towards simplification - we appreciate some of the features of simplification contained in the Commission 's text - and naturally also towards control .
Simplification means transparency , and comitology is the science of committees , but a science of committees obviously needs rules and the rules must be transparent .
A good many jokes have been made about the word comitology , but we should not forget that we are talking about the role of the institutions and the opening up of the legislative process to the citizens .
So , although it is bound up in a technical problem , this is actually a great political issue which affects our citizens , because the relationship between legislation , transparency and our citizens cannot be overstated .
Madam President , behind the technical aspects this is actually a question of power .
When the draftsmen - this is my term for those responsible for preparing treaties - decided to introduce codecision into the Maastricht Treaty , Articles 145 and 155 should have immediately been amended , technically speaking , but this did not occur .
Parliament remained silent on the matter , which was negotiated between the Commission and the Council .
When I made enquiries , I was told that it was too late , that the subject was too technical and that there was no opinion to be given on this .
We referred this matter to the Court of Justice and something quite astonishing happened there .
Disregarding 30 years of tradition whereby it had always tried to interpret texts according to the intention of the draftsmen , or legislators , the Court of Justice for the first time - actually not strictly for the first time , but almost - based its judgment on a purely formalistic interpretation .
This , incidentally , is another of the consequences of enlargement .
A major error was therefore made because , in all the constitutional systems all over the world , those responsible for deciding the rules and for laying down the laws are also responsible for specifying the implementing measures for these rules and laws .
This is not so in this case , as Parliament and the Council lay down the law together , but the Council decides the implementing measures on its own .
When the intended aims of the Maastricht Treaty were brought under the spotlight , the citizens of Europe were led to believe that , henceforth , the European Parliament would be given more power and would be placed on a proper equal footing with the Council . This is not what has happened at all .
We are not , by any stretch of the imagination , on an equal footing with the Council because , in terms of implementation , Parliament does not participate and the Council makes the decisions on its own .
The Commission is quite happy with this situation .
There is no mention of this anywhere in its text , except to say that , as the Council did not want to change Article 147 , the Commission is quite satisfied .
It is therefore allowing a right to be denied which is actually being asserted everywhere else .
This is tantamount to saying ' in principle you are equal , but in practice you are not , and we do not want to change Article 147 ' and herein lies the root of the problem .
Why are we protesting so vigorously ?
Not just on the basis of the equality of rights .
If this situation were restricted to consultation or even management as you suggest , there would be no problem , but you are keeping the rules .
And what do the rules say ?
They say that if the Commission 's proposals do not comply with the committee 's opinion , they cannot be accepted .
And who takes the decision not to accept these proposals ?
Answer : the officials of the national authorities , who are not answerable for anything , not to their national parliaments nor to the European Parliament .
Not for anything .
This is what is so worrying and what justifies our indignation .
At first sight , you have not been open to this argument , which is why we find it so difficult to accept the situation , while objectively recognising that this is actually progress on the current situation .
However , you are happy to remain within the framework established by the decision of the Court of Justice and by the refusal of the negotiators of the Amsterdam Treaty to amend Article 145 .
So you have indicated your satisfaction with this situation .
Although it is true that you have done your utmost within this framework , I am sorry to say that , if you are hoping to put an end to the problems in this way , this will not happen , because Parliament will rightly demand that it be allowed to exercise all the rights which it has formally been granted but which , in practice , it is being refused .
Madam President , Commissioner , the excellent report from the Committee on Institutional Affairs prepared by Mrs Aglietta states that the Amsterdam Treaty , by extending the field of application of the codecision procedure of the European Parliament and by eliminating the third reading , has unambiguously expressed the equality between the European Parliament and the Council in the adoption of Community acts .
The Amsterdam Treaty could have been taken to its logical conclusion by reinforcing the control over the implementing rules so that the legislative procedure could be fully respected .
This was not the case and the Treaty entrusted the Commission with the responsibility of presenting proposals on comitology .
The Commission has responded to this request in the time required , for which it should be thanked .
Its primary objective was to strive for simplification and transparency and to introduce a more democratic system , giving Parliament a right to scrutinise the implementing powers for acts adopted under codecision .
However , and this is to be regretted , the retention of the regulatory committees in the Commission 's proposal - underlined just now by Mr Herman - is extremely worrying , given that this removes the European Parliament 's option of challenging an executive act .
This is contrary to the Amsterdam Treaty , which stipulates that control over the executive activity of the Commission must be shared equally by the legislative authority , namely the European Parliament and the Council .
There is therefore a risk of undermining the codecision procedure , which would be restricted to acts with a very general content . This is why the report from the Committee on Institutional Affairs very logically establishes , as one of its priorities , the guarantee of full respect for the legislative procedure in order to prevent a legislative act , including the updating of acts adopted under the codecision procedure and the amending of annexes , from being adopted as an implementing measure outside the scope of the codecision procedure .
Commissioner , all these speeches have the same theme .
You have tried to make an improvement and to a certain extent you have succeeded but , in our opinion , you have not gone as far as we would have hoped .
Madam President , I should like to thank the Commissioner and the rapporteur for their involvement in this issue .
In every democracy there is the idea of the separation of powers so that no one institution has outright power over another .
There is a system of checks and balances .
Parliament has always therefore been somewhat fearful of the ideology of comitology .
I was somewhat amused to hear the Commissioner , in his opening statement , setting out the importance he would place on Parliament 's role in ensuring that its power as a codecision maker , co-legislator , is respected and guaranteed .
There is a saying : ' You know me by my actions , not by my words ' .
The actions of the Commission are somewhat disingenuous .
Tomorrow in Parliament we will be discussing the Miller report on excise duties .
In light of the fact that everybody knows that the Amsterdam Treaty is coming into operation , in light of the fact that everybody knows the opposition there is in Parliament to certain acts and decisions that were taken at Council level , a dispute has arisen with regard to duty-free sales and what excise duty laws would apply .
What did the Commission decide to do when this problem arose ?
The Commission decided to refer it to the Committee on Excise Duty , thereby totally precluding Parliament from any involvement in the decision-making process .
Therefore we , in Parliament , have to be very careful with regard to any olive branches held out to us by the Commission .
We have to be certain in our own minds that we , as the only directly elected , democratically accountable body within the European Union should stand up for our right to be the final arbitrators and decision-makers .
We should move away from this idea of regulatory committees and executive committees which are nothing more than glorified quangos - unelected , unrepresentative and unaccountable .
Let us bring power back to the people , back to Parliament , where it should be ; to censure commissions ; to criticise decisions .
Give us the power now to change and make better law .
Madam President , Commissioner , I should firstly like to congratulate Mrs Aglietta on the work which she has accomplished on a subject which is a very complex and technical one , which is difficult for the general public to understand .
However , behind this technical façade , comitology has clearly political implications .
In fact , just when everyone has accepted the need for transparency in the European institutions , it is clear that the comitology system is anything but transparent .
This system of control exercised by the Council over the implementing powers of the Commission is actually opaque , complex and subject to paralysis , particularly in the regulatory committees .
It is not a question of us being given identical powers to those held by the Council today , but rather of us having a power of recall where two institutions share the legislative power .
The hostility of the Council to any re-examination of the problem is becoming annoying , but what is worrying and serious is that the Commission , in its proposal of July , seems to be edging towards positions which are far removed from those of the European Parliament .
This proposal actually provides for the retention of the regulatory committees and does not allow Parliament the option to challenge an executive act .
It is therefore with the utmost urgency that serious negotiations should be started in order to conclude an interinstitutional agreement in this respect , with this agreement clearly going further than the current modus vivendi which , it must be said , leaves all the comitology procedures as they are .
Before ending , I must say that the comitology case is closely linked to one of the major problems pending in the European Union : the hierarchy of rules .
I remain convinced that it will be very difficult to find lasting solutions to this problem without the proper classification of European legal acts .
This subject was on the agenda of the intergovernmental conference , but was not resolved .
This is the purpose of the amendment tabled on behalf of my group and I hope that it will be supported by the House .
Madam President , there must be around a thousand committees in the EU .
We know the list from the budget , but we do not know every committee .
My group demands that not a penny should be paid in travel expenses to committees we do not know or cannot find out about .
We demand that all funds for meetings should be placed in budget reserves and the money released once we have been given sufficient information .
The committees should serve the voters ; their agendas , working documents and reports should therefore also be available to the voters .
If legitimate interests call for confidentiality , those interests can be stated and access can be limited , for example , to the chairman of the committee , rapporteurs and an individual spokesman from each group .
But the principle must be that every document is also accessible to the democratically elected representatives when the document is outside the Commission , and I would like Mr Oreja to confirm that it is also his principle and that when a document has left the Commission it is also available to any democratically elected representative in this House .
It should also be a principle that matters from a committee can be put onto the agenda of the Council of Ministers .
The Commission and a committee must not be able to obstruct the legislative work of democratically elected representatives .
The essence of democracy is that we can vote in elections and get new laws . We cannot do that when power is switched to either the Commission or a committee .
Then only the Commission can put a matter back on the agenda of the Council of Ministers .
It is crucial therefore that the Council of Ministers and Parliament have a general right at all times to have a matter put on the agenda .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , comitology is neither about an esoteric lore nor a new religion .
In essence , it concerns rather democratic legitimation and the supranational nature of integration .
I wish to make this clear with regard to two points : firstly , the European Parliament is a co-legislator and budgetary authority with equal rights .
In the comitology procedure which was organised before the Treaty of Maastricht , the representatives of the Member States take a number of decisions in the expert committees which affect the legislative and budgetary powers of the European Parliament .
This has to be amended , because there was no codecision in 1987 and the codecision procedure has become the norm in Community legislation through the Treaty of Amsterdam .
It is therefore provided for in the protocol statement that the Council will present an amendment by the end of 1998 , Parliament 's only involvement in which will be to deliver an opinion .
That is not sufficient for us .
We now therefore wish to begin talks with the Council , in order to assert our position strongly .
That is also the purpose of the resolution with which our debate today will end .
Secondly , the supranational nature of the integration process is a constant area of conflict between the interests of the individual Member States and the supranational perception of Community interests .
Legislative and budgetary procedures have until now largely done justice to this area of conflict .
At the level of implementing decisions , however , this balance has not yet been achieved .
Naturally , the interests of the Member States must be represented in doing this because the implementation of Community acts is mostly a matter for the Member States .
However , when implementing decisions of a general nature do not generally reflect the supranational level , what we have is back-door renationalisation .
The whole debate on subsidiarity demonstrates this problem .
In order to counteract this risk , the European Parliament is demanding a right of political control parallel to that of the Council of Ministers .
Certainly , the perception of common interests at supranational level is first and foremost your business , Commissioner , and is thus a matter for the Commission .
Since the management committee procedures often give the Council of Ministers the opportunity to outvote the Commission 's position , however , the creation of a political counterbalance at parliamentary level is a sensible move .
We wish to have and we must obtain an interinstitutional agreement precisely on this basis .
Madam President , Commissioner , you yourself are also responsible for information , amongst other things .
You will therefore not be surprised when I tell you that I have not found the thread running through the labyrinth of comitology in the statements - which have indeed been produced with some effort - but that this term still , in my view , represents a kind of magic square for our citizens , who are unable to see through it .
When numbers are mentioned here , it must be said that the practice currently followed in what are estimated to be several hundred management and regulatory committees , consisting of representatives of the Member States and placed alongside the Commission to implement legal acts , has led to an unjustifiable mixture of legislative and executive functions and removed the classic separation of powers in the EU 's system , and indeed done so in an unreliable way .
This does not just involve codecision , but also programmes in the field of external relations , for example , which are also controlled above a certain ceiling by these management committees .
We are not so concerned about Parliament intervening in the executive , but rather that the Council is intervening much more strongly in the executive authority of the Commission , and in an unacceptable way .
I think the Commission and Parliament really must try to obtain a form of control , as you have just pointed out , but for which the information available to us is actually insufficient .
Our citizens will be questioning us on transparency , clear responsibilities and democratisation in the next few months before the European elections .
Then we shall have to answer for you , rather than for your officials or indeed those of the Council .
This is where the root of the matter lies .
We are therefore very interested in the conclusion of a sensible interinstitutional agreement which sets out these elements with much greater force .
In this respect , we fully support the line taken in Mrs Aglietta 's report , in all its complexity .
Madam President , all legislative systems have a procedure for conferring implementing powers on the executive .
This often means that the executive is empowered to enact detailed technical legislation , sometimes going further and under strict conditions modifying the basic legislative text within certain limits .
That is not unusual .
What is unusual in the European system is that the Commission as our executive is obliged to work in conjunction with committees of national civil servants .
One might think that is logical .
It is , after all , the Member States which have to apply European legislation once it is adopted .
It is perhaps sensible to involve them in the adoption of detailed implementing measures .
Why then does Parliament object to the comitology system ?
There are three or four main reasons .
Firstly , it is because these committees of national civil servants - and only these committees - have the right to block the Commission implementing measure and refer it back to the legislature or part of the legislature .
Parliament has no equivalent right .
We are not able to scrutinize the executive and blow the whistle .
Secondly , if something is referred back in this way , it is only to one branch of the Legislative authority - the Council - not to both branches - Council and Parliament - as it should be in the equal system of co-decision we now have in the European Union .
Thirdly , the whole system is so complex with so many committees , and agendas and procedures that are difficult to get hold of , that it is opaque and not transparent for the wider public .
Fourthly , we do not like procedure 3 and especially procedure 3b which can lead to blockages .
All procedures 3 can lead to a system whereby it is almost the same as the legislative procedure .
The Commission makes a proposal , it needs a qualified majority of national representatives to approve it , sitting in one of these committees but Parliament is cut out of the system entirely .
It is a way of excluding Parliament , often from very important decisions .
That is why we cannot accept this system .
The Commission proposal goes some way to rectifying this but it does not give us total satisfaction on all those four points .
It is not quite good enough .
We will now have interinstitutional negotiations and the resolution we will adopt will serve as a mandate to our negotiators .
Let the other institutions understand .
Parliament is serious and will be very tough in these negotiations .
We have already seen co-decision procedures fall down on the issue of comitology , and of implementing measures .
That may well happen again .
We have seen many hours wasted in conciliation committees arguing over this one issue whereas the legislation of substance could have been settled easily and earlier .
That will happen again and again until this issue is settled .
That means all institutions - Council , Commission and Parliament - have to work on a compromise .
But we will take this opportunity to sort out the system once and for all .
Madam President , I should like to sympathise with the Commission .
I feel genuinely sorry that it has been put in a situation where it has had to make a proposal on this matter .
We actually thought at the time of the modus vivendi that the situation had been put to one side and at the next revision of the Treaty the people who are to blame failed to come up with a proposal that put this matter to bed in spite of giving an assurance , at the time of the modus vivendi , that this was the only technical way of bridging the gap until the matter could be resolved .
At the next revision of the Treaty the matter could have been resolved entirely by the Council accepting the principle that colegislators could not only co-legislate on primary legislation but could be the co-legislators on other areas .
Our colleague 's report on that matter addresses and makes the very best of a very bad situation .
I hope we can get away from blaming the Commission and put the blame where it lies .
The Council did not address its responsibilities at the last revision of the Treaty and it must do so either by an inter-institutional agreement or at the next revision of the Treaty .
Thank you , Mr Barton .
I would inform the House that I have received a motion for a resolution tabled pursuant to Rule 37 ( 2 ) .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Supervision of insurance undertakings
The next item is the recommendation for second reading ( A4-0286 / 98 ) , on behalf of the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights , on the common position adopted by the Council ( C4-0308 / 98-95 / 0245 ( COD ) ) with a view to adopting a European Parliament and Council Directive on the supplementary supervision of insurance undertakings in an insurance group ( Rapporteur : Mrs Mosiek-Urbahn ) .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the legislative procedure hitherto has shown that the basic objective of the proposal for the directive is widely approved by all those involved .
The supervisory authorities of the European Union are to be able to determine more effectively in future the actual degree of solvency possessed by insurance undertakings belonging to an insurance group .
This is a question of guaranteeing consumers - the insured parties - the highest possible level of protection .
They are to be protected in the event of the insolvency of their insurance company .
There is some dispute as to which precautions are necessary and appropriate in order to achieve this aim .
The Council 's common position and the European Parliament 's Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights take clearly differing positions on some important points , aimed at limiting the financial burden to an appropriate amount .
In particular , the European Parliament welcomes the fact that the Council has adopted most of the amendments which aided clarification .
We are also particularly pleased that the Council has at least come closer in its common position to Parliament 's call for all the aspects of solvency that apply to the supervision of individual insurance undertakings to be applied to the supervision of group undertakings too .
The Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights has said that it does not agree with the common position where this provides that the financing of insurance participations for insurance holding companies is now to be dealt with through other aspects of the provisions governing the solvency of individual insurance undertakings as well .
In practice , these are essentially subordinated loans and dividend rights capital , but not other financial instruments , such as loans , convertible loans and other outside funds .
This reduction of financing approaches at any rate seems inappropriate in holding companies .
Their shareholders are not insurance undertakings .
The target group of the increased protection is the insured parties and not the shareholders , who are not subject to individual supervision .
Amendment No 5 , adopted in the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights , is aimed at reducing this excessive protection to an appropriate level .
The scope of the group supervision provided for in this directive remains the main point of contention .
The common position now includes any participation of an insurance undertaking in other insurance or reinsurance undertakings , whereas at first reading , the Parliament provided for its application only above a threshold of 20 % and where the influence was dominant .
This represents an increase against the first reading and the Commission proposal .
If the directive were adopted in the present version , it would have clearly negative effects on the capital structure in Europe and the European insurance industry .
The existing insurance groups would have to raise considerable funds on the money market to finance their increased own funds requirements .
Capital is expensive , and the insurance undertakings would try or would be forced to balance out the costs incurred either by increasing premiums or rationalisation measures .
Increases in premiums would be charged to the insured parties themselves , and the rationalisation measures would threaten jobs .
The directive would cause additional problems in raising capital for insurance undertakings such as mutual insurance organisations which do not have access to the money markets because of their legal form .
This problem may well be relevant in terms of competition .
There would be the danger that this would permanently undermine areas of insurance which have developed traditionally in individual Member States .
A compromise as regards the scope might be to modify the threshold values according to the respective regulatory areas .
This would fully meet the requirements of supervision in terms of transparency and transaction monitoring .
At the same time , however , Parliament 's demands from the first reading would also be taken into account . These provide for limiting additional solvency requirements resulting from belonging to a group to cases in which risk-enhancing influences between undertakings may actually be possible as well , particularly where a dominant influence is being exercised .
Amendments Nos 3 and 4 were tabled for this reason .
The main reason for not continuing to include minority participations is that the holding of such participations without a dominant influence does not provide any opportunity for unfavourable intra-group transactions .
They do not produce any risk factors .
However , risks may well result from supervision being carried out inadequately on the basis of the existing rules .
Another point in this context is that , unlike the European rules on the solvency of individual insurance undertakings , the directive and the common position only harmonise the supervisory intervention criteria and not the supervisory measures themselves , to say nothing of the various methods permitted for calculating adjusted solvency which are only said to be equal to each other anyway .
This may result in the supervisory authorities of a Member State demanding increased capital when a deficit is established in calculating adjusted solvency as provided for by the directive , whilst the supervisory authorities of another Member State demand at most a report .
This inevitably leads to distortions of competition , which are specifically to be avoided through the directive .
Finally , another objection is that the responsibility for assessing the presence of a dominant influence is to lie with the competent authorities .
Madam President , I speak on behalf of the Socialist Group .
Firstly I should like to thank the rapporteur for all her hard work on this issue .
Secondly I would like to place on record the apologies of our shadow-rapporteur , Mr Rothley , who is unfortunately engaged on other important business .
He has as usual , been conscientious and assiduous in his work .
Insurance supervision is an important issue .
The sustainability and solvency of insurance companies is a crucial issue for the reassurance of consumers on a whole range of matters .
My group welcomes this report .
In the first draft from the Commission there were considerable problems .
We believe the common position is a considerable improvement on that initial proposal .
Although my group is not unanimous in its view , we feel that overall , given the improvement in the common position from the original draft , the common position should be adopted unopposed .
Therefore the majority view of the Socialist Group is that the common position should be adopted unamended .
Regretfully , therefore , we cannot accept the amendments that have been tabled for this reading .
However we still thank the rapporteur for her hard work , recognise the importance of this subject and trust that the Commission will expedite the successful conclusion of this report .
Madam President , the rapporteur is quite right when she refers to the difference between insurance undertakings and banks or credit institutions with regard to the risks to be taken by them .
On the other hand , everyone knows what is happening on the financial markets , and in this context we do not need to explain now how important such a directive and a commitment on this matter are , for which I naturally thank the rapporteur .
However , I want to use the rest of my speaking time , Mrs Mosiek-Urbahn , to explain the reasons why I am unfortunately unable to agree with your amendments .
It is for a quite simple reason , and that is the experience I have had with the mismanagement of holdings in the former GDR .
That is why , in this respect , I am for more rather than less monitoring .
This mismanagement of holdings has by no means come to an end and , unfortunately , it is not just happening in the former GDR .
I am afraid that what you have said in Amendment No 5 and now repeated once again shows me that there is quite a considerable need for monitoring here .
So once again , thank you very much for the work that has been done .
It is a pity that I cannot agree with your suggestions and that I am consequently proposing , on behalf of my group , the same decision as my colleague Ms Oddy .
Madam President , Commissioner and colleagues , my law professors , who were guided by the thinking of St Thomas Aquinas , used to say that , in order to assess a text , you first had to determine its aim and then examine the means used to achieve this aim .
So what is the aim of this text ?
To give better protection to the insured and to remove distortions in competition .
What means are used ?
The prevention of the multiple use of own capital , known as double gearing , the imposition of an obligation for major intra-group transactions to be declared to the supervisory authorities and , finally , the organisation of access for supervisory authorities to the information needed .
On examining these aims , the common position as presented to us seems satisfactory .
As underlined by the rapporteur , it contains numerous amendments made by Parliament and is therefore a fairly balanced text .
This is why , Mrs Mosiek-Urbahn , we unfortunately cannot vote for your amendments .
Amendment No 4 in particular seems to me to reduce the scope of supervision too far .
As for Amendment No 1 , this could be considered acceptable in terms of its intention , as it might be thought that the assessment of the dominant influence should not be left to the competent authority but should be defined more objectively .
However , in its current wording , we cannot vote for this , since it is too restrictive and limits supervision to the parent company alone .
We shall therefore vote in favour of the common position as it stands .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I should also like to start my speech by thanking our colleague , Mrs Mosiek-Urbahn , for her important work .
She has gone to great lengths to achieve a broad agreement and this is why the Council 's common position , which was adopted by the vast majority of countries - 14 of the 15 as I recall - contains in full or in part , either word for word or in terms of their intention , 18 out of the 24 amendments adopted by the House at first reading .
We therefore consider that the French Socialists are supporting a good compromise .
This evening our rapporteur is proposing amendments at second reading and I must inform her that we do not feel it is necessary to go down this road .
If these amendments were accepted , the balance of the common position would be severely undermined , to the detriment of the protection of the insured and of the mutual insurance association sector , remembering that this sector is particularly important to us .
I would add that currently , in France , the mutual insurance associations are already reeling from an action brought by the European Commission against France before the European Court of Justice .
As a result , the French Socialists , like the majority of the Socialist Group , will accept the common position without amendments .
They have asked me to inform you of this .
Madam President , as Mrs Mosiek-Urbahn has emphasised in her important report , the insurance groups directive is highly relevant to the purpose of completing the single insurance market .
As everyone knows , insurance firms must hold a certain level of reserves to ensure their solvency and the solvency margin is a guarantee of security for policyholders .
This directive is intended to prevent avoidance of this obligation by groups of insurance companies in contexts where it would otherwise be possible to use the same funds more than once in calculating solvency .
The Council 's common position on the directive confirms the key elements of the Commission 's proposal and accepts , with or without adaptation , 19 of the 24 amendments adopted by the European Parliament at first reading .
It is a balanced and consistent text , which has been approved in the Council by all the Member States but one .
I am afraid any changes to the common position would weaken the text , would reduce consumer protection in particular and might call into question the compromise achieved in the Council on a very complex text .
So I strongly recommend that Parliament accept the common position in its current version .
We now come to the amendments .
All the amendments proposed , with the exception of Amendment No 5 , do seem to pursue the same objective : restricting the scope of the directive or making its application more discretionary .
The common position provides for the directive to be applied in cases where the holding amounts to at least 20 % .
Amendment No 4 explicitly limits the scope to parent companies and subsidiaries - with a participation of at least 50 % - so any insurance company which has a holding of between 20 and 50 % will be able to dilute the reserves it needs , which everyone considers necessary for an individual company not forming part of a group .
Amendments Nos 1 and 2 have an analogous effect , in that they would make it optional and non-obligatory for Member States to include companies which exercise a de facto dominant influence on other insurance companies .
This optional character , which is acceptable in the context of a set of accounting rules such as the Seventh Directive on company law , becomes inappropriate in a precautionary set of rules like this , understood as guaranteeing that solvency requirements are respected at group level .
Amendments Nos 1 and 2 would make it easier to elude the directive and would make the application more discretionary .
Finally , Amendment No 3 is understood as transforming automatic application , above the threshold of 20 % , into mere presumption .
The insurance companies and the supervisory authorities would then have the opportunity to exclude holdings greater than 20 % from the scope of the directive .
So I have to inform Parliament that the Commission could not accept Amendments Nos 1 to 4 .
The Commission considers Amendment No 5 superfluous , since its aim is already achieved in the common position .
The common position already makes it clear in the recitals that any reference to the first directive on insurances must be understood as a reference to the amended version of the third directive and any other subsequent directive .
In debating the amendments , it is perhaps easy to forget the reasons why this directive is essential , reasons which make these amendments unacceptable .
In the last analysis , the directive fills a gap in the supervisory rules for insurance firms , banking and investment groups being already covered by Community legislation .
The directive protects consumers and here I am afraid I cannot say I agree with Mrs Mosiek-Urbahn , because the directive does not contain additional capital requirements .
It is simply intended to eliminate double counting so it does not involve additional costs to consumers because it does not involve additional capital requirements , while it will mean advantages for consumers in terms of greater security .
The directive will bring companies belonging to insurance groups into line with individual insurance companies without saddling the groups with additional burdens , and it creates conditions of parity with the insurance mutuals which , by definition , cannot have holdings in each other .
Finally , a point which is often given insufficient prominence : if the directive is not adopted in an unweakened form , the Community 's work on financial conglomerates in line with the recommendations of the G7 Joint Forum will be seriously compromised .
As everyone knows , the growth of these financial conglomerates at international level constitutes one of the main challenges we must confront if we wish to ensure financial stability in a global economy and , Madam President , I need not remind you today of the importance of financial stability and the financial operators in the light of the latest international developments .
Weakening the content of this directive would definitely send out the wrong signals , particularly at the moment .
Thank you , Commissioner Monti .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Islam and Averroës European Day
The next item is the report ( A4-0167 / 98 ) by Mr Mohamed Alí , on behalf of the Committee on Culture , Youth , Education and the Media , on Islam and Averroës European Day .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the celebration of Averroës European Day certainly provides the ideal opportunity for reflection on the relevance of the life and work of this great philosopher and commentator on Aristotle to contemporary society .
Averroës stated that the search for truth is an essential process in the development of every human being .
It proved particularly necessary for us as , when preparing this report , Averroës provided the opportunity of dealing with contemporary Islam and its role in Europe . This became a complex and difficult task particularly because - regrettably , but all too often - Islam tends to be identified with Islamic fundamentalism and the violence and intransigence associated with the latter .
There is no better example of this identification than the present political situation , dominated by the terrifying campaigns of the Taliban and by the horrific news of the continuing bloodbath in Algeria .
These latest events overshadow other atrocities currently being perpetrated in Kosovo as they were previously in Bosnia .
It is against this background that we attempt to reflect and to search for the truth . We find ourselves greatly influenced too by the ongoing tensions generated by the social crisis afflicting Europe , which can take the form of the insoluble human tragedy caused by unemployment or of exclusion and urban violence .
For these reasons , amongst others , debate on the presence of Muslims in Europe is particularly fraught and , in addition , Islam is all too easily linked to immigration .
This is neither the time nor the place to comment on the interesting content and conclusions of the report prepared by the Runnymede Commission , charged with studying the phenomenon of Islamophobia in Great Britain . Islamophobia results in the demonising of Muslims , thus preventing a calm and realistic analysis of the situation .
Reflex reactions such as that of Huntington , obsessed with the need to find an opponent to fight against in place of the former Communist threat are determined to prove the inevitability of a clash of civilizations .
However , the timely plan to pay tribute to the memory of Averroës is aimed specifically at highlighting the importance of his ideals of tolerance , progress and human development .
It may also provide an opportunity for more detailed consideration of the social , political and economic factors which foster ignorance , prejudice and obscurantism . These in turn result in exclusion and the break-up of society .
Only culture and education can raise our awareness of these risks and encourage us to work towards solutions .
From time to time , we meet people from a range of backgrounds and cultures whose world is structured in a different way from ours , and who have other values and other ways of investigating and making sense of the world around them .
We must display both tolerance and modesty because these are people who , although they come from another cultural background , do nevertheless belong to a different culture we could come to understand and appreciate if we made a minimal effort to listen and to engage in a sincere and respectful dialogue .
No one can ignore his neighbour when the latter seeks recognition of his human dignity , because as Javier de Lucas maintains , one should play down one 's own way of life to allow for the demands of other forms of existence .
One 's own identity should never be put forward as universal , nor should any alternative to it be marginalised . In short , we must strive for a continual increase in tolerance , reasoning things out in a sincere , rigorous and consistent manner .
Islam should be seen as a culture , a civilisation and a religion , not just as one more facet of our multicultural society , but as a force inspired by those same values which are at the heart of a democratic , tolerant Europe .
The Swiss theologian Hans Kung stated that any religion must phenomenologically fulfil three essential functions , namely making sense of life , laying down rules and building a community .
Hence this theologian calls for Islam to be given the opportunity of integrating into the modern world whilst retaining those three functions , and on the same terms as Christianity or any other creed .
It is probably not for me to confirm or disprove Malraux 's prediction , some time ago , that either the coming century would be religious or it would never come about .
In fact , as a Muslim , I should remind you that the 15th century after the Hegira has barely begun .
I can but make an appeal - hinted at in the report 's resolution - naturally , the majority view prevailed - that the authorities in the Member States , and all men and women of good will should take into account the implications of the fact that Islam is now clearly the second religion in our societies .
However , on the one hand , Mr Chevènement - whom , incidentally , we wish a swift and complete recovery - assures us that couscous is a French dish , and on the other , we see that in Brussels , Muslims sometimes stuff tomatoes with prawns and serve them with chips to break the Ramadan fast .
Is all this a sign of cultural impoverishment , a sign of change or of the forging of new identities ?
In my humble opinion , these are certainly new experiences for Muslims , and changing times and circumstances will subject them to more .
It is more likely that we are on the brink of a process of integration in which , understandably , no one wishes their own identity to be unduly neglected .
It is therefore reasonable to suppose that we are witnessing the first expressions of European Islam . Perhaps those experts like Olivier Carré who claim that in Europe , Muslims and non-Muslims are moving towards the same practices are not too far off the mark .
And so , ladies and gentlemen , it is my earnest desire that Mohammed , Fatima or any other Muslim who serves us our daily coffee in Brussels or here in Strasbourg , absorbed in his or her work , should become again , for all of us in Europe , men and women to whom we can relate , neighbours whom we respect and accept because we have come to appreciate them as equals .
In short , we should consider them our partners in everyday life , link hands with them and work together towards a fairer future .
We European Muslims , or those of us who live in Europe , are resolved to give of our best in the building of that Europe which , as Jacques Delors said , is in need of a soul we must all help to provide .
I am quite certain , Madam President , that the Muslim presence in the patchwork of European society will enrich it in many ways , but especially as it provokes thought on the place of spirituality in today 's secular societies , ever more intent on unbridled and destructive consumption .
I have no wish to appear pretentious , Madam President , but I too have a dream .
Madam President , I would like to thank my colleague Mr Mohamed Alí for a very profound report , and its explanatory statement was particularly interesting to read .
I think you should appear as opening speaker at the symposium that you and Parliament probably also wishes to organise in honour of Averroës Day .
You really are to be thanked for having produced such an unusual report .
The Committee on Women 's Rights have taken a position on this matter , as migrant women are often Muslim .
We have stressed the fact that they often have a disproportionate number of problems fully participating in our society .
We would urge the Commission and Council to improve the situation for female migrants who profess the Muslim religion .
I am glad to see how the rapporteur has taken on board remarks made by the Committee on Women 's Rights .
The report emphasises the fact that gender equality must be taken into consideration in EU relations with Islamic states .
It calls for an end to discrimination against women and condemns their oppression in the family , for example the fact that genital mutilation is still being practised , although in many countries this is an illegal act .
Madam President , I should also like to thank Mr Mohamed Ali for all the work and patience he has put into this report .
I do not speak only on behalf of the Socialist Group but also on behalf of the many Muslims in East London whom I represent and who so enrich my constituency .
The report is timely given the recent unfortunate events which risk creating further conflict between Islamic and Western culture .
Given the multicultural nature of our societies , we have to try and encourage their peaceful co-existence .
This is where we can learn from the great philosopher Averroes .
Firstly , if you have not done soalready I recommend that you see the film Le Destin .
It is a brilliant exposé of Averroes 's life and work .
If only it could be shown in every school and in every community across Community , it would do so much to help understanding .
It is unbelievable that I had to come here to the European Parliament before I heard the name of Averroes .
Our children should be introduced to Averroes as a role model .
He was a courageous and radical philosopher with a wide knowledge of science , sincere in his speech , consistent in his arguments and a promoter of the co-existence different religious faiths .
Not surprisingly he was persecuted .
His works were often banned .
And nothing has changed over the centuries ; Salman Rushdie 's books are still burned .
We have to use Averroes ' legacy to promote pluralism of thought , free speech and respect for human rights .
These are the essential pillars upon which democracy rests .
We should insist that this is best achieved by the separation of church and state , which has not been completely achieved in all our Member States ; the establishment of laws which outlaw religious discrimination , something we will take action on in the United Kingdom ; and minimal censorship , with the emphasis always on freedom of expression .
I particularly like paragraph 10 which calls for the principle of secularism in education .
However , we have to work for more than just tolerance of other cultures ; we have to appreciate and celebrate diversity in our society .
We have to condemn the violation of women 's rights connected with extremist Islamic movements and make sure women are aware of their rights , including our policies in Europe .
We must make it easier for people to learn Arabic as a living language and promote the study of Islamic culture , history and politics .
The Oxford Centre for Islamic Studies is a very good example .
I ask the Commission and Member States to study the recommendations and propose action on the basis of this report .
Once again I thank the rapporteur .
We look forward to celebrating Averroes Day for many years to come .
Madam President , this own-initiative report , whose initial aim was the examination of cultural links between Islam and Europe on the occasion of the 800th anniversary of the death of Averroës , has experienced many problems and has taken nearly two years to be produced .
The problem is that this report , in its current form , seems to have several objectives .
A number of points condemn any discrimination - it restates in this respect the contents of the resolutions on human rights adopted on every month , on a Thursday , by the European Parliament .
Other passages deal with the problem of religions , which is outside the European Union 's field of competence .
In fact , this is what recently led to the rejection of the report by our colleague Mr Oostlander , which dealt with similar problems .
Furthermore , several proposals do not respect the principle of subsidiarity , in particular the proposal stressing the need to allow Islamic communities to express their views on the same terms as other religions .
We realise that these questions are very delicate and that they are answered with specific solutions in each country , depending in particular on the level of representation of the Islamic communities and the place given to each religion by each state , according to the constitutional rights .
Finally , as I have already said , this report , which has moved away from its original objective of dealing with cultural questions , does not tackle the essential political problems , such as the integration of immigrants , voting rights , social problems and the concept of citizenship , all of which are elements which are currently being examined in depth in the various states .
Europe has responsibilities in the Mediterranean countries and must assume these while still respecting other countries and other peoples .
It must also establish suitable measures for integrating immigrants from third countries .
We feel that this report does not indicate specific courses of action for immigration problems and that it is restricted to a superficial examination of various options .
For all these fundamental reasons , and on the grounds of competence , the ELDR Group will abstain .
Madam President , this own-initiative report has moved away from its cultural objectives , as my colleague Mr Monfils has just said .
We are perfectly happy to recommend an Averroës Day , but dealing with religious problems is no longer within Parliament 's field of competence .
I regret even more having to make these remarks as the rapporteur 's explanatory statement contained an interesting analysis of the influence which Averroës could have through his work , for example : ' A lesson in how to use our intelligences by showing us just whence intolerance springs ' .
Unfortunately , the lesson in how to use our intelligences quickly turned into a lesson in Islam , telling us what we should do to be tolerant .
I have absolutely no intention of condemning this report . I only wish to say to its author that , although a fervent believer in the insertion and integration of a large population within European society , I regrettably have no intention of actively promoting the foundation of a Euro-Islamic university within the territory of the European Union , nor of encouraging the vocational training of imams , nor of implementing many other actions to suit religious rites .
I deeply regret the wayward direction taken by this report , although I do share the idea that intercultural dialogue is a source of enrichment and must be developed , and that we must be actively involved in this .
Finally , despite certain recommendations with which I agree , I also do not feel that this resolution can change the position of women , no more so than the application of the principle of secularism in education , even though I support the intention behind this .
I therefore believe that our group will abstain from voting on this report .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the name Averroës stands for the Islamic interest in the traditions of enlightenment and emancipation in Europe .
Whenever Thomas Aquinas wished to quote the most important authority for him when commenting on Aristotle , he only needed two words : commentator dicit .
His contemporaries knew that Averroës was meant by that .
I learned in school that European culture is based on antiquity , Christianity and Teutonicism .
The important report which has been presented to us , and on which I can only congratulate its author , reminds us that there is a gap in both our memory and our history .
I therefore regard it as particularly important - unlike the previous speaker - that the idea of a Euro-Islamic university is taken forward .
Admittedly , this is also a reminder that the proposed programme can only become effective when the constitutional position of Islam and its believers in the European Union has been established beyond that of a merely tolerated marginal existence , and towards a publicly recognised and guaranteed position .
Madam President , this report , as presented to us today by our colleague Mr Mohamed Alí , is the result of many exchanges and debates which have taken place since it was first presented to us last year .
It has been clarified and important explanations have been provided .
I must , however , point out to my colleagues - as have several previous speakers - that it still contains ambiguities , particularly from the point of view of democracy .
I am not at all suspicious of your intentions to respect the freedoms as enshrined in our democracies , but I must nevertheless ask you this question . Can the Koran , as it stands - and quite literally so , since the distinctive feature of the Koran for many centuries has been not to allow explanation and theological debate - imply anything other than a theocracy ?
We must ask ourselves this fundamental question .
As I say , I do not suspect your intentions , but I do feel that we must be consistent .
If the celebration of the memory of Averroës causes us to ask all these questions , then we must ask them very frankly .
As for a university , instead of your proposal I would much prefer a European university in which , at the highest level and in all sincerity , in the search for truth and with mutual esteem , we could study the problems of the relationship between religion and politics , between faith and reason , in Islam , Judaism and Christianity in all its forms .
You will appreciate that this task is enormous .
I must pay tribute to the work which we have done together within this committee , but I cannot endorse your proposals without reservation unless certain ambiguities are eliminated .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , this report definitely had a difficult birth : we spent several months discussing it in committee and there were a great many complications .
I think the celebration of the 800th anniversary of the death of Averroës is an important occasion for presenting wide-ranging cultural programmes , strengthening dialogue and highlighting knowledge of the civilisation and culture of the Mediterranean basin .
Reciprocal knowledge between peoples is the basis of all human coexistence , and what better form of knowledge is there than literature itself ?
In Europe , much has been translated from Arabic and other Islamic languages , generally with excellent results .
There is a need to continue making the Arabic and Islamic classics available to the European reader .
It is also necessary to take care with the translations .
In particular , I have here the Italian translation of Averroës ' work ' The Harmony between Divine Law and Philosophy ' , which can be interpreted in various ways because some sentences in it can have another literal meaning if presented in isolation .
So from a symbolic standpoint , this celebration could provide the right opportunity to highlight the modernity of Averroës ' thinking , in seminars and public events , and take up the challenge of fighting against exclusion and xenophobia - the fruit of obscurantism , ignorance and prejudice - on the eve of the third millennium , within the European Community itself , for all that it is imbued with democracy , pluralism and human rights .
So we need to strengthen dialogue with the Islamic world , which means relations with the Euro-Mediterranean countries , through the MEDA programme and others , not only in socio-economic terms but principally in terms of culture and education , which form the basis of any civilisation and democracy .
Only a knowledge of our actual origins , history and traditions will enable us to understand the values of peace , solidarity and tolerance which constitute the pillars for the construction of Europe .
Fundamental rights and individual dignity , for both men and women in equal measure , must be respected and examined through calm dealings with the Islamic world , without any condemnation and discrimination , particularly as regards women .
Finally , I think calm dialogue is really necessary in this whole sector , but it is equally necessary for nothing to be imposed , because our culture , our education and our experience can only be enriched if we achieve what we consider important and what we have always asserted : a clear , calm period of information and face-to-face dialogue .
Madam President , 40 years after the death of the prophet Muhammad in 632 , Islam attacked Constantinople five times , marking the start of a war with Europe which has lasted over a thousand years given that , on the eve of the 21st century , the conflict is still continuing .
Taking as a pretext the 800th anniversary of the death of Averroës , a Spanish philosopher from the Middle Ages whose questionable theories led to him being much disputed at the time and who still is today , our colleague Mr Mohamed Ali would like to instigate an era of peace between Islam and the European nations .
I respect the Muslim religion , which is the personal business of its believers .
However , how can we talk of peace when our honourable colleague obtained an invitation onto the European Parliament 's Committee on Culture for the former director of the centre for Arabic philosophies at the Catholic University of Louvain who was , at the same time , publishing in Beirut a minor work in which he applauded the massacre of seven Christian monks in Tibehirine ?
How can we talk of peace when , in 1995 in Rome , in the heart of the city of popes and Caesars , the largest mosque in Europe was inaugurated ? How better to deride our God while His priests are being savagely murdered on the other side of the Mediterranean ?
How can we talk of peace when the island of Cyprus , which is part of Europe , and Constantinople , an imperial city of Europe , are yet to be liberated ?
Madam President , this report by Mr Mohamed Alí puts me in mind of the most interesting philosophy lectures I attended at my protestant university .
Lectures highlighting the parallels between European and Arab theology and thought .
How is that ?
It is thanks to people like Averroës who interpreted and commentated on Aristotle and introduced him to Europe , because that is the route by which he came to us .
I think it is most important that a report like this should also pay tribute to the contribution which Islam and the Arab world , but Islam in particular , has made to European culture .
I think that we must acknowledge that , because in both science and philosophy , culture and latterly of course in our social and economic life too , Muslims have made an enormous contribution to European society .
Islam is of course blamed for all manner of deeds done by just a few Muslims .
The same is true of course for acts perpetrated by Christians , socialists and liberals ; Christendom , socialism and liberalism cannot be held accountable for all of those either .
I find it right and proper that the rapporteur should take the lead in stating the case here .
There are two serious points in the report to which we are opposed , both of which have to do with the separation of powers between religion and state .
One point is obvious , paragraph 11 ( f ) , which refers to a Euro-Islamic university .
I have been a fervent advocate of this for years and happily moves are now afoot in the Netherlands to set up something of that kind .
It sits well with the Dutch constitution , too , since religious beliefs enjoy equal rights under it .
That is a very good thing , as the Muslim communities can involve their imams who have a role to play in our own social and cultural life .
But we cannot dictate policy on what kind of theology must be taught there .
We can only hope that it will be a modern , liberal or European one , but we absolutely cannot stipulate that in a document of this kind .
That would be a serious breach of the separation of powers .
The second objection is in paragraph 10 , which introduces an anti-personal element which does not accord either with the position of present-day Muslims .
Even the Dutch Government , which has no Christian Democrats in it , has acknowledged that Dutch education based on a foundation of Islam is often an excellent system for promoting the emancipation of Muslims , up to secondary level .
The university I mentioned just now is also a part of that system .
I would regard it as quite wrong and very harmful to Muslims to have their freedom of choice restricted by this report .
We must not do that and we must not create suspicion by making a fuss over the kind of ideas which should be taught at their institutions , because we shall not succeed in that .
So I urge Mr Mohamed Ali to get rid of these two points along the lines we have suggested , otherwise he will not secure our votes .
And that would be a great pity .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I fear that we are doing Averroës a great wrong here this evening .
Indeed I fear that , in reality , he is far from the concerns which seem to be prompting all these speakers .
Averroës ' journey within Islam is mysterious to say the least and , in any case , does not conform to the orthodox religion of Islam .
In a way , Averroës is to Islam the opposite of what Maimonides is to the Jewish religion .
For my part , I must urge Mr Mohamed Alí not to be concerned .
Whether you like it or not , I cannot support exclusion and xenophobia , and I have studied Averroës extensively .
But does Mr Mohamed Alí know , for instance , that we do not have the original Arabic translation of ' De Anima ' - which is Averroës ' main work - but only a very mediocre Latin translation produced by Michael Scot at the Court of Palermo for Frederick II ?
Furthermore , much of Averroës ' work in its original Greek has been irretrievably lost .
I must also say that Averroës is the man of an era , but of an era which should be considered , not with ideological blinkers , but with all the requisite objectivity .
The great historian , Jean Dumont , director of Amiot-Dumont publications , dealt with this in his magnificent work ' L 'Église au risque de l 'histoire ' , as did the great Jewish historian from Israel , Bat Ye 'Or .
This is the history of the colonisation of Spain by Islam , and it is not idyllic like those who tell us stories on the subject would like us to believe .
The status of the Jews bears witness to that .
This is irrefutable , just like the massacres of the Christians .
This was the history of a colonisation and the Spanish Reconquista was the history of a decolonisation .
Could we be opposed in this House to decolonisation ?
Mr Mohamed Alí regrets that more mosques are not being built in Europe .
Would he be interested in a reciprocal situation ?
Where are the churches in Saudi Arabia ?
There are 1500 mosques in France - are there 1500 churches in Saudi Arabia ?
Are there 100 or 10 , is there even one ?
Wahhabi Islam persecutes Christians and does not allow them anywhere to worship .
And what about in Algeria and in the lands of St Augustine ?
What Christianity is there currently in the Islamic world ?
Of course , there are men of intelligence in Islam who would like to see an end to the Islamic law which , as noted by my excellent colleague Mrs Seillier , currently represents a theocracy which , at the very least , is unsuited to the modern world .
We can therefore accept the thinking of Averroës , but not Averroës in all his aspects !
And if we want to organise an Averroës Day in Europe , let us do that , but let us also organise one at the al-Azhar university in Cairo .
Let us organise an Averroës Day in Tunis and another one in Saudi Arabia .
But I can tell you that this will not be allowed because Averroës is a devil in an Islam which does not allow Christians any freedom in the countries over which it rules , except in the case of a man as open as Saddam Hussein who allows cathedrals to be built in Iraq which the American planes then unfortunately bombard !
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen : I have to say , Mr Mohamed Alí , that I was genuinely moved when I heard the name of Averroës mentioned in the House .
We learnt about the life and thought of this great figure at school , and I offer you my sincere congratulations on your initiative .
Your initiative was certainly timely .
I do not intend to open a debate on historical issues at this juncture , but I would venture to say - indeed I must - that the presence of Islam in Spain was not simply colonisation .
It was much more .
It was a process of mutual enrichment which continues to benefit us in the present day . Indeed , any contemporary Spaniard is bound to feel indebted - as I do - to the legacy of Islam , to that of the Christian world and to that of the Jewish world .
I believe that the three cultures have combined to create the cultural identity of all true Spaniards .
I congratulate you on your report , Mr Mohamed Alí .
In particular , I congratulate you on proposing the celebration of an Averroës European Day . Not only will such an occasion provide an opportunity to honour a great thinker , a defender of tolerance , learning and rationalism , it will also , as your report suggests , encourage cross-cultural dialogue to prevent exclusion and do away with outbreaks of intolerance and xenophobia .
This became clear to me as I read your report .
The Commission is aware of the contribution made by Islam to European culture and also of the problems concerning the social and cultural integration of groups within European Islam . We must welcome them into our society whilst respecting their identity .
On this issue , the Commission is convinced of the value and importance of promoting free and open dialogue , particularly amongst the younger generations .
I would like to remind Members of the many initiatives which have been taken to stimulate such debate .
Under the Euro-Med programmes , collaboration between the Youth for Europe programmes and Mediterranean programmes is being developed .
In the area of vocational training , the Turin Foundation plans to broaden its programmes and open them to the countries of Central and Eastern Europe . On the occasion of the Stockholm Conference held last April , a debate on culture and civilisation was held , as part of the follow-up to the Barcelona Declaration .
In a few days ' time - and I very much regret being unable to attend - a Euro-Mediterranean conference of Ministers of Culture and the Audio-Visual is to take place in Rhodes , on 25 and 26 September .
As for the cultural sector , the Commission has presented a new framework programme to Parliament and to the Council .
This programme is currently under discussion within our institutions , and it is worth noting that it places particular emphasis on the importance of cross-cultural dialogue as a prerequisite for peace and social cohesion .
I should like to say , Mr Mohamed Alí , that the Commission feels this report has probably arrived rather too late for the event you suggest to be held before the end of the year .
Specific measures must be taken , concerning both the organisation and financing of the event , and we do not really have the time and resources available .
Nevertheless , the Commission does believe - as Mrs Baldi so brilliantly put it - that study of the work and values of great Islamic thinkers like Averroës would provide an excellent basis for interaction between cultures and foster the spirit of tolerance and understanding which must underpin genuine dialogue between civilisations as rich and as varied as ours .
I can therefore assure you that your report will be borne very much in mind , and that we will do all we can to ensure that in the very near future , we do honour the life and work of Averroës , and give due recognition to the relevance of his thought to contemporary society .
Thank you , Commissioner Oreja .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
( The sitting was closed at 11 p.m. )
Welcome
Before moving on to deal with the order of business for today , I should like to welcome the delegation from the Duma and the Federal Council to the official gallery .
In view of the significant role played by the Duma in recent developments in Russia , it is particularly appropriate that the European Union-Russia Joint Parliamentary Committee should be meeting here in Strasbourg today and tomorrow .
I would urge members of that delegation to make every effort to ensure the success of the working session , which is particularly necessary in the light of the present situation .
International financial crisis and political developments in Russia
The next item is the statements by the Council and the Commission on the international financial crisis and political developments in Russia .
I give the floor to Mrs Ferrero-Waldner , President-in-Office of the Council .
Mr President , Madam President-in-Office of the Council , Mr President of the Commission , quite some time ago , when we discussed the forest fires in Indonesia and I pointed out that there were other reasons for the situation , some of them social , I received a written reply from the Commission , stating that the European Union was already trying to obtain more money to assist the fire services in Indonesia .
The President of the Commission is just leaving , but I should still like to remind him that this was the position of the European Commission on a serious economic , political and financial crisis .
The President-in-Office has told us today that the crisis is far more profound than was originally thought .
Much of what Mrs Ferrero-Waldner has said can be fully endorsed .
But without laying claim to omniscience , I should like to emphasise clearly here and now that at least some of this could have been avoided by careful examination , Commissioners , without the blinkers of liberal or indeed ultraliberal economic ideology .
It was and remains unacceptable that we have hidden for so long behind an American position that is high on rhetoric about human rights and democracy but sometimes turns a blind eye , or even two , in the case of so-called allies .
What are the causes ?
I can only subscribe to what Mrs Ferrero-Waldner has said .
First of all , there was the direct trigger of speculative capital movements , then the failure , deliberate or otherwise , to create all the necessary institutions and conditions .
The future President of the European Bank in London recently stated that we in the West were pleased about many of the spectacular privatisations in Russia and did not see that the essential economic and political institutions were not being created .
We must also be openly critical of regimes that are partly corrupt , of combinations of economic , political and military power in the hands of certain elements within the administration and of inattention to social needs and human distress in some countries .
Many of these patterns were identical from Indonesia to Russia without our really having noticed .
The answers that I have received , especially from the Commission , are not entirely satisfactory .
What are we to do about speculative movements of capital ?
I am a supporter of free trade , and I support the principle of freedom , which includes the free movement of capital .
But we in Europe have taken decades to achieve such freedom .
We cannot force it on other countries overnight , especially not developing countries .
Are we prepared to take specific action against speculative , shortterm capital movements and to create a framework of global rules governing such movements ?
I have not received a reply to that question .
The second point concerns institutions .
Let me reiterate what has been said here , namely that appropriate national institutions - a central bank , commercial banks , banking authorities , etc. have to be created .
But something has to be done internationally too .
We in the PSE Group find it intolerable that there should be a free economy and free movement of capital without even any elements of an international regulatory structure .
We ought to strengthen the IMF and the World Bank , but they would have to be reformed at the same time .
It is illogical that all speculators , whether they be banks or individuals , should receive immediate aid from the international banking system when they incur losses , which encourages them , as it were , to carry on speculating .
They have nothing to lose .
Many unemployed people in the world and in Europe do not receive the support that speculators enjoy worldwide when they speculate against weaker currencies .
What does the European Union say to that ?
Will it press for these institutions to be strengthened in this way , but in conjunction with reforms designed to ensure that we do not rush to lend a hand wherever currencies collapse under the combined weight of corrupt regimes and speculators ?
That , of course , is unacceptable .
My third point relates to the separation of politics , business and the armed forces .
I have heard a thing or two in this connection .
Let me stress emphatically that it is absolutely imperative to ensure that reforms take place .
The fourth point concerns social measures .
The administration and the economy of those countries must be geared to reducing the alienation that has developed between the government and the people and to supporting the socially deprived ; we cannot tolerate any visible vestiges of alienation and marginalisation .
There is a delegation from the Duma here today , to which I should like to extend my own personal welcome and that of my group .
You bear a great responsibility , not only for your country and not only for Europe , but also on a global scale .
I would ask the representatives of the Duma to support the newly appointed government in a spirit of constructive cooperation and to ensure that the aims we have referred to today are actually achieved .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , when I look at the many political and financial crises in the world , I have to conclude that Euroland is a land of stability .
I am pleased that we did not follow the advice of those who , in the spring of this year , were still speaking of the euro as a premature birth .
Many of those who have held up the Asian model as an example to us are nowhere to be seen now , presumably because they are busy burning their speeches !
In my speech I should like to concentrate on the situation in Russia .
A united , democratic and stable Russia is of paramount interest to us Europeans .
That sort of Russia , as an equal partner of the European Union and of NATO , can make a decisive contribution to stability and constructive development in Europe .
For that reason , it is essential that the appropriate reforms are enacted in Russia , reforms which are the responsibility of Russia and Russia alone .
We can lend support , and we can help the Russians to help themselves , so that they will be able to clear away the ballast of the Soviet regime and the planned economy .
At the same time , we must get round to talking about the basics , by which I mean such fundamental elements as a functioning administration , which is the key to the implementation of social , environmental and , above all , economic improvements , as well as to a rational and balanced interactive relationship between central government and the regional authorities .
This is the only way to guarantee the rule of law and to establish the social market economy which will bring about the progress that is so urgently needed . Such a market economy must be embedded in a framework of social justice and environmental responsibility as we understand them .
I agree with Mr Swoboda that we Europeans undoubtedly made a great mistake in the past , for although we gave money , we left the provision of advice to a host of Harvard professors who preached pure free-market capitalism .
I believe in a social market economy which takes account of all the national structures and is designed to strengthen small and medium-sized businesses , which are the basis of economic development in Russia .
These structures are absolutely essential if the public finances are to be put in order , if taxes are to be properly collected and if corruption and organised crime are to be curbed .
We must also seek ways and means of recovering the 150 billion dollars which has found its way into private hands within and outside Russia , so that it can be used for the nation 's economic development .
We consider it essential that democratic structures and national political parties should develop .
I hope , Mr van den Broek , that the aid from the European Union , such as that provided through the TACIS programme , will be tailored to these requirements , but we shall surely have the opportunity to discuss this in greater detail .
If our position is to prevail during the preparations for the G7 meeting , the European G7 participants must coordinate their approach .
Mr President , the Russian crisis cannot be cured in the way that you would cure someone with a cold .
Many have underestimated the extent of the political , economic and social gauntlet thrown down to the Russians following the collapse of the communist regime and the end of the Soviet Union .
However , it would be as mistaken to predict a return to communism in Russia as it would be foolish to gloss over the bitter failure to implement reforms , which particularly reduces the alternatives in the current situation .
Also , simply pointing the finger at those responsible - or those supposedly responsible - for the current Russian crisis , whether this involves the IMF or other agreements , will not help Russia to escape the impasse .
I can only heartily applaud the analysis of the current situation in Russia presented a few moments ago by the President of the Commission .
However , I would add that , whatever the reforms possibly undertaken in Russia - which should target first and foremost better operation of the institutions and re-establishment of the main budgetary and macro-economic balances - the Russians , with the best will in the world , cannot resolve the situation on their own .
They are , in the short term at least , essentially dependent on the assistance of their European partners , with whom they are already forming an inevitable community , if only on the security level .
This assistance must not just involve the injection of another several thousand million ecus into the system .
Basically , as loans need to be granted , we should improve the system for granting these , with the nonchalance and thoughtlessness with which they were granted in the 1970s to middle-income countries being an example , par excellence , of what must be avoided .
It also seems essential to me , in the long term , to increase cooperation in all areas : political , economic , administrative and , I would add , between the citizens of the European Union and the citizens of the Russian Federation , so that progress can also be made on the local , micro-economic and humanitarian level .
Basically , we must make a personal investment in all these areas .
Mr President , a storm struck Russia this summer , which immediately led to the conclusion that the democratic transition had failed and that Communism was returning .
Before proposing any solutions , we must understand what happened .
The backdrop to the crisis is an indisputable economic disaster .
The rouble collapsed and was devalued by the government which also froze its external and internal debt .
Prices went through the roof , the savings of the poor disappeared and the population feared , with the onset of another bleak winter , that they would have no food or heating .
A frightened population may look for order in the chaos .
Is this crisis due to the reform policy ?
No , because its causes are primarily political .
This summer 's crisis is first and foremost a political crisis , even though its manifestations have been economic .
Russia is not suffering from too much reform , but from reforms which have not been implemented because those in power were opposed to them .
Since 1992 , power in Russia has been in the hands of two opposing legal rulers : the President and the Duma , both of which are elected by universal suffrage .
To resolve this , the 1993 constitution gave the President considerable powers and left the Duma with the power to block all decisions and all reforms .
This systematic blocking of reforms , in particular tax reform and land ownership reform , has had dramatic consequences .
By refusing tax reform , the Duma has deprived the State of the means to levy taxes and therefore to function , and a State without financial resources cannot exist .
Russia has a powerful president governing a phantom State .
How can you have democracy without a State ?
The second reform involving land ownership has constantly been refused .
This has blocked the development of private agriculture in Russia and as a result the government has had to import food for its people , which is absurd in a country with considerable agricultural resources .
Russia is now stopping payments as it can no longer make these .
If there is a famine in Russia , this will not be because of the reforms but because reforms were not implemented .
The political crisis , resulting from the impotence of the executive , does not therefore date from last summer .
It was predictable and nothing was done to prevent it .
It was simply precipitated by the Asian crisis and the fall in the prices of raw materials , the sale of which provided Russia with the bulk of its resources .
However , political crises , although dangerous , can be beneficial when they do not turn into a catastrophe .
This is perhaps what is happening in Russia today .
Despite the dual dangers of a population which no longer has confidence in its political leaders or in politics , despite the country breaking up as the regions turn in on themselves due to the lack of an effective State and the possibility of division , despite all this , Russia has not sunk into civil unrest , anarchy or a political adventure led by an apprentice dictator .
The agreement between Mr Yeltsin and the Duma on the appointment of Mr Primakov has halted the crisis , at least for the moment .
A new balance of power is emerging .
For the first time , the head of government has legitimacy and the Duma which gave him this can only support him , even though the Communists have not rushed to take part .
The President must necessarily abandon part of his power , which will therefore lead to a more balanced and more democratic political system .
This must be enshrined in the constitution , which will put an end to the unproductive infighting which has set each centre of power against the other , resulting in paralysis .
The Communists are going to participate in the government , which does not mean that they will take it over , only that they can no longer just criticise and block .
Also , the appointment yesterday of a reforming Deputy Prime Minister , Alexander Shokhin , is clear evidence that Primakov is not simply , as has been said , a head of the KGB , but a man of authority who is not a hostage of the Duma .
Nobody in Russia , not even Zyuganov , wants to turn back the clock .
However , all Russians know that , in the current crisis , everyone , including the Communists , must participate in the democratic change .
This must be understood so that Russia can be helped in a sensible manner , and not just by pouring in limitless amounts of aid .
Mr President , there are two aspects of the world economy : the economy in practice and the economy on paper .
That on paper is the bubble economy .
John Maynard Keynes called it casino capitalism .
The world is an electronic casino , where the stakes are the various products of the stock exchange .
Every day , sixty times more currency moves around the world than is needed to pay the world trade bill .
That is why the world economy is unstable .
The banks and the other world casino players invested electronic money into the Far East , Russia and Latin America in the hope of high profits .
The money was used for the wrong purposes .
The capital market inflated .
When the bubble bursts , the consequence may be world deflation .
The Asian collapse has been paid for out of IMF funds .
Now there is not enough money for elsewhere .
We have all had to pay out via the IMF .
The IMF is asking its member countries to increase their subscriptions and for a special NAB system .
I would like to ask who we are really bailing out with IMF funds ?
My reply would be that it is a great many speculators , casino players and thieves .
Western banks , under the leadership of Germany , invested perhaps ECU 100 billion in Russia , money which the Russian mafia have recycled back to the West for themselves .
The debts remained in Russia , and the money came back to the West .
Should the West , by assuming the burden of Russian debt supranationally , keep those in power who enslave their people with money and television ?
Must the West rescue a president in the name of a reform policy which has already received the verdict of the Russian people ?
Poverty , despair and starvation are the judges of history .
Now we need a resurrection of leftist thinking in Europe .
The right have destroyed the alternative they offered , and any prospect of a rescue from the crisis .
Mr President , Commissioner , Madam President-in-Office , the example of Russia teaches us that a process of economic transformation must follow directly from successes in the development of democracy .
Democracy sustained such damage when the parliament building in Moscow was shelled in 1993 that it has not yet regained the necessary credibility in the eyes of the Russian people .
The West has ignored this fact and has continued to back Boris Yeltsin as the guarantor of democracy .
Reality in Russia , however , looks quite different .
The reality is that 80 % of economic activity is unofficial and that the West 's neoliberal schemes have come to grief when confronted with the hard facts of Russian life .
It is an illusion to think that Russia need only hasten to implement the reforms that the IMF and the World Bank have wanted for the past seven years , and everything will then be all right .
But how can it do that when the system of government has collapsed ?
The percentage of the population who live below the subsistence level has long included some of the middle classes , and as winter draws in , the people in Russia only have themselves to rely on , for they will not put any faith in the grand words of politicians at home or abroad .
This profound crisis of confidence has currently blocked all the political roads to democracy .
And yet I have the impression that Western politicians are less interested in this situation than in the fact that suppliers of yoghurt and cheese from the West have lost a market and that containers are piling up in Rotterdam .
Western economic relations , however , must be modelled in such a way that they foster stability within an economic system that is subject to ecological and social conditions rather than undermining the reform efforts in Russia .
The purpose of Western support must therefore be to help overcome this profound crisis of confidence ; the West must recognise that the reconstruction of the social security system and the reinforcement of democracy are every bit as important as its economic priorities .
Mr President , Madam President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , I will be speaking about Russia and my colleague , Henri de Lassus , will deal with the Asian financial crisis .
No one can deny that Russia is going through an extremely difficult period .
The economic , financial and social crisis is so severe that it could be viewed in terms of bankruptcy .
There is also a political crisis , with President Yeltsin having lost authority , the problem of choosing a prime minister , paralysing opposition between the Duma and the executive , and so on .
However , we should note that , despite the seriousness of this crisis , it has so far occurred within the institutional framework and in accordance with the constitutional rules .
In a country whose democratic traditions are still shaky , this is a not insignificant point which we must underline and encourage .
Faced with this multi-faceted crisis , we must re-examine , or revise , our policy towards Russia .
Any hesitation by the Union could have disastrous consequences in the Russian Federation , even though the future of Russia is clearly , in the main , in the hands of the Russians themselves .
So saying , I would like to welcome the delegation of members of the Duma who are in the official gallery .
Firstly , I am happy to note that no one here is considering abandoning our great neighbour and major partner .
I firmly believe that we need to continue our cooperation and our aid , using every possible means imaginable .
The Russian people need to feel that the European family understands and supports them .
It would be very easy for Russian nationalist extremists to depict the European Union as an organisation of rich egoists , untroubled by the misfortunes of Russia . This would be very dangerous !
We must ensure that our attitude can never be interpreted in this way as this could lead to the very worst xenophobic reactions in Russia .
Having said this , our cooperation and aid must themselves be reformed .
President Santer has just acknowledged this , as have several colleagues .
This is not the first time that Members of the European Parliament have expressed their reservations , indeed their criticisms , not only about the policy followed by the IMF , the World Bank and the West in general , but also about the policy followed by the Union , for example with the TACIS programme .
I must be brief , due to lack of time , and would say that we have on numerous occasions encouraged the establishment of a market economy . This is good , but we have assumed that the foundations of Russian society were firm enough to implement and operate this free market economy .
This assumption has been shown to be false .
Russia is not Poland or Hungary or Czechoslovakia , for example .
For historical reasons which should never be forgotten , Russia did not have in 1991 either the foundations of a true rule of law or the attitude and public-spiritedness to prevent the free market from turning into a wild jungle where anything goes , including large-scale organised crime .
Fundamental reforms - for example , the correct operation of a proper tax system , land-sharing , respect for undertakings and contracts , at least some social law and social welfare - are not the firm supports on which the subtle reforms requested by the West can be developed .
These fundamental reforms and a transformation of attitudes are still to be achieved .
This is where we must target the bulk of our advice and aid , Mr President , while hoping that the Primakov government can rise to the enormous challenge weighing on its shoulders .
Mr President , in January Mr de Silguy announced in this House that the Asian crisis would have only a marginal effect on our economies .
The shield provided by the forthcoming euro would be sufficient to protect us , as if by magic , from any fallout .
We had to face up to reality then , and once again we are confronted by an extremely tough challenge .
The same shining shield is now being held up for us by Mr Santer with regard to the Russian crisis .
Still thanks to the forthcoming euro , we will be protected to some extent .
Surely it is rather presumptuous to predict that the Russian crash , which we were unable to foresee , will not have profound effects on our economic and monetary development ?
On the contrary , we must not disguise the extent of the crisis .
Furthermore , its immediate causes must be correctly identified , in particular the singular responsibility of a parliament , dominated by the Communists , which blocked the development of the legislative framework essential to the establishment of the rule of law .
It is true that the Russian banks , which are weak and fragmented , have been careless .
With debts in dollars and deposits in roubles , they can no longer honour their internal and external obligations .
They have lost the confidence of savers and investors alike .
As victims of excessive monetary restrictions , they have been the channel for a colossal flight of capital and have fed international corruption rings , into which a large part of the Western aid seems to have disappeared .
Who is to blame , if not first and foremost the Duma which refused to give the banking system the legislative framework it needed to operate ?
And who can pretend that the implosion of the Russian banking system will not have a serious effect on ours ?
If the State is now powerless and unable to regularly pay its officials , this is surely primarily because the Duma refused to adopt the tax code and buried the proposed tax system under a mountain of amendments .
Deprived of tax revenue and therefore of the means to act , the State is involuntarily contributing to the fragmentation of the country , leaving regional feudal systems and mafia networks to capture the real power .
Mr Primakov is facing two major challenges : to restore the authority of the State and the unity of the country .
If a European population , namely the Russian people , is threatened by the prospect of a real famine this winter , on the eve of the third millennium , surely this is primarily because its agricultural sector could not develop due to the complete blockage imposed by the Duma on the land ownership legislation .
In order to feed a population which lives on the best land in the world , Russia must therefore import massive amounts of foodstuffs , which we produce , but for which it is now virtually unable to pay .
Are you trying to tell me that this will not have serious consequences , particularly on our agri-foodstuffs industry ?
It is therefore high time that we completely reviewed the mistaken approach which we have taken up to now .


We must stop incessantly calling for reform , we must stop wasting our taxpayers ' money on aid programmes whose assessment we have not received , but we must help Russia , genuinely and en masse , to train the new , competent and honest managers which the country urgently needs to restore the authority of the State , to operate the administration and to restart the economy .
Mr President , the economic crisis which has hit Russia , and consequently other countries ' financial markets , is the result of a long-running political crisis .
Inexplicably , this has not been paid sufficiently focused attention by either the European Union or other states or influential institutions , nor have they formulated any proposals for intervention .
The political crisis in Russia means that the process of market liberalisation and democratisation of access to the market has not really been taking place over the last few years .
In fact , since the collapse of the Communist system , the privatisations have not been implemented for the benefit of the population , but have been an instrument of immense profit and power for certain castes of the nomenklatura and , in some cases , have served to enrich parallel organisations in the criminal world .
Reforms like agricultural ownership or taxation continue to exist only in the dreams of the Russian people , and disturbing events for everyone , like the bombardment of the Parliament itself , should have demonstrated to the European Union just how far Russia still was from the road to normality and democracy .
I would mention one example at random : European officials working in Russia reported the incredibly dangerous state of the aircraft fleet in that country and the neighbouring countries , but no one ever did anything about it .
As a member of the delegation which visited Moscow , I have witnessed truly unbelievable situations myself .
So it is not up to us today to endorse one government coalition or another , but to seek to bring about , through the instruments of diplomacy , a Russian political system committed to promoting and implementing the economic and social reforms that are necessary for embarking on the road indicated by the Union 's Foreign Affairs Ministers on 9 September in Salzburg . Furthermore , the European Union needs to do two things .
Firstly , the governments of the Union need to speak with one voice in the international institutions - the IMF , the European Bank and so on - to anticipate events and intervene multilaterally when crises occur . Secondly , they need to make arrangements for the support to Russia and the interventions agreed in the Union institutions to be provided in a way that avoids measures being taken piecemeal by individual governments , depending on the convenience of this or that national economic or productive power , as has often happened in the past .
Let us launch this second pillar , which is still absent in so many areas and sectors where it could be having an innovative effect , now that it can finally operate outside the traditional blockages paralysing any autonomous European initiative .
There is room for action , if Europe has the will to act .
Mr. President , Madam President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioners , at the beginning of the summer we were still enjoying excellent economic health , and yet in a very short space of time , an ill wind from the Pacific brought us Asian flu , spread it to North America , struck South America and left the whole planet trembling .
Russia had already shown signs of weakness , so I shall leave it aside for the moment .
Now , what is the cause of this global collapse ?
Detailed explanations of the causes are already being put forward - rather like having a patient 's disease diagnosed at the post mortem .
It appears to be a recurring problem .
Despite all the recent technological advances , predictions in this area are still far from accurate . In fact , there is a tendency for them to be made after the event , while we are facing the consequences .
The economic outlook for Europe remains quite good at the moment , so it would seem , except for businesses with close ties to Latin America , Japan or Russia .
It was only yesterday that the representatives of the Duma gave an assessment of the current situation within the framework of the Delegation for relations with Russia . I would like to welcome the representatives here today and wish them every success as they deal with the difficult situation before them .
It is not exactly a financial crisis , but a crisis resulting from the total lack of order , structure , the absence of a fiscal system and from a long list of other shortcomings .
It hard to imagine how a country so rich in natural resources could have become so utterly bankrupt .
We must make our methods and systems available as a matter of urgency , to help with rebuilding , but we should not send financial aid - you never know whose pocket it will end up in .
I would draw your attention also to the need for humanitarian aid to relieve hunger . Indeed , as a Finnish colleague mentioned at the meeting I referred to earlier , it could well be that the border between Finland and Russia will be besieged by Russians driven from their homes by hunger .
In times of distress , the best advice is always to avoid knee-jerk reactions .
We must continue to follow the best way forward for the economy , namely free trade and a world investment system under the aegis of international institutions such as the World Trade Organisation , The International Monetary Fund and the World Bank .
We must persevere , and continue to work within this framework .
Mr President , I should firstly like to welcome the delegation from the Duma .
I have heard plenty of good advice given to the Parliament and to the new government of Russia .
Surely there are lessons which Europe itself can draw from the financial crisis which has continued to grow since May 1997 ?
We should not be so easily reassured .
The economic and social situations in our own countries would not emerge unscathed from a long-term fall in world growth .
We must therefore react - and this is the sticking point for adherents of orthodox monetary policy .
To restart growth involves partly letting go of the obsession with the alleged inflationary danger and with ultra-restrictive monetary and budgetary policies .
The world order has changed , and to ignore this would be irresponsible .
Even the G7 nations are for the first time taking this into consideration , as demonstrated by their communiqué the day before yesterday which stated that the nature of the risks to the world economy has changed .
It also underlined that inflation is low and drew attention to the fall in demand . The financial press regarded these declarations as a surprise and as a spectacular initiative which they claimed reinforces the theory of a concerted easing of the monetary situation .
Among the seven members of the G7 , there are four countries which belong to the European Union , of which three , and important ones at that , will be in the future euro zone .
It would be logical for Europe in turn to take one of these spectacular initiatives , by reorientating its priorities towards boosting real growth .
However , this has not been the attitude to date of the European Central Bank .
Although its President , Mr Duisenberg , recently acknowledged that the global economic and financial environment of the future euro zone has clearly been damaged and that the current crisis will definitely restrict growth , he immediately repeated the Bank 's sole creed : budgetary discipline .
Faced with such a contradiction and due to the exceptional gravity of the challenges , I propose , Mr President , that Parliament should invite the President of the ECB to explain himself to us .
The European Parliament would be within its rights to exercise democratic control over this institution and to develop , during a debate , its own vision of the situation on behalf of the citizens who elected us .
Mr President , Mr Santer is undoubtedly correct on one point .
There is indeed no turning back .
What we are looking for are new forms of global governance , a reformed and regulated market economy in which the adjectives ' social ' and ' ecological ' do not merely reflect wishful thinking , for that is the only way of avoiding the situation in which the weakest national economies are required to serve as a safety valve whenever the world economy undergoes a global structural crisis .
Bill Clinton , who , as you know , is still politically active , is pinning his hopes on the strengths of the international financial system .
Even senior representatives of the IMF speak of the need for control of capital movements as a key element in a new international financial edifice .
As Mr Wurtz has just said , the G7 have been talking again about boosting real demand .
In short , the issue today is about social and ecological regulation of the world economy as the common denominator in the enlightened self-interest of a Europe strengthened by the proper implementation of a single currency , and in the interests , which are forever being violated , of the peoples of this world , who are not prepared to be the pawns that are sacrificed in pursuit of capital accumulation .
To this end we need tailor-made transitional programmes , embedded in the necessary broad social and political consensus that only a historic compromise can achieve , to take the place of an economically and socially destructive policy of structural adjustment .
What is at stake today is the opportunity at long last to bring the sad chapter of neoliberal casino capitalism to a painless end for the great majority of mankind , to release the air from the balloon in a controlled way , instead of letting it explode .
Mr President , the Group of the European Radical Alliance does not wish to be associated with the joint motion for a resolution on the global economic and financial crisis which will be voted on tomorrow morning .
This motion seems to have little significance in relation to the capabilities and current responsibilities of the European Union .
Faced with a crisis which is affecting the whole of Asia , Russia and Latin America , we are entitled to expect broader and more precise proposals to be adopted by our Parliament .
We welcome the solidity of the euro , which has been developed to give coherence and stability to the monetary environment of the European countries .
The euro is based on powerful , organised and controlled economies .
The administrations of the Member States , whatever the criticisms which we sometimes lay at their doors , are proven administrations which take into account almost all business movements .
Our institutions were formed slowly . They are supported clearly and democratically by all the people in the Union .
This is why the euro is basically stable and solid .
On the other hand , Russia and the majority of the emerging economies have institutions which are unfortunately fragile , newly created and lacking in deep-rooted democratic support .
Their administrations seem to be widely afflicted by corruption .
They control only part of economic activity , with the rest having been taken over by parallel or mafia-controlled economies which profit from the financial aid given to their countries by the international financial community .
However , institutions such as the International Monetary Fund continue to lend to these states , demanding that the latter put their economies or their institutions in order . And yet institutions like the IMF do not have the means to really make themselves heard , and they allow themselves to be pushed into a defensive position from which they continue to lend without any hope of return for fear of even more damaging chaos .
Faced with these problems , the motion for a resolution is restricted to calling for reform of the international financial institutions , without saying from where these institutions should draw their authority and allowing the assumption that they can simply remain technocratic .
We would have preferred a clear indication that the continued globalisation of trade would involve the establishment of a worldwide financial regulatory and supervisory organisation , with real democratic support .
We would have preferred , as indicated by the text of our amendment , the acknowledgement of the relative failure of the International Monetary Fund whenever it addresses governments and administrations ill-prepared for market economy mechanisms . This failure is due to the IMF not taking account of the devastating effect of parallel economies and not assessing the social consequences of the measures which it proposes .
We would have preferred , as indicated by another amendment , consideration to be given to a credible procedure for regulating capital movements , particularly through the establishment of an international tax on this trade .
The force of the observations made this morning by President Santer specifically on the situation of the institutions and the Russian economy shows the acuteness of the problems which we are facing .
Only a very firm political stance taken by the European Union can transform the current crisis into a useful step towards world progress .
We hope that the move towards a social market economy is assessed in each country concerned according to the institutional capacity of these countries to manage and regulate this .
The role of the Union should be to help accelerate the potential increase in the rule of law and democratic institutions which is essential to the vitality of the nascent market economies .
We believe that this is the role which the people of the world expect us to play .
Mr President , I should first of all like to welcome the delegation from the Russian Duma which is here in Strasbourg , and I must immediately denounce the hypocrisy of the West in its relationship with Russia .
Officially , of course , this is one of friendship as we have heard this morning , but in reality I fear this is not the case .
The great Greek historian , Thucydides , said that political power generally has three motivations : interest , fear and vanity .
The vanity of the West is evident .
For us in the West , it is too often wealth and human rights which concern us and we are encouraging our Russian friends to imitate us , as if we were a superior being .
The Western fear of Russia , even though it is often hidden , is perfectly real .
The aim is clearly to weaken Russia 's military force and to gradually dismember this vast territory .
Interest is the basic motivation .
This involves economically colonising Russia by using Western resources .
Powerful interests in the West are clearly pressing in this direction .
These interests are the same as those which are pushing for transatlantic integration , which would result in Europe accepting a situation of permanent subordination to the American superpower .
This is the real situation .
And yet , cooperation and friendship between Europe and Russia are needed more now than ever .
We are firmly convinced of this .
However , this cooperation cannot take the form of costly and ineffective financial operations such as we have seen in the past .
The Russian economy must find solutions within Russia itself and the economic crisis cannot , under any circumstances , be resolved without the prior political condition of the end of anarchy .
It is this anarchy which is preventing the establishment of a true rule of law based on respect for the right of property .
Russia is primarily experiencing a crisis of authority , particularly because the political leaders have ignored the people too much .
The Kremlin can no longer ignore the patriotic majority in the Duma , because the State will keep its authority only while it heeds the interests of the Russian people as represented by their parliamentary assembly .
Reform in Russia is not a technical problem : it is a political problem .
Russia needs a strong State , and I repeat , a strong State , because the country is rooted in the traditions of its people . These traditions are obviously national ones , but they are also spiritual traditions resulting from the Orthodox Church .
The emergence of this strong Russia is also in our interest , if only to balance the domination of the American superpower which has won , we should remember , three world wars : the first , the second and also the cold war .
Everything else is really just peripheral and unconnected with the real situation in Russia , and reflects the egoistic interests of the Western multinationals .
This is why I hope that Russia can find its own way .
Mr President , it is very tempting to blame the problems in Russia on the world financial crisis .
That would be a good excuse for the new Russian Government which comprises elements of a past with which it has manifestly not yet come to terms .
But old solutions are no answer to new economic problems .
The Russian crisis , for it remains unresolved , is primarily political in nature and is the result of a political sham in which the genuine reforms which are needed have been neglected .
The Russian people are now paying the price for that omission .
Regrettably the aid we have given in recent years has not contributed to real progress .
The outlook and debate on what is currently happening in Russia prompt a measure of gloom in me too .
The same goes for the Russian Government 's warning that it may be necessary to keep on printing money so that people have the financial resources they need .
As we know , that will lead to a situation in which the economic difficulties get worse and worse , in the shape of hyperinflation , for example .
Our influence on developments is somewhat limited , but our interest is considerable .
Not so much our economic interest , as many speakers have already said , but rather our political interest .
But we must not back the wrong horse again but stick to our substantive position vis-à-vis economic reform in Russia .
It is on this that the new government will be judged and the aim is stability , creating greater confidence and working to build a properly functioning social market economy as part of a government structure which can be relied on .
Russia still has to put her house in order .
That was the purpose of our aid , and it will continue to be .
Russia has yet to find her place in the world economic order .
I think it is important to agree that we want to go on helping , using the instruments available to the European Union , but the answer to the question of whether we actually can help lies in Russian hands .
Mr President , Madam President-in-Office , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , ten and a half years ago , the Chernobyl nuclear reactor disaster signalled the end of Communism and the beginning of perestroika .
Today we are witnessing a return to perestroika in Moscow , which is reflected to some extent in personnel policy .
The Soviet Union responded to that disaster by entombing and isolating Chernobyl .
Today in Russia we are experiencing an economic and also political Chernobyl , but we cannot respond this time by entombing and isolating the problem .
What we need is an open , stable and democratic Russia with a social market economy .
The wheel of history cannot be turned back in Russia ; new mistakes cannot be corrected by resorting to the old mistakes .
The goodwill of the European Union is there .
However , we must be realistic in assessing our scope for influencing the course of events .
Representatives of the Duma are here today , and we were told yesterday by the Vice-President of the Duma that the forces of reform were still present and intended to continue the pursuit of their goals ; that is all very reassuring , but what has not happened so far in this crisis could yet happen , namely a fresh outbreak of money-printing .
The question is not only about the composition of this government ; it is also about the influence its members will have and retain over the reform process in Russia .
The cause of our concern is clear .
The Russian Communist Party remains strong .
Unlike the Communist parties in Central and Eastern Europe , it has not gone down the road of democratic socialism .
We do not want to see the centre of power in the Russian State disintegrate and split up into a host of regional power bases .
But nor do we wish for a return or a seizure of power by military despots .
Not even that danger can be ruled out .
What we therefore need is a strengthening of the democratic institutions in Russia , particularly those whose mission is to guarantee the rule of law .
If we merely pump money into Russia , the wrong people will benefit .
However , one point of particular importance in this situation , a point that has yet to be addressed , is that developments in Russia make it absolutely imperative to press on with the enlargement of the European Union in order to stabilise the heart of Central Europe , so that this stabilisation can also have an impact on the situation in Russia .
Mr President , Mr Santer is right . The main message emerging from today 's debate is that Europe and Russia are mutually dependent .
Cooperation between them means stability for the whole continent . We cannot afford to turn our backs .
Instead , our priority should be to support Russia in the ways we can : promoting sound administrative practices ; fostering local government ; strengthening civil society ; helping the customs authorities .
All of these are important from the point of view of any future Union policy on the ' northern dimension ' .
Today 's debate is about Russia , but let us not forget that Ukraine too has been badly hit by the collapse of the international market .
Ladies and gentlemen , suffering human beings suffer in the same way , wherever they happen to live .
We must be ready to intervene if food shortages become acute .
And we need assurances that aid will get through , without customs duties .
There has been a lot of talk about the IMF , but I would refer you at this juncture to what Grigori Yavlinsky said about having put too much faith in Boris Yeltsin .
It was Yavlinsky who gave us advance warning of the crisis we are now in . The euro has also been much discussed - and I wish to highlight its particular importance for a country like Finland .
Without the prospect of the euro , the Finnish economy and Finnish markka would not look as good as they do now .
Mr. President , I welcome the speeches by the President-in-Office of the Council and the President of the Commission .
There are some really worrying facts which should have been taken into account earlier .
I live in a region of Spain known as Murcia y Alicante .
In recent years , it has become well known for the influx of Russian mafias who smuggle dollars into the area for laundering , thus proving the failure of the reform of Russian institutions undertaken by Mr Yeltsin .
Nevertheless , the West , the International Monetary Fund , the European Union and G7 continued to support to the so-called ' reform ' which showed signs of inefficiency for years , though these went undetected by the West , blinded by neoliberal fundamentalism .
Some statistics on health also give cause for concern : the increased death rate and child mortality rate , the spread of disease , epidemics , the lack of funding for hospitals , all of which suggest a dangerous social decline in Russia .
We in Murcia are also suffering the consequences of the crisis caused by the collapse of the pork sector , which incidentally should be receiving aid from the European Union .
And yet , when the democratically elected representatives of the people , the Duma , challenge Mr Yeltsin , the West - the European Union - backs him against the voice of democracy .
It is incredible how the West can apply these double standards and be so two-faced , supporting authoritarianism and stifling democracy .
It has to be said that along with other movements in Russia , the Russian Communist Party has made great efforts to guarantee the reforms and to guarantee democracy .
That is why I believe it is important for the European Union to support this Russian democratic channel , whilst also providing the necessary humanitarian aid which will be so crucial in the coming months .
Mr President , I would like to focus on the way the European Union and the international community have approached the situation in Russia .
It has been said that Russia must continue the process of freeing up markets and privatisation . As if to say , as a word of warning , that there is no other path for them to take other than the one that has been chosen for them .
What , then , should they do now ?
Should they continue with the approach that led to the present catastrophe ?
The problem with freeing up the market in Russia 's case is that she has insufficient productive industry - if in practice she has any - taking into consideration her size , to serve as a basis for economic growth .
There are only speculative movements of money and capital based on quick profits , which do not achieve the objectives which the EU , among others , considers important .
Furthermore , privatisation in itself cannot be a cure for a situation where the private sector does not function rationally as a whole , but in a way that does not make it possible to include the social dimension , amongst other things , in the market economy .
The conclusion is , therefore , that we should permit and approve a certain degree of manipulation , where the State is concerned , in a situation which is about much more than whether the economy is collapsing .
The issue is that the entire structure of the country is being put to the test and is in danger of falling apart , which would mean a far more disastrous situation than we the one we have now , from our point of view as well .
I am not saying that the EU should dictate , but there has to be cooperation .
Mr President , nearly everything has been covered , but not quite .
Mrs Lalumière , although we must help the Russians - and no one is denying this - we also need the Russians .
Kosovo and the Balkans are a thorn in our side .
Grave dangers threaten us . And what are the Russians doing to help us in this area ?
What ?
Do you think for an instant that Mr Milosevic could continue to flout the whole of the West , the European Union , the WEU and even NATO if he were not assured of the tacit and more or less secret support of Russia ?
We were flabbergasted yesterday when Mr van den Broek told us that we should not expect the Russians to change tack on this point .
That is the last straw .
I have no idea how he can justify that attitude .
Perhaps it is masochism .
You are telling us that we will help Russia , we will continue to demand considerable efforts from our taxpayers in order to help Russia , and in return Russia will continue to take a different line from us in a matter in which we are involved ?
You must be joking !
I sincerely apologise , but Milosevic must laugh when he hears us making our speeches .
And I would appeal at this point to the Duma : if you do not change , be assured that we will not continue to support you !
This is the message which I have not yet heard today , among all the speeches which I otherwise support wholeheartedly .
As for the international financial crisis , it is time to forget Russia .
We must now concern ourselves with Latin America , as this is where the problem lies .
It is too late for Russia : it has committed irreversible acts ; it has used up its international credit ; it has literally refused to pay its debts .
It is now to the countries which can still use our money that we must turn our attention , and it is a pity that it is Mr Clinton , despite his embarrassing situation , who has taken the initiative which we should have taken .
Mr President , the gravity of the financial crisis , with its especially serious repercussions in Asia and Russia , but also in Latin America , demands our closest attention .
And it calls in particular for Europe to assume its own position regarding the crisis , rather than simply echoing the ideas aired during the meetings of the G7 and between President Clinton and President Yeltsin .
This is no passing malaise ; it is a crisis rooted in the ultra-liberal approaches that are prevailing throughout the world ; consequently , its impact will become apparent , and indeed already has , in a downturn of growth , demand and employment in our national economies .
If the situation is to be resolved , a change must be made in the ultra-liberal approaches that are conducive to speculative activity , and this inevitably calls at the same time for a closer focus on social problems and on the reviving of domestic demand in order to achieve sufficient growth to bring about the recovery of productive investment .
It also calls for effective regulation of the movement of capital , with proper taxation in a context of appropriate international cooperation .
In Russia , the simultaneous crises on the economic , financial and social fronts cannot be viewed in isolation from the global crisis .
It does of course have its own particular features and assumes a prominence of its own .
The domestic factors responsible may be readily identified , as President Yeltsin has said .
But the external pressures and constraints cannot be ignored , particularly those exerted by the IMF , and indeed the European Union , which have systematically neglected social concerns .
We have followed recent political developments and the declared intentions for the future with the closest attention .
And we consider that the European Union can and should pursue a positive line of action based on treating Russia as a privileged discussion partner , not exerting pressure to implement economic measures that have proved to be inappropriate , but concentrating instead on achieving stability at home and in Europe .
Let us learn from the past and consider other alternatives for the future .
Mr. President , Madam President-in-Office of the Council , I am much more inclined to agree with the global analysis made by the President-in-Office than with the speech by the President of the Commission , which dealt solely with Russia .
We are indeed facing a crisis of capitalism on a global scale , and I am not referring now to what someone might have said in the Duma , but to what Mr Soros , a philanthropic speculator , said yesterday in the Banking Committee of the United States House of Representatives .
Given that we are confronted by a global crisis , we Europeans should not be asking ourselves what advice we need to give our Russian friends - whom I welcome here - but rather what our responsibility is and what role we have to play . We can make a significant contribution in two ways : we have the experience of building a civilised common market area over the last 50 years , and we also have the euro , a significant asset even before it is born .
I believe that , in the first place , we must take the lead alongside the United States and Japan , whom no one has mentioned and on whom everything depends at present .
Secondly , we must also act jointly .
I am concerned that Europe is currently making its voice heard through the G7 - no longer the G8 - rather than through ECOFIN and the Commission .
Thirdly , I believe we should call for a summit on globalisation , bearing in mind , as Mr Herman so rightly pointed out , that rather than being wise after the event , we should concentrate on current problems , and Brazil , not Russia , is the problem now .
The difficulty is that the Latin American economies , which had strengthened their foundations in recent years , have suffered a major setback .
What we need to do is decide what action to take .
In this respect , I should like to be informed of the opinions of the Council and the Commission on our policy towards the International Monetary Fund .
Are we in favour of urgent action ?
Should the Fund be reformed ?
Should we contribute more funds ?
I believe these are very important issues and if we do not address them , we will just end up subsidising the speculators , both those who created predatory capitalism in Russia and those who operate on an international scale .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I share the view of the President of the Commission that any assessment of the situation in Russia will certainly also have to take account of the fact that the European Union has perhaps failed on occasion to manage the provision of assistance as efficiently as it might have done , but there again we are only human and are not infallible .
On the other hand , from my experience as a member of the joint delegation of the European Parliament and the Russian State Duma and Federal Council , I can tell you that on many questions of Russian reform policy , we have effectively been conducting the same talks with our Russian colleagues since 1994 .
These talks relate to the very areas in which there has been an absence of reforms which would make Russia an attractive business location and investment target .
The first of these areas is the tax system , then come the facts that there is no code of real-estate law and that the system of banks and finance markets does not work , not to mention numerous other important shortcomings .
I have the impression that this discussion has been going on for years and has not really produced any results .
For a long time now in Russia , the executive and legislature have been blocking each other , and I can only wish and hope that the new Russian Government does not have to work in a political vacuum , but that there is a realistic prospect of it obtaining parliamentary support for its work .
It is and will remain one of our main tasks , especially for the Delegation of the European Parliament for relations with the Russian Federation , to be absolutely specific in our talks with colleagues from the State Duma as to where reforms are needed and to voice any criticisms of developments and political processes in Russia , not in a carping way but constructively , with a view to exerting influence that will promote the continuation and success of reform policies .
I believe that this will be the key task confronting the members of our Parliament over the next few days when we sit down with the Russian delegation .
Mr President , in my view we need an in-depth analysis of Russia and a search for fundamental remedies for the situation .
We must not do this behind closed doors , but through closer dialogue with our Russian partners .
We must not repeat the mistakes that have already been made , by exporting prescriptions .
I wish to make two points , which seem to me fundamental .
Firstly , we are also responsible , as a Parliament , as a European Commission , as an International Monetary Fund , as international organisations , both for underestimating the factors in the crisis and for having accepted , or directly sought , processes which could hardly fail to result in this situation .
Secondly , we put unlimited trust in the political leadership and in economic processes which have already been rightly described by Mr Swoboda and Mr Barón Crespo as savage liberalism and speculation dressed up as the construction of a market economy .
This is not creating a real market economy - which would be a proper objective - in this country , and the State , which used to be everything , indeed too much , is being dismantled . Of course it needed to be changed and reformed , but now it seems to have been reduced to nothing .
We know that public impoverishment is often linked to private enrichment of the few , and it seems to me that this is what is currently happening in the country : public impoverishment is plain to see , and so is private enrichment of the few .
We often see evidence of this in our own countries : in recent years there has been an increased flow of Russian tourists - and I am pleased about that - spending more than the Americans spent in the 1950s and 1960s .
But there is one small difference : the Americans had the United States behind them , a solid economy and a strong country , and the Russians do not .
I do not know if it is true that only 8 % of Russian citizens pay taxes , but this would imply the dismantling of a whole political system : there is no going back , obviously .
So we need to rediscover a serious and lasting economic and political approach , and our work together with our Russian partners must be geared to making a concrete contribution which will improve the current situation .
Mr President , of course I share the view of those in this debate today who have said that the global economic system is in danger .
In this House and elsewhere in the Western world we have every interest in ensuring its maintenance and its strength .
But what we are talking about in this debate is what we should be doing about Russia .
We have seen this morning that the view of the majority in this House , apart from the fringe groups , is that we should follow a coordinated Western approach , so that Russia can implement its own economic reforms combined with specific well-targeted assistance .
Secondly we must show our willingness to ensure that Russia remains an active player in the global economic system , but without any big aid programmes which will go into unknown pockets .
Recognising that this is a long-term strategy , I agree with President Santer that we must coordinate our position before the next G7 .
But there are three important points to consider . Firstly , we must ensure that all our programmes - TACIS and others - are properly adapted to an emergency system if necessary , including food aid .
I would like an assurance that this is being done .
Secondly , our aid should be targeted on local and regional entities across the Russian Republic so that we actually know that the money is going into specific programmes . Last , but not least , is democracy .
President Santer said democracy is very important .
When I visited a Moscow school for political studies bringing young elected officials from all over the former Soviet Union to learn about democracy , I learned that their funding is being cut off at the end of this year .
It appears that under our Rules we are not allowed to finance anybody for more than three years , however important they are .
I would like the Commission 's assurance that this funding will continue on a regular and multiannual basis .
Mr President , on behalf of the Socialists on the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy I should like to welcome the Members of the Duma .
Today we are not merely discussing the collapse of emerging markets .
As my colleague , Hannes Swoboda , recognised in his excellent speech , there is a financial and economic crisis in parts of Asia as well as Russia .
The situation in several Latin American countries is also precarious .
Developed countries need to contribute to a rapid and lasting recovery in these countries and the EU has a key role to play in this respect .
However today 's debate needs to look beyond the effects of the crisis and the immediate remedies and consider the phenomenon of globalisation .
In this week 's Economist Jeffrey Sachs , professor of international trade at Harvard , talks about the end of an era ( and I was surprised to hear Mr Brok blaming Harvard professors for what has happened ) .
Yes , we all need to grasp the full consequences of current events and to acknowledge the failure of development concepts based purely on the free market , with the invisible hand bringing emerging economies into global capitalism at very little cost to rich countries .
We therefore need a sounder basis for globalisation .
If we could go beyond ideology and all agree on this objective , the present crisis will have at least had one beneficial outcome .
I believe Parliament 's resolution to be adopted tomorrow will contribute to this objective .
We ask for a reform of international financial institutions , greater transparency of markets with more financial information , better supervision and regulation of the financial sector and controls over short-term lending and speculation .
In this reform process , Europe should play the leading role .
The so-called Washington consensus needs to be reviewed .
Europe , not least with the euro among the world currencies , can improve the international approach towards globalisation .
There is a need for better dialogue between richer and poorer countries .
Reform packages should not simply be imposed by IMF officials on the basis of purely technocratic standards .
There is a need for greater acknowledgement of social objectives in the development and reform process , be it in Russia , Indonesia or elsewhere .
The social and human costs have been and still are enormous and unacceptable .
It is right to help such countries as they strive towards economic development but not on the basis of purely economic standards and objectives .
Otherwise we face the risk that public opinion in such countries will force their governments back into protectionism and nationalism .
I therefore urge the Council and the Commission to engage in a close dialogue with the European Parliament as well as our international partners , in order to establish a sounder basis for globalisation .
Otherwise world prosperity will be seriously threatened in the longer term .
Mr President , Madam President of the Council , representatives of the Commission , ladies and gentlemen , as the PPE Group coordinator for Asian affairs , I should like to confine my remarks to the financial crisis in Asia .
Let me emphasise that the reasons for the Asian financial crisis are indeed manifold and that each country 's problem therefore has to be addressed in a different way .
In Japan , the main issue is still whether the Japanese can overcome the banking crisis .
Only if they manage to do that will they stand any real chance of pulling out of recession .
All parties in Japan are now called upon to get to serious grips with this legislation and not to be mutually obstructive , which will only serve to plunge Japan and all of us into serious difficulties .
In other countries such as Indonesia it is not just a matter of banking systems but of the entire economic order .
But without social and political reforms , countries like Indonesia cannot succeed in solving either of these problems .
Moreover , we also have the urgent task now of saving sections of the population from undernourishment and famine .
We welcome the fact that the People 's Republic of China has not devalued its currency , but we must also ensure that this situation does not lead to upheavals in trade relations .
In China too , economic and political reforms are needed .
All in all , we must look at each individual country in order to assess how progress can best be made .
We Europeans can and must help to overcome the crisis , but what some speakers have said about Russia I should like to extend to Asia , namely that the key to the resolution of the crisis lies in these countries .
It is up to the government and parliament of each country to overcome the crisis .
We can only help .
The critical pressure for reform must develop in these countries .
They must not seek salvation in the short-term solution of protectionist measures against trade and the movement of capital - quite the contrary .
The uncontrolled banking system , the intransigent web of economic collusion , the corruption , the absence of a market economy embedded in social justice and the lack of democratic pluralism in these countries must be overcome , and that has to be done by these nations themselves .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the crisis in Russia is part of a wider economic and social crisis , and it is on the latter that I wish to comment .
The worldwide economic crisis is like the falling of a row of dominoes .
Irresponsible borrowing and profiteering short-term investments by the Western banks , combined with irresponsible borrowing by the local banks and companies in South-East Asia , gave the first push which set the whole process in motion .
There is no doubt that in the medium term , the rules of the international money markets will have to be tightened because of this crisis .
The danger that a crisis in the system can be triggered by short-term capital movements is too great for us to allow those short-term movements to continue in the same unimpeded and uncontrolled way as in the past .
International supervisory bodies will have to reorganise themselves to respond to the new demands of our times , but the main focus of our effort just now must be reorientated away from the dominoes that have fallen - and I fear that Russia 's economy is one of them - and towards those which are now under threat .
The threat has now shifted from Russia to Latin America , especially Brazil .
And of course , after Latin America and Brazil , the threat looms over the large domino of Wall Street , which would lead to a recession of America 's economy whose effects would be disastrous all over the world .
Consequently , we cannot focus our efforts just on the deadlock of Russia 's economy where , as Mr Herman very rightly said , the battle has already been lost and it will take a very long time for the economy to recover .
We must turn our efforts towards Brazil , and we must do something to adapt economic policy in Europe away from this mania of anti-inflation that has gripped us all , and towards some other urgent policy . Because an anti-inflation policy in Europe where inflation ranges from zero to 2 % under conditions of recession does not make sense , I would point out to the Commissioner and the rapporteur .
Mr President , I cannot disagree with much of what Mr Katiforis said , but I would like to say that at this time it would be wrong to let Russia remain in a state of decline and continual disaster and ' wash our hands ' , saying that the issue has been played out .
Russia is an enormous country and a great people , it is part of Europe , and I do not think we ourselves are blameless for what has happened .
At first , we tried to implement prescriptions which bore little relationship to the society and system in place there .
So we produced a misprint of a Western European or American economic situation there , which in the end did not last , as might have been expected .
We must not be surprised , for example , that the Russian banking system has collapsed .
As for the hundreds of banks there , the only thing most of them had in common in the banking sense was the name , and nothing else .
They were not banks , they were organisations whose preoccupation was how best to milk the economy .
And they did that very effectively , with very good results for them and bad ones for the economy .
So we must not abdicate responsibility .
We still have a responsibility and that is the framework within which we should intervene .
It is very difficult , Mr President , to continue believing that we can impose economic systems which suit us on a society not prepared for them , ones appropriate for traditional and true democracies , but which are not suitable for a country and society which somehow has never had such experiences .
When we say that we must stay out of it and let Russia solve its own problems , we ought therefore to think again .
Of course , our interventions will have to be much better - better thought out , aimed in the right direction , with the right kind of monitoring and directed at Russia , not at European organisations , as most European interventions have unfortunately been .
Only in this way will we be able to avoid what now looms as a great risk , the risk that the Russian people will come to think that its difficulties stem from the striving towards democracy .
That would be very dangerous for us all .
Mr President , our debate this morning is rather curious .
It consists of two closely related aspects : the Russian crisis on one hand and the global economic and financial crisis on the other .
Mr Santer , under the pretext that it is the Russian crisis which is of greatest interest to European public opinion , spoke only of Russia .
It is a pity that the Commission did not comment on the world crisis of recent weeks and that it did not outline any courses of action .
Faced with globalisation and the resultant risk of a general crisis , everyone , including economists , bankers and politicians , is moving towards more voluntarism and more regulation .
Politicians of all persuasions are finally realising that we cannot talk in abstract terms about people , their misery and unemployment and that we cannot leave the market to look after these .
It also seems that , although this wonderful globalisation can quickly create wealth , it can also totally destroy it , and even more quickly if it is not managed and disciplined .
The European model in this respect is telling .
As one French minister has said , for example , the euro is a formidable pole of stability in the world financial chaos .
I should like to take this opportunity to pay tribute to the Socialist government of Lionel Jospin which has played a leading role in encouraging political voluntarism .
In this respect , I shall refer to what the French Prime Minister said in his analysis of the economic crisis , which was that crises create an illusion that the economic sector is independent , separate from the political system and from social organisation .
Mr President , the European model must be a compromise between market economy , openness , liberalisation and the political will to manage and organise the market .
This is a compromise between profit and concern for people .
That is why the European Union and in particular the euro zone must assume their responsibilities faced with this worldwide chaos .
How much easier this approach would be if the whole of the European Union were in the euro zone !
How much greater the influence of this zone would be in the world !
However , as things stand , the very least that can be expected is that the large and small countries in this euro zone are united with regard to the crisis .
As a minimum , efficient and effective coordination is required between the four large European countries which are members of the G7 and the other Member States in the euro zone , not only due to the Russian situation , as Mr Santer said earlier , but also due to the world crisis .
I should like Commissioner de Silguy to inform us of the Commission 's proposals in this respect .
Mr President , the internal cohesion of the euro zone is an important political factor faced with the rest of the world .
If we want to work together and deal on an equal footing with the United States , Europe must prove itself to be truly united in this respect .
Mr President , the current Russian crisis has profound economic and political implications for the country itself , the region and wider geopolitics .
However , it has to be acknowledged from the outset that there is little the EU can do to resolve the situation .
It is up to Russia to sort out its own political mess which has directly led to the country 's economic collapse .
All the EU can do at this point is to address the consequences of the situation .
Some EU countries are more exposed than others - Germany probably more than anyone else ; but even we in Ireland are not unaffected .
The market for more than half of our autumn beef exports has been lost and the collapse of pig prices in Ireland is partly due to the fall in demand from Russia .
We must monitor the economic consequences of the problem and ensure the effects are minimal .
However , whatever the consequences for existing EU members , the countries of Central and Eastern Europe must view current developments with growing alarm .
The Russian crisis could roll the clock back in spite of the great historic changes that have taken place .
Those who have had reservations on enlargement in the past should realise that not only have their particular concerns been misplaced but the current crisis is in fact an argument for accelerating the agenda for enlargement .
That is the only way to guarantee permanent peace and security in the region .
As far as helping Russia itself is concerned , there can be no more financial aid without a genuine commitment to economic and political reform .
There is absolutely no point in throwing further funds into the bottomless pit of economic collapse in Russia , especially when there is continued political maladministration and corruption .
However , it must also be acknowledged that the harsh Russian winter is not far away and we must therefore prepare for it .
The Commission has an opportunity to plan for a programme of substantial food aid and it should do so without delay .
The Commission can also provide badly needed technical aid and expertise to help Russia restructure its economy .
Providing expertise is one thing , taking advice is another .
But if Mr Primakov and his administration do that we can help each other out of the present crisis .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , one of the Union 's major goals is greater stability in Europe .
European stability should serve to enhance the security of the world economic system as a whole .
For precisely that reason , it would be entirely inappropriate to talk the world into even more crises and disasters .
Nevertheless , one thing is necessary : we must do a certain amount of stocktaking .
Although we are talking about Russia today , the fact is that one third of the world economy is in the depths of recession , that living standards in the countries concerned are plummeting while unemployment rises .
In relation to Russia , this has meant that about one in four employees throughout the country has virtually received no pay for six months .
That is the social situation in a nutshell .
The additional slump in trade resulting from this delicate situation has assumed threatening proportions and has led to a further loss of confidence .
What is the issue ?
Russia needs some restoration work on its governmental administration systems and it needs structural aid .
The structural aid has to be approached in a sensitive manner .
The TACIS system must be developed and expanded .
That cannot by done by simply controlling capital movements .
Confidence is imperative .
Without loans the world would grind to a complete standstill .
Under no circumstances must the present crisis culminate in a credit crunch , for that would be disastrous for these parts of the world and especially for Russia .
But one other thing is certain , namely that it is desirable and essential that the ability of Russia , of all countries , to repay its loans should be re-established as quickly as possible if confidence is to be restored .
Perhaps , to take up a point that was touched upon today by our State Secretary , we should also adopt a more resolute approach on the international stage .
We should form an international commission , perhaps on the model of the Brundtland Commission .
It is a matter of putting the financial structure in order again and restoring confidence .
That is all .
We shall do it with the greatest of sensitivity , as the present situation demands .
Mr President , out of the many possible reasons - a government threatening to fall apart , a context of socio-economic underdevelopment , rich minorities , poor majorities - I wish to mention one , because it relates to the prevailing political culture which also flows in Europe 's veins and has certainly not done Russia any good .
I am talking about abstract ideology which does not bend to reality , but expects reality to bend to it .
In fact , when Communism fell , people thought that if an ideology was not left-wing it would not be rigid .
Narrow liberal thought applied as a miracle cure to the most disparate realities is another prison where policy is understood as a lay art of government and a result of the force of ideas .
Under dogmatic liberalism , and also under culpable pressure from the west , Russia was expected to make the leap , without a safety net , from 70 years of command economy to its opposite . No one asked if such a thing had ever happened before , or whether there was a proliferation of entrepreneurial capacity , or whether , after all , there might not be a danger of seeing the old oligarchy return , disguised as managers .
Instead of being renewed , the productive system is completely collapsing in upon itself and the government is in deep crisis .
The strange thing is , Mr President - and this has been echoed here in the House - that today Japan and the Asian tigers are indeed looking a little mangy alongside the fact that China is supporting its own currency and not devaluing .
That is curious , and it suggests that narrow thought does not help us understand reality , even less control it .
Mr President , the good thing about this first globalisation crisis which we are experiencing is that it is making us face facts : we need to manage the market and we need economic regulation , otherwise the market economy will turn against its own logic .
In these troubled times , the crisis has another virtue which is to show the validity of the European approach in terms of the euro adventure .
This is clearly no longer an adventure , but proof of great wisdom , which gives us a certain responsibility in the analysis which we will make of the crisis today .
With regard to the international regulatory authorities , we must ask ourselves about the operation of the IMF .
How can this major organisation be made to function without the financial participation of one of its main contributors ?
How can we not consider transforming the interim committee of the IMF into a real decision-making body in the near future ?
How can we not base the question of a world tax on capital movements , as proposed to us several years ago by Mr Tobin ?
How can we not consider taking into account , in our perception of how to implement market economy reforms , the social and environmental dimensions of these reforms ?
How can we not accept that , under certain conditions , exchange controls must be re-established ?
How can we not imagine that the current situation will perhaps require , here or there , renationalisations in the banking sector , because without a structured and organised banking sector there can be no market economy ?
All this implies State and regulatory power , and for us as Europeans , this also implies rapidly and urgently deciding on the question of the external representation of the euro .
We need this .
In these troubled times , Europe is the source of all that is new and creative as a result of the instrument which we have established - the euro .
We must make this an instrument of growth and stability .
This gives us a collective responsibility and we must not shrink from that .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , now that we have discussed all these things here , one question remains : if Russia takes all the action we recommend , will it then be saved ?
Or are some of our words born of our despair in trying to comprehend something so totally unfamiliar ?
' Russia is great , and the Tsar is far away ' is what they used to say .
Everything we have been talking about is concentrated on Moscow .
Russia is so great and so vast that it is also in our interest to find out what is happening in the provinces .
What structural measures are being implemented there ?
Is there a concentration of powers in the provinces too ?
One lesson we must take to heart is that , whatever more stringent measures we think we can introduce against Russia , events in that country have a huge bearing on our own development .
Our direct aid , to be honest , is only a drop in the ocean of problems that are being experienced in Russia , and yet we talk about cutting TACIS or amending it and much else besides .
We must try to restore confidence through human contacts and by supporting the present government .
I believe this government deserves our trust , if only because the head of the government has said that there will be no change to the reforms and that the loans will be repaid .
We should not doubt his word but should encourage him to redeem these pledges , and for our part we must seek ways in which we can help to smooth his path towards these objectives .
I have heard from the presidency of the Council that it too has adopted a detached and clinical approach to the analysis of this situation and is responding to the task list with a slight shrug of the shoulders .
We have no patent solution , said Mrs Ferrero-Waldner , but we hope that whatever is done will be for the best .
However things may appear , external trade policy is synonymous with foreign policy at the moment .
We must put our trust in Russia and help it in this difficult situation .
Any attempt to turn back the clock would result in a collapse that would affect every one of us .
Mr President , I have just three questions concerning the current financial crisis . Who or what is to blame for it ?
Who will have to pay the cost of solving it ?
How is the discrepancy to be addressed between whoever is to blame and whoever is to pick up the bill for it ?
Consensus is gradually emerging about the cause of the financial crisis which is becoming increasingly international .
The most important factor was the excessively careless lending of money by private banks .
Banks took great risks in emerging markets , attracted by the prospect of large profits .
These profits were as high as they were because they included a risk premium to cover the eventuality of creditors defaulting .
Against this background it is of course baffling that the costs of the crisis have to be borne primarily by governments and are passed on by governments to the ordinary taxpayer .
I find it unacceptable that banks should make large profits by taking big risks , but that when things go wrong they should not foot the bill .
It is suspiciously reminiscent of the old saying ' private profit and public risk ' .
So what can be done to ensure that the general public does not have to pay for the excessive risks taken by private banks ?
To start with evidently existing banking rules on equity capital and risk are still fundamentally inadequate .
The problems are still the same as they were at the time of the Mexican peso crisis of 1994 , the Northern European banks crisis in the late 1980s and early 1990s and the American savings banks crisis of the 1980s .
The rules thus need to be drastically changed and supervision tightened .
The question is , though , whether it is actually possible entirely to prevent a funding crisis under the current system where banks are obsessed with making maximum profits ?
If it is not possible , then it is essential to tackle the discrepancy between those who cause a crisis and those who have to pick up the bill for it .
In financial crises too , it is ultimately the polluter who must pay .
To my mind that can only happen if a world crisis fund is set up , fed from levies on the private banks .
This could be done in one of two ways .
By a specific levy on high-risk loans or by a levy on all capital transactions , the so-called ' Tobin Tax ' .
The question is , who should administer such a fund and how it could be subjected to democratic spot checks ?
I can see two candidates : a reformed IMF with more democratic voting or the Bank for International Settlements , which would first need to have a democratic supervisory board .
Some people talk about this crisis in terms of casino capitalism .
I think the situation is worse than that .
Casinos have strict rules , but financial markets do not even have those .
Let this be the last crisis in which all that elected governments can do is pick up the pieces after the disaster has occurred .
Mr President , if there is anything certain today in Russia , it is uncertainty .
The crisis is both a political and an economic one .
Learning what real democracy is has not been easy against the background of tsarist rule or the Soviet system .
A philosophy of social welfare and exploitation have produced , on the one hand , vast wealth concentrated in just a few places and , on the other , widespread poverty .
Money pouring in from the West has not helped .
It has got into the wrong hands .
Russia 's politicians must themselves acknowledge the facts and act accordingly .
Work and real enterprise must be accorded their true value .
People must be encouraged to stand on their own two feet while adhering to the rules of democracy .
The EU now has to focus on humanitarian aid for its neighbouring regions .
We have to take care that food supplies do not run out .
Famine has before now been the cause of revolutions , unrest and uncontrollable floods of refugees .
For Finland , with its long , eastern border with Russia , the only EU country to have a border with Russia , it is important to underline the importance of this .
It is also important to see that aid reaches its proper destination without border or customs officials hampering operations or the goods ending up on the black market .
Political leaders in EU countries must support the new government , especially by improving the basis for commerce .
In this way , Russia can acquire the foreign currency she needs to discharge her obligations .
It also has to be emphasised that the idea of the regional redeployment of armed forces , which some in Russia have proposed , must be given up .
It would only increase distrust in the West and weaken our citizens ' desire to deliver voluntary humanitarian aid to the people of Russia .
Mr President , it was significant that when the President of the Commission spoke to us this morning he talked about the Russian crisis and not the overall problem that we face in the global economy .
That is a very worrying sign for the European Union .
While we talk about the fact that the Union intends to be a partner with the United States in managing the global economy , the Commission and the Council have to show confidence that with the coming of the euro we are actually going to exercise that responsibility .
What I would like the Commission to do , if it intends to reply today , is to say what it means to propose in terms of intervening in this global crisis ; not just about the Russian crisis , which is partly institutional and political and partially due to the immaturity of Russia 's market economy , but about the global operation of the world 's economy .
What role will we play in the global summit meeting that President Clinton has proposed ?
Will we speak with one voice when we go to events in the future since we now have our single currency about to be born ?
Will we propose major reforms of the IMF and for the future role of the Bank for International Settlements ?
Are we going to try and ensure a return to stability and confidence by having greater supervision ?
Frankly it is not acceptable for the President of the Commission to come here and only talk about the situation in Russia .
Unless we can try to intervene as the European Union in the global economy , then the Russian situation will not improve .
I would like to see Parliament , the Commission and the Council take an initiative early in the new year to press for reform of the Bretton Woods institutions .
We have got to use institutions like the Bank for International Settlements to bring about greater supervision of cross-border lending , which would also help to bring stability and transparency in the system .
Commissioner de Silguy , if you intend to reply this morning , we would be very grateful for facts and firm commitments rather than simply an analysis of the crisis .
Mr President , Europe has gained in stability owing to the fact that many former Communist countries in Central and Eastern Europe have been trying harder than Russia to put their dismal past behind them .
Their systems are therefore not in the same state of collapse as the Russian economy . They are however affected indirectly - just like the EU countries - by disruption to trade and investment .
One key reason why reform has been taken more seriously in the CEECs is that they have applied for membership of the European Union and know what this entails .
No one would dispute that the Russian situation is extremely dangerous , but matters would be many times worse if Europe had not minimised the risk of a domino effect by preparing for enlargement to the east .
Equally , cooperation on EMU has helped us steer clear of much of the currency turmoil triggered by the crisis in Russia and south east Asia .
Confidence building is an issue for the EU , particularly when it comes to Eurosceptic countries like the United Kingdom , Denmark and Sweden .
In our future efforts to promote European cooperation , we need to stress the positive spin-off of the two major European projects : EMU and enlargement to the east .
If the EU countries can emerge relatively unscathed from the current crisis , they will be better placed to assist Russia financially .
A healthy economy at home should enable us to resume trade and investment . And , provided Russia gets back on its feet , we will be there to provide constructive support .
In its desperation , Russia might be tempted to return to centralised control . All the more important that there should be onetime Communist countries nearby with a track record of reasonably successful economic reform .
Communist nostalgia in Russia will soon fade once people see how well things are going across the border .
Mr President , Madam President-inOffice , Commissioners , the world is not yet on fire .
Flames are flickering , but there is no sign of a fire brigade or even of any firefighting plans .
The Asian crisis , the financial collapse in Russia and the difficulties in many Latin American countries demonstrate the fragility of the finance markets and of many national economies . Prosperity , growth and employment are in the stranglehold of these finance markets .
Reform of the international finance system is needed more than ever before .
Let us not be fooled by the calm in Europe .
The finance markets , after all , are entirely globalised and are independent of any political control .
Although only 3 to 4 % of the capital flow of USD 1300 billion has anything to do with trade in goods and services , these money movements have a huge adverse - or sometimes actually beneficial - effect on national economies , disrupt growth and investment trends and thereby destroy jobs .
The liberalisation and deregulation of financial markets , as well as progress in communications technology and the complete withdrawal of the State from financing have allowed the national finance markets to become intertwined .
International free trade undoubtedly requires an open global finance system .
However , the benefits of globalisation - better allocation of capital , cost-cutting , new means of hedging risks - must be weighed against the potential for instability in the finance markets .
Increasing monetary assets and leverage ratios lead to problems with volumes , prices and derivative instruments , and these problems vent themselves in the form of speculation , volatility and crashes .
The real economy cannot cope with that .
The exclusive growth of trade in derivatives - amounting to a volume of some USD 40 billion in 1994 - and the separation of this sector from the realm of economic policy have contributed to the malfunctioning of the financial markets .
Since national economic policies can no longer be pursued , it is high time that we had international cooperation and coordination in the domain of economic policy as a means of preventing crises .
Harmonisation is essential !
For that reason , I explicitly welcome the Clinton initiative and call on the Council presidency to endorse this initiative wholeheartedly and to become involved in it and help shape it .
The crisis-torn nations of this world must sit down at the bargaining table with the G7 .
The development of the world economy is no longer determined by G7 meetings .
Perhaps we even need an international security council .
Such ideas must be discussed on a global scale by those who are now responsible for monetary , financial and economic policy decisions .
We need to find ways out of this crisis , as well as a new financial order which brings stability to monetary and financial relations through transparency and through supervisory , earlywarning and support systems .
The calls of some speculators for international credit-insurance systems must , however , be rejected .
Tolerating speculation is one thing , but using tax revenues to reward it is out of the question .
A common international economic policy would admittedly be difficult - of that there is no doubt - but it is necessary and must involve appraising the roles of the International Monetary Fund , the Bank for International Settlements and the World Trade Organisation , without calling the institutions themselves into question .
We must organise an efficient new international regulatory and supervisory framework , as well as actually reforming the institutions and improving the ways in which they work together .
Above all , a regulatory system must include measures for the compulsory disclosure of financial data of a comparable standard , for transparency in all finance market transactions , for more efficient financial markets , for better supervision by creditors and borrowers , for measures to reduce the volume of short-term borrowing and to curb speculation , as well as incentives for long-term cross-border loan agreements .
In democracies , all economic data must be disclosed by governments , so the finance markets cannot be permitted to conceal such information .
Moreover , prosperity , growth and jobs are becoming increasingly dependent on these markets - that is undeniable .
Exchange rate stability will also be important in these globalised markets .
The euro will be able to contribute to this within a multipolar world currency system , even though I believe that target-area agreements are still a long way off .
But one thing can certainly be achieved , namely close cooperation between the European Central Bank and the US Federal Reserve , which is in the interests of all of us and will serve to promote stability .
This would also help Russia , since I believe that the Russians have reason to be disappointed with the G7 proposals .
Even if Russia does its homework , we cannot go on assuming that IMF policy will automatically put things right .
Manchester-style capitalism has been too much for Russia to bear .
Every possible step must be taken to ensure that a social market economy is finally established in Russia and that a socially acceptable transformation is effected .
I believe that even temporary controls on capital movements for Russia are tolerable and necessary from our point of view as a means of ensuring that the development process in Russia can be guided in a way which will benefit the Russian people too .
We have heard many wise words today about the world economic crisis , but especially about the situation in Russia , which the presidency and the Commission President have also covered in detail .
Let me round off this debate with a few observations , and my colleague Mr de Silguy will add a few more words on the economic and monetary aspects of the world crisis .
I would say to begin with that all today 's speakers have expressed great concern , but also great solidarity with Russia in her time of trouble .
The interest of this enormous country on our own continent of Europe is that the situation should stabilise as swiftly as possible .
That is not only in Russia 's interest , but certainly in our interest too .
At the same time I should add , and a number of honourable Members have made the point in a number of different ways , that of course the impetus for real change , for real reform , has to come from Russia herself .
It cannot be imposed from outside .
All the international community can do , all we can do , is to give aid if Russia does indeed pursue a further policy of reform .
Consequently the top priority at present is to overcome the political crisis and to reach and develop a consensus between the government and the Duma , because without that , further reform can never be possible .
That political process is showing a few hopeful signs at the moment , at least .
We hope things will be clearer towards the end of the week .
Once more I would stress that reform in Russia is not a concession to the West but is in Russia 's own interest .
And that those , like President Santer , who have pointed out that sound economic policy in itself clears the way for social policy must bring that point to the attention of members of the Duma - not for the first time either .
We can hold ideological debates , and that is very interesting and worthwhile , about what kind of market economy would be best for Russia , but a number of basic facts must on no account be neglected .
This means that the total lack of any regulatory system in Russia , of any legal framework , makes all forms of economy and economic policy vulnerable to excess .
And this is precisely what we have seen .
If business profits disappear abroad , if taxes are not paid , if banks are not supervised , and so on and so forth , the whole system collapses .
Liberalisation is no bad thing in itself , but completely uncontrolled liberalisation or liberalisation solely for the benefit of a small oligarchy is a very bad thing indeed .
That too is a phenomenon we are clearly witnessing in Russia .
Much has been said about what specific action the European Union itself might take at this stage .
When preparing for this debate , I looked again at what exactly was contained in our TACIS programmes with Russia . As Mr Santer told you , some ECU 2 billion have been earmarked under these in recent years since 1991 .
These were mainly programmes designed to restructure the Russian economy , plans for economic but also political reform to which we gave our support .
Specific examples include programmes intended to revamp the tax system , banking supervision , investment safeguards which would also give foreign investors more confidence to put more capital into Russia .
There are plenty of other examples : training programmes for young managers and so on .
A start has been made on many of these programmes , but the fact is and remains that on the Russian side their transposition into new legislation , checks on implementation or actual programmes which actually convert the reforms into real deeds , real practice , has been only fragmentary .
The best thing we can do just now is to see how far existing programmes need to be adapted further or to focus more closely on the most acute needs of the moment .
We have already put ideas on this to the Russian authorities , even before this crisis broke in mid-August , and we shall have to see to what extent further changes are needed to the programme being prepared for 1999 , work on which has already started .
It has been said here , and President Santer has frankly admitted , that in implementing these programmes we are often held up by our own red tape .
With many of these programmes , once the management committee , which represents the Member States , has given its approval to certain programmes it then takes about ten months before a contract is actually signed .
Just as we did in consultation with Parliament over reconstruction in Bosnia , where the same complaints were heard , we are more than willing to try to speed up these procedures , whether or not this involves changing the regulation , though that would seem inevitable .
But to do that we shall need to have the Council on board as well .
But where we are able to speed up our procedures in-house , you can be sure that we shall do so .
We may perhaps need to deploy more people here and there in order to be more effective in the current crisis .
But I wish to avoid giving the impression that our aid programmes or even those of other international organisations , including the IMF , or insufficiently effective action on the part of the international community are in fact responsible for the crisis .
No , Mr President , the solutions have to be sought in the first place from within Russia herself .
This remark needs some qualification .
It is not really all that surprising , given all that had gone before , that after only seven years of the reform process in Russia , one cannot as yet point to any truly spectacular results .
Too little has been done .
There are countries which have had far more success with their reforms , but these are also countries with a different history , a different culture from Russia 's .
I say that not as an excuse .
I am saying , by way of encouragement to Russia , that the present situation as such has to change if the political leadership and parliament in Russia are genuinely and jointly dedicated to pursuing true reform .
I am convinced that the international community too will be prepared , taking account of the present situation , taking account of the very difficult social situation , to adapt its aid as far as possible , provided there is some prospect of progress - and provided a number of basic rules are complied with , particularly that the establishment of all kinds of legal frameworks is not shelved .
Because that would mean just throwing good money after bad .
This is the basis on which we are currently negotiating with Russia .
I am particularly glad that the EU-Russia Joint Parliamentary Committee is sitting this afternoon .
I am glad to have the opportunity of addressing it at the invitation of both chairmen .
A summit is planned with the President of Russia in October .
Meantime there is an invitation from the Prime Minister to Mr Santer and myself to discuss the situation .
The G7 are particularly busy and are getting ready for possible new measures .
One thing is certain and I repeat it : it is Russia herself who is anxious to be part of the G7 / G8 .
It is Russia herself who wants to join the World Trade Organisation .
So Russia herself must take the measures which will allow her to play an effective part in these bodies and show results .
She will then be able to count on the full support of the international community .
Welcome
Ladies and gentlemen , I would like to welcome the delegation from the National Assembly of the Republic of Tunisia , headed by Mrs Shadlia Boukchina , Vice-President of the House of Representatives , which has joined us in the official gallery .
The delegation is doing us the honour of visiting us on the occasion of its ninth interparliamentary meeting with the corresponding delegation of the European Parliament .
Relations between Tunisia and the European Union are based on the principle of European Mediterranean cooperation , and our contacts at parliamentary level have demonstrated our common wish to cooperate as widely as possible in vital areas .
I hope this ninth meeting will be another step towards the necessary approach between the countries and peoples we represent , with the prospect of peaceful and fruitful coexistence around the Mediterranean , which today as indeed in the past is a privileged area of contact .
I should like to wish the Tunisian delegation a fruitful meeting and a pleasant stay in Strasbourg .
Welcome to the House .
International financial crisis and political developments in Russia ( continuation )
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , in the short amount of time which I have , there are two sets of comments which I should like to make on the economic situation in Europe and on the Russian situation .
Turning firstly to the economic situation in Europe , it is indeed fortunate that the decision of 2 May is behind us !
What would the monetary situation in Europe be today if , on 2 May , Europe had not decided on the list of countries adopting the euro and on the conversion rates which will be used to fix the euro on 1 January ?
As a result , it is clear that the euro has already had its initial success - the monetary stability experienced by our currencies .
This is certainly a defensive role - we have heard a shield mentioned - but it is still an indisputable fact .
Now , what will the effects of the current crisis be on the European economy ?
Certainly the crisis is serious and will have effects , but these will necessarily be limited by Europe 's assets .
The crisis is serious because it is primarily cumulative .
All the talk this morning has been about Russia . We have heard little about Asia , and yet overall Europe is much more committed in Asia , in commercial and financial terms , than in Russia .
Even though the situation in Asia has now set a course , with stabilisation in South-East Asia , and even though China is showing remarkable responsibility at the current time , the Japanese problem is still waiting in the wings . On the one hand , Japan is suffering from a recession and on the other the programme for stabilising and re-establishing the financial and banking system is not yet effective .
There are therefore uncertainties , so why hide from them ?
The crisis will have effects on world trade , if only in certain sectors . It is clear that this disruption is not likely to develop and encourage world trade and so this is not good news for Europe .
Among the sectoral effects , the President earlier highlighted the importance of the Russian markets for European agricultural exports .
Some countries such as Finland and Greece have more trade with Russia than the Community average .
What will these effects be ?
I would refer you to the forecasts which we will be making at the end of October to try and quantify these effects .
However , it still applies that they will necessarily be limited by the assets which Europe has at its disposal .
There is no need to panic at the moment .
Why ?
Because the foundations are firm .
I remember a year ago that we discussed in this House the effects of the Asian crisis and we wondered what was going to happen in Europe .
It should be noted that European growth will be 2.8 % in 1998 and that since last year at the same time , as reported before the House , long-term interest rates have fallen by 1 % in Germany and in the euro zone . This is considerable and is despite the crisis .
I would add that , in 1998 and 1999 , among the main economic groupings , Europe will be the one with the most growth .
What a change this is from the situation of two years ago when we wondered in this House why there was growth everywhere except in Europe !
The fundamental economic structures are therefore sound and there is currently no reason to panic .
The only question is to decide how to maintain confidence in Europe .
I believe that the way to maintain the current dynamism is to maintain the policy mix .
This is essential .
We must not therefore allow any budgetary relaxation , as only the pursuit of the policy which bore these fruits will allow strong demand in Europe to be maintained , and I would add that this demand must be sufficiently robust to counterbalance the negative effects which I have just indicated .
With regard to the international economic situation , we must firstly be careful of mistaking the right solutions .
The international financial organisations are doing their best .
We must not forget that , when all is said and done , their shareholders are the states themselves .
Thirty per cent of the capital of the International Monetary Fund - or 30 % of the shares - is held by the European countries , compared with 18 % by the United States .
We should firstly therefore look to ourselves and our countries .
In addition , I believe that monetary stability , which is the task of the International Monetary Fund , is essential and must be assisted .
It is therefore now essential to adapt the working methods and tasks of the international monetary system and of the International Monetary Fund .
I believe that we must reflect on this .
We must adapt the IMF to the new order and we must see how its financial programmes must and can be supported on the social level .
We must also adapt the IMF to the new order represented by the euro which will of course fundamentally change the landscape .
A second mistaken solution is the tax on capital movements .
We must be careful , as this is dangerous and unrealistic .
It is dangerous because I would be concerned about penalising investment .
We need investment and we therefore need capital .
We must not discourage this , especially today in Europe as this is where capital is being attracted , thus allowing us to maintain growth .
We must not therefore penalise our companies or the developing countries whose current accounts are in the red and which need money .
In addition , these taxes on capital movements are unrealistic as they would not eliminate the tax havens which would not apply the tax . This would be an encouragement to fraud and speculation .
So what is the solution ?
I personally believe that there are four possible avenues to be explored .
Firstly , more transparency of transactions , whether these are financial , commercial , public or private .
Transparency should be extended .
Secondly , it seems essential to me to examine the rules of banking supervision and surveillance , to ensure that the standards which we apply in Europe can also be broadly applied throughout the world .
It is also necessary to bring the private sector into the management of crises and it is absolutely essential to have more international macro-economic cooperation .
This is where the euro has a part to play if we want Europe to take an active role on the international scene , and not just to be an observer .
We must take advantage of the consequences of the euro 's arrival .
The Commission must use these consequences .
The Member States still need to accept this , and the coming months will place a heavy responsibility on our shoulders , on your shoulders and on those of the Austrian Presidency of the European Union .
Europe must work within the international system so that this is representative and therefore effective .
Finally , before ending , a word about Russia .
The problem with Russia , unlike the problem with Europe , is that Russia must restore confidence .
We must maintain confidence .
Restoring confidence is the responsibility of the Russians themselves , which we have spoken about a great deal this morning .
Do not lose hope about the Russians , but help them .
However , the Russians must also restore the confidence of the international community .
They have a government .
We are now awaiting their economic programme . We will judge this programme when we receive it .
I believe that confidence will be based not only on the political consensus which will support this programme , but also on four simple principles , on four analytical keys which are : the capacity to contain inflation , that is to stabilise the rouble ; the capacity to remedy the budgetary situation ; the capacity to consolidate and restructure the banking system and , finally , the capacity to honour its international financial obligations .
It is in the light of these elements that the Russian plan will , I feel , be judged by the international community .
To conclude , there is certainly a crisis , but a crisis is not necessarily the end of the world .
Remember that despite the crash of 1987 , growth in Europe in 1988 was 4 % .
We must therefore keep calm .
We must be vigilant and we Europeans must now use our assets , our opportunities , and in particular the arrival of the euro .
I have received seven motions for resolutions tabled pursuant to Rule 37 ( 2 ) concerning the international economic crisis .
I have also received six motions for resolutions tabled pursuant to Rule 37 ( 2 ) concerning political developments in Russia .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , since the vote is about to be taken , allow me to avail myself of the customary prerogative of the presidency to say a few words in conclusion .
First of all , may I thank you for this very interesting debate on absolutely crucial aspects of the Asian crisis , the crisis in Russia and the impending crisis in Latin America .
So what is the most important thing for the European Union to do ?
Let me summarise that again very briefly .
On the one hand the Council is naturally aware of the role that Europe is called to play on the world stage by virtue of its economic and financial strength .
I should like to place particular emphasis on that point , because it was raised in the discussion .
Of course the Council , like the Commission , will make its proper contribution to this effort .
On the other hand , the Council and Commission are to cooperate closely in formulating the proposals that we can present to the Russian side at the forthcoming meeting .
Optimum coordination within the European Union is of the essence .
This applies especially to the provision of European know-how in the areas of banking and finance , in administration , in the establishment of structures that will guarantee the rule of law and in the fight against organised crime .
The Commission will naturally also develop more proposals for ways of helping Russia to overcome these complex transitional problems , especially through TACIS but through other programmes too .
However , I should like to re-emphasise what has frequently been stated in the discussion and has also been referred to by the Commission , namely that the reforms must of course be initiated in Russia and that we can only provide assistance .
I consider it very important that the mechanism of the partnership and cooperation agreement should be used to intensify our dialogue with Russia .
The reflections of the EU Finance Ministers should naturally take full account of the human and social dimensions of the situation in Russia - another point that has been raised time and again in this debate .
Through our joint monitoring of developments in Russia and through their assessment by the Foreign and Finance Ministers of the EU as well as by the Commission , the coherence of the EU 's actions can be guaranteed .
I believe that to be hugely important too .
Allow me to address a few key points that surfaced , so to speak , in the debate .
Both sides should continue to conduct their relations on the basis of cooperation , partnership and of a dialogue between equals .
There has , of course , been enormous solidarity on that point in today 's discussion .
Secondly , I should also like to endorse what Mr Silguy said , namely that the situation should not be overdramatised .
It is a crisis , but we are certainly not starting from scratch , and much has already been achieved .
Early signals indicating the course that is to be pursued and prompt measures are especially important .
It is absolutely vital to stress , as I do once more on behalf of the presidency , that the current situation will not lead to a retreat by Russia 's partners , but to an intensified dialogue .
What shape will this dialogue take ?
As you know , the troika of Foreign Ministers is to be received tomorrow by the Prime Minister , Mr Primakov , and on 27 October the EU-Russia summit will take place in Vienna ; thorough preparations are already under way for the summit , at which we shall discuss all the matters that have been raised in the debate here today .
The debate is closed .
We shall now proceed to the votes .
VOTES
I should like to begin by informing the House that I have received a formal letter of opposition to the simplified procedure applicable to the sale of genetically modified maize in Austria , Doc .
C4-0373 / 98 .
This motion was tabled in accordance with Rule 99 of the Rules of Procedure by Mrs Flemming and others .
The proposal is therefore referred back to committee pursuant to Rule 99 ( 2 ) .
I should also like to inform the House that I have received a formal letter of opposition to the simplified procedure applicable to the sale of genetically modified maize in Luxembourg , Doc .
C4-0374 / 98 .
This motion was tabled in accordance with Rule 99 of the Rules of Procedure by Mrs Roth-Behrendt and others .
The proposal is therefore referred back to committee pursuant to Rule 99 ( 2 ) .
Mr President , I signed the request calling for these proposals to be referred back to the Committee on the Environment , but I would like to have some assurance from the committee that it will examine them properly .
On 24 June , the coordinators of the Committee on the Environment did in fact discuss the Commission 's decision on the sale of genetically modified maize , but the proposal has not been examined in committee .
As a result , I would like to make sure that it is properly examined this time round .
Let me be clear .
We have no choice but to refer the matter to them under the Rules .
How they handle it will be a matter for the Environment Committee .
Mr President , we also naturally support the referral motion .
But I cannot help pointing out that the Green Group in the European Parliament tabled the selfsame motion before the summer recess , and those very Members who have now tabled the motion refused to discuss it at that time in the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection .
However , my concern is this ...
( The President cut the speaker off )
Colleagues , we are not having a debate on this matter .
The Rules are very clear .
It has to go back to committee .
There is no room for explanations or justifications .
Mr President , this is a very complicated report and it would be to the benefit of the House if I briefly explained that the European Parliament is to vote now on two Commission proposals to modify the same regulation on financial and technical cooperation with the Gaza Strip and the West Bank .
The first proposal was presented at the beginning of the year and the second in July .
The Commission , however , insists on maintaining the two proposals separately .
They are therefore being treated together .
They constitute the basis of the compromise between Parliament and the Commission , being sought after Parliament 's vote on 18 June to send the first report back to the Commission under Rule 60 ( 2 ) .
On that occasion , Parliament approved 12 amendments to the first proposal .
These 12 amendments were all rejected by the Commission .
Some of the amendments on the first proposal have now been taken up in the second Commission proposal .
Following negotiation with the Commission for a global compromise on the two proposals , I , as rapporteur , managed to persuade the Commission to accept almost all the amendments , except those concerning comitology .
Here Parliament is examining the new Commission proposal on comitology and requires that what is decided in that context be applied here .
Therefore , before proceeding to the vote , the Commission should here in plenary first of all confirm that the Amendments Nos 1 , 2 , 7 and 8 to A4-180 / 98 voted by the Group of the European People 's Party last June to the first Commission proposal have been incorporated already in their second proposal .
If the Commission can so do , they can be considered as withdrawn .
Secondly , it should commit itself to modify rapidly its second proposal to take in Amendments Nos 5 and 12 , already voted last June , as well as the compromise Amendment No 1 to the first proposal , which is in the batch of 6 new amendments tabled for voting today , and also Amendment No 6 to the second proposal .
If the Commission can both confirm the first and commit itself to the second , I would recommend to the European Parliament that of the new amendments in Document A4-300 / 98 it should vote in favour of compromise Amendment No 1 and Amendments Nos 4 , 5 and 6 , and Amendments Nos 2 and 3 can then be withdrawn in favour of Amendment No 6 .
The success of this agreement will depend on the rapid presentation by the Commission of a modified text of its second proposal respecting the political position of this Parliament .
Thank you , I am glad you said that .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I must first express my gratitude to the Committee on Budgets , and especially to the rapporteur , Lord Tomlinson , for their painstaking work .
On 25 June , the Commission presented a second proposal for the amendment of the Financial Regulation to Parliament and to the Council . In line with the promise I made at the plenary sitting of 17 June , this included various modifications suggested by Parliament to our initial proposal , namely Amendments Nos 1 , 2 , 7 and 8 to the first proposal .
I can therefore confirm that the Commission accepts them .
Thanks to the Parliament 's determination to reach a pragmatic solution , you presented a single report which did indeed deal with the two proposals in two separate parts , and this has enabled us to resolve a large number of queries raised between the two institutions .
Essentially , these concerned comitology , which as you are aware , is an area where the Commission would like to see change .
However , some issues requiring further consideration remained outstanding , and I can present our position on those today .
Firstly , the matter of the duration of the Financial Regulation .
The Commission had proposed an eight-year programme , from 1999 to 2006 ; but we can now agree to the five-year period , from 1999 to 2003 , in the second proposal .
Secondly , the Commission also agrees to accept the other three modifications to its second proposal suggested by the House .
I am referring to Amendments Nos 5 and 12 , to compromise Amendment No 1 suggested by Parliament for the first proposal , and to Amendment No 6 to the second proposal .
I can confirm this .
As a result of this compromise , from 1 January 1999 the Commission will have at its disposal , thanks to the European Parliament 's help , a much more flexible and pragmatic method of maintaining the European Union 's support for the Palestinian people and the peace process .
I have to point out , however , Lord Tomlinson , that unfortunately the success or failure of this ambitious programme for the peace process will depend on how that peace process develops , and we should be very much aware that at present , the situation is critical .
The Commission will therefore propose these instruments immediately , but it has to be quite clear that the implementation of these instruments on Palestinian territory will depend essentially on the peace process .
If the peace process moves forward , we shall be able to undertake a major programme of economic cooperation ; if it remains stalled , we shall be faced with the kind of difficulties which I do not need to spell out to you .
( In successive votes Parliament adopted both legislative resolutions )
Mr President , I am not entirely clear about the substance of the matter on which we are voting .
May I ask someone from the Party of European Socialists to explain it ?
Amendment No 4 calls on the Commission to submit proposals extending the right of family reunification to children and relatives in ascending line who are not entitled to maintenance .
Is that intended for citizens of the Union , or is it supposed to apply to nationals of third countries ?
That would trigger a wave of immigration , which is why I am asking for an explanation as to what is meant here .
Does it only apply to citizens of the Union , or are third country nationals included ?
The answer will naturally have a decisive influence on the vote .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I believe the wording is clear as it stands .
It refers to those who live in the Union and to the reunification of families there .
That actually emerges clearly from the text .
It applies to all those who are already legally resident in the Union .
Amendment No 8 :
Mr President , I would like to raise a procedural motion and ask the House to authorise a separate vote on one word .
I realise that this request is being made rather late in the day and I do apologise for this .
The word at issue here is ' political ' in the last sentence which , and I quote , ' urges that such nationals ... ' - the nationals being discussed here are legally residing in the Union - ' that such nationals be treated in the same way as EU citizens with regard to their political , social and economic rights ' .
On behalf of the French members of this group , I would like to call for a separate vote on the word ' political ' since , whilst we are in favour of their right to vote at local elections , we are not in favour of the right to vote in national elections .
In this case , the idea of equal political rights encompasses both local and national elections .
So in short , if a separate vote is authorised and the word ' political ' is deleted , then we will vote in favour of this amendment .
If this word is not deleted , then we will vote to reject the amendment .
I would like to be helpful but we have strict deadlines for informing the services of intention to request split votes .
I can tell by the mood of the House that if we take this as a split vote we will have a long debate on it .
( Parliament rejected the resolution )
Mr President , as you know I take an interest in roll call votes .
Could you tell me whether we have just had five roll call votes or one roll call vote ?
How many times did you press the button ?
I will leave you to work it out .
( The President declared the common position approved as amended )
Mr President , on a point of order .
On the subject of roll call votes , on a personal basis and on behalf of a few other Members of this House , I wish to make the following statement to you and have the matter checked .
For almost all of the first half of this year - I do not have the dates on me now - I was accredited with not voting , despite the fact that I knew that I was here and voted .
I raised myself afterwards the question of the soundness of my voting card .
In fact , Mr President , you yourself on one occasion asked for the machine to be changed .
But I still continued to question my voting card .
Today I arrived without the new card which I received in June and I went to the offices at the back of this building to obtain a spare card .
I was given back my old card .
I then went to the technicians ' office to have it tested , to find out that my old card , which I was dependent on in this House for the four or five months of this year , was not functioning correctly .
I knew it all through that period of time myself .
I paid the price financially but that is not really what is at issue .
I was accredited with not being present in this House to record my vote when , in actual fact , I was here but my card was faulty .
I want to raise that matter with you now for the benefit of the other Members of this House who felt exactly the same way .
Thank you very much .
Mr President , I would like to ask that this report be referred back to the committee responsible .
At the opening of this part-session , the President of the Parliament made his wish to respect the Treaty clear , as well as his hope that texts which contravene the Treaty would not be submitted to the House .
As you will recall , this discussion was in relation to the Bösch report .
It would appear that we must show the same legal vigilance today with the Christodoulou report .
Articles 4 and 209 of the Treaty state that , for any expenditure , there must be a dual legal basis , both financial and legislative .
The Court of Justice made this very clear in paragraph 26 of its judgment of 26 May and only excluded non-significant Community actions that do not require this basis .
There are two main criticisms of the draft interinstitutional agreement we have received .
The first criticism is that it provides for appropriations entered in the 1998 budget to be implemented without a legal basis , whereas the Court only allowed this for appropriations which had already been committed . The second criticism is that it expands the concept of pilot schemes , preparatory actions and specific measures , whilst putting a ceiling on the overall amount .
This concept of action limited in time was condemned by the Court , which specifically stated that there is nothing to stop significant Community action incurring limited expenses , or taking effect for only a limited period of time .
Therefore , nonsignificant actions were excluded by the Court , and consequently this is a highly irregular legal situation .
To check this , I suggest that this text be referred back to the committee responsible , as happened with the Bösch report .
Mr President , the judgment to which the last speaker referred , and which was delivered by the Court at the request of the United Kingdom , relates to the legal bases of European Union expenditure . In its statement of grounds , the Court makes it clear that insignificant amounts of expenditure do not require a legal basis .
The statement of grounds explicitly indicates that insignificance is not determined by the amount and duration of the expenditure , but depends on a decision that must be taken by both branches of the budgetary authority .
This is precisely the principle we followed when the Interinstitutional Agreement that is now being put to the vote was concluded by the 15 Member States , the Commission and the European Parliament .
This agreement is therefore the means by which the Council and Parliament have performed the task of interpreting and implementing this principle as the Court enjoined them to do at that point in its judgment .
Accordingly , there are no grounds for not dealing with Mr Christodoulou 's report .
I move that the vote be taken now .
Mr President , I quite agree with what Mr Samland has said .
( Parliament decided not to refer the report back to committee )
Amendments Nos 1 to 4 :
Mr President , these four amendments embody very sound principles . However , I am compelled to ask for a vote against them , because they do not belong in the text we are referring to .
We have agreed about a plain text , and through the principles , I say again , are good ones , they are superfluous .
The same applies to Amendment No 5 by Mrs Ewing .
After the answer given by Commissioner Liikanen about the issue of less widely spoken languages , that amendment is superfluous .
I am therefore opposed to all the amendments .
Mr President , I thank the rapporteur , the content of whose report is consistent with the position of our group .
The amendments address the substantive points on which we sought clarification in the framework of the Interinstitutional Agreement .
Since Mr Liikanen signalled clearly in yesterday 's debate that every effort will be made to create these legal bases together with Parliament in future , as well as to guarantee maximum implementation of the budget in 1998 , I am prepared to withdraw the amendment on behalf of my group .
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
Mr President , we appear to have a problem here as the text is entitled ' Transatlantic relations / Echelon system ' .
Seeing as a few of our colleagues - and not just one or two of them either - have gone to great lengths to ensure that the word ' Echelon ' does not appear anywhere in the text , I suggest that we delete the word ' Echelon ' from the title itself , if the text remains unchanged . If this happens , then our colleagues will have been 100 % successful in their task .
Mr President , the motions for resolutions discuss problems linked to economic information and these are directly related to the Echelon system .
In view of this , we must keep the term ' Echelon ' in the title of the motion .
Mr President , I should like to ask you not to take a block vote but to take separate votes , certainly on Amendments Nos 4 , 12 and 13 .
Moreover , there was an unfortunate mistake in the vote on the Schaffner report .
The motion requested a vote by roll call at the end of the debate , and I should like you to tell us why you did not allow a roll-call vote .
The services have just told me that it was their fault .
It was an administrative problem .
We apologise for that .
( Parliament adopted the joint resolution )
Mr President , may I come back to your statement in reply to my previous question .
You said it was an oversight by the services in not passing on the motion for a roll-call vote on Mrs Schaffner 's report .
That is just one of those things that can happen to anyone .
But you , as the President of the sitting , are able to have the vote taken again as a roll-call vote .
That is what I am now asking you to do .
The fact that a mistake was made is no reason for not repeating the vote .
I therefore request a roll-call vote on the Schaffner report .
It is on the suface a perfectly reasonable request .
However , the problem is that people leave and enter the Chamber and we will not have the same presence now as had when we took the vote .
It is an error on my part and I can only apologise for it .
I do not think we are in a position to repeat the vote .
Mr President , I refer again to Mrs Schaffner 's report .
You have said that it is not possible to vote again now because the composition of the House may have changed .
But it is possible for you to defer this vote until voting time tomorrow , and that the groups themselves , knowing that the vote is taking place , can ensure that they are duly represented .
Then we can vote by roll call .
It does make a difference whether we vote by roll call or in secret ; it even sways Members ' voting decisions .
That , in fact , is why this request is being made .
I have admitted and apologised for an error .
But it is quite clear that once a vote is declared in this House you cannot at a subsequent date go back on that vote .
The result of the vote has been announced .
That is the end of the matter .
Mr President , I just wish to respond to the comments made by Mr Killilea .
It is a shame he is not here to hear them .
As a Quaestor of this House I am surprised that he had to raise something like that on the floor of the House .
He , more than anyone else , should know how best to deal with that .
One has to wonder at his motives for raising it on the floor .
The Danish Social Democrats have today voted for the annual report of the Europol Drugs Unit .
In view of the increase in international organised crime in fields such as drugs , it is very important that the Europol Drugs Unit should operate effectively .
The fight against organised crime will be most effective if Europe 's police forces work together .
Europol is there to facilitate police inquiries in the individual Member States by providing a framework for the rapid exchange of information between police authorities .
Secondly , Europol can carry out overarching analyses of trends in crime which benefit the national police forces .
We cannot endorse any call for actual investigative powers to be assigned to Europol .
Europol must not acquire the character of a European police authority ; the investigation of criminal matters must be carried out , as hitherto , by the police in the Member States .
Europol must instead prioritise the very important tasks it already has , for example exchange of information and expertise , support for investigations , analysis and training .
COM in rice ( C4-0276 / 98 )
As we give our opinion on the Council regulation on establishing an integrated management system and control system for certain regimes of Community aid and in particular for rice growers , I would like to ask my colleagues , the Commission and the Council to bear in mind the tragic situation of French rice producers who are mainly based in the Camargue region and in French Guiana .
Indeed , we have had lengthy debates here in the House highlighting the Commission 's failings in its management of the cereals market .
Last year at the beginning of our campaign , when world prices were at their highest , the Commission did not issue any export certificates and , as a result , the EU lost the large Arab markets .
I must remind the House that a similar situation developed in the rice markets , if only because European production is on too small a scale to cater for our internal market .
The Commission agreed to import rice from third countries - albeit under pressure from the WTO - whilst ' forgetting ' to manage our internal market .
Today , the producers ' and cooperatives ' silos are full and there is no longer any storage capacity specifically set aside for rice , such as ventilated silos .
Soon we will have to harvest our 1998 production , and what is the Commission suggesting we do to address this problem ?
Nothing .
Therefore , I am formally asking the Commission to take urgent action to allow our rice producers to continue with the 1998 harvest and to allow our cooperatives to stockpile our production .
Having progressively reduced aid to rice producers and having caused the bottlenecks in our silos , it would appear that the Commission does not want us to maintain any rice production in Europe ?
Or has it simply decided that the European Union should be dependent on rice produced in third countries for its entire rice supply ?
Schaffner report ( A4-0108 / 98 )
Mr President , we have rejected the Schaffner report , although it deals with a very important subject , and all because of a number of unacceptable amendments , not least those tabled by Mrs Zimmermann , which explains why her Social Democratic Party is freefalling towards the 20 % mark in Bavaria .
Amendment No 4 , for example , sought uncontrolled immigration of grandparents , unmarried and homosexual live-in partners and the like .
I believe that if Parliament continues to treat such important matters so flippantly under pressure from the Socialists and Greens , it will trigger protests among broad sections of the population .
Given these important responsibilities that are now being entrusted to us , we have a duty to return to constructive cooperation and to stop playing this sort of demagogic game behind the backs of our citizens and taxpayers .
It is indeed striking that a similar paper was referred back by the Socialists themselves when Mr Schröder was here in Strasbourg , because they were embarrassed by it .
But no sooner has Mr Schröder left than they are at it again .
( Heckling from Mr Schulz )
The Schaffner report on the free movement of persons has just been rejected in this House by a coalition formed out of contradictory reasons .
Nonetheless , we must point out that , before the report was rejected , Amendment No 8 had been adopted by a clear majority - 276 votes to 250 - and this should not be forgotten .
This amendment stated that ' the free movement of persons pursuant to Article 7a of the Treaty on European Union ( Article 14 of the consolidated version ) must also apply to third country nationals residing legally in the European Union ' and then went on to ask ' that these members be treated in the same way as EU citizens with regard to their political , social and economic rights ' .
The first part of the quote comes from the draft Amsterdam text , which sets a deadline of five years for the abolition of all border controls within the EU for citizens of Member States and for third country nationals .
The Europe of Nations Group is opposed to this measure as it would lead to us losing control of our territory - a fundamental basis for our sovereignty .
How can territorial integrity be preserved if we no longer have the right to control our own borders ? How can we defend a territory , which the French constitution states must be defended and even , in Article 16 , goes as far as allowing exceptional powers to be invoked for the defence of this territory ?
Yet what follows Amendment No 8 goes even further than this .
It calls for equality amongst nationals and citizens of third countries as regards their economic , social and political rights . These political rights , for example , include the right to vote in all elections , ranging from council to presidential elections .
This text did not come about by accident .
It is indeed an expression of this House 's lasting philosophy ; namely the desire to erase any difference between citizens and foreigners in all areas .
In our opinion , such a philosophy will not lead to the construction of Europe , but rather to its destruction .
French citizens must be on their guard : the Amsterdam Treaty allows for decisions on the international movement of persons to be taken by qualified majority voting in the Council , in codecision with Parliament .
If we grant such powers to Parliament , then they will be used as has been made clear today , and this will not change in the future .
This House will always remain a Parliament too far removed from its citizens and manipulated by pressure groups who only want to go over the heads of the different countries in order to destroy Europe .
I would ask French citizens to remember this when ratifying the Amsterdam Treaty .
We cannot support the Schaffner report under any circumstances .
The report is in our opinion completely out of step with reality and , at its worst , is an expression of EU federalism .
The Schaffner report shows a contempt for national democracies that is inadmissible - for example in paragraph 1 , where it proposes that the Council implement Article 7a , which covers the removal of internal frontiers and the strengthening of controls at the Union 's external frontiers , without any noticeable concern for national law .
At the same time we can only call on the Danish Government to stand firm in the Council and continue to block the Commission 's proposal to extend Regulation 1408 / 71 .
We do not merely oppose the élitist view of how political decisions can be implemented , we will also at all times fight to uphold the exclusive right of national parliaments to determine national border policy , visa policy , social policy , etc .
At the same time , having regard to the electoral process by which we have been elected , we will also affirm the obligation of democratic states to observe the international conventions that have been adopted under the auspices , for example , of the Council of Europe and the United Nations and will actively defend their principles .
In that context we energetically reject the proposal of the Austrian Presidency for a common EU policy on immigrants and refugees , which is in clear conflict with , among other things , the UN Convention on Refugees and common humanity .
Unfortunately , the Austrian initiative is not the only EU-related ploy in the refugee field which conveys a ' Fortress Europe ' mentality .
The Danish Prime Minister even stated , in the context of the referendum on the Amsterdam Treaty , that a vote for the Amsterdam Treaty would mean fewer refugees in Denmark .
We are in no doubt that the Schaffner report is to be seen as yet another brick in the construction not just of the United States of Europe but also of a ' Fortress Europe ' .
We are therefore voting against the Schaffner report .
Along with other members of the Liberal Group , I note with dismay that the European Parliament was unable to deliver an opinion on the reports from the High Level Group on Free Movement , chaired by a respected European and former Member of this House , Mrs Simone Weil .
The voting behaviour of the conservative side demonstrated a lack of any desire to create a level playing field for third country citizens legally resident within the Union .
Can we really speak of free movement if the rules apply to EU citizens only ?
The operation of such a system beggars belief .
Those British Labour Members who clearly abstained also bear responsibility for the fact that Parliament cannot fulfil one of its primary missions , namely to create a citizens ' Europe .
The report charts the day-to-day difficulties dogging the lives of many people in Europe .
One of our main concerns should be to remedy this state of affairs .
Lannoye recommendation ( A4-0278 / 98 )
We are voting for the Lannoye report and particularly welcome the fact that Amendment No 4 has been withdrawn , since we do not want to see simplifications of existing standards enacted by committees .
We have indeed noted with satisfaction that the Commission has not included in its presentation - although this is what it originally wanted - formulations which would provide possibilities for future simplifications of existing standards to be carried out through the committee procedure , of which clearly we strongly disapprove because of the closed and undemocratic nature of committees .
Mosiek-Urbahn recommendation ( A4-0279 / 98 )
I would like to congratulate our rapporteur , Mrs Mosiek-Urbahn , on her work and on all the effort she has put into reaching an agreement on this important directive on supplementary supervision of insurance undertakings .
Mrs Mosiek-Urbahn has succeeded almost completely in getting different points of view to agree .
The Council has in fact adopted the amendments voted through at first reading .
The common position , adopted by 14 votes to one , seems to us to be a good compromise .
Mrs Mosiek-Urbahn does , however , suggest a number of amendments at second reading .
We regret to say that we do not agree with these amendments .
We believe that the balance struck by the common position is the right one and we are concerned that the proposed amendments will alter the directive and thereby jeopardize the protection offered to policyholders and the insurance groups sector - something which is very important in our eyes .
The French Socialists will therefore accept the common position without amendments , as will the majority of the Socialist Group .
I would personally like to ask the European Commission to defer its critical stance on the French mutual insurance associations and to reopen talks on this question with the French Government .
It is essential that both citizens and firms in the internal market can have full confidence in the insurance industry .
It is thus a very positive development that the European Union is now effectively seeking to prevent insurance companies from resorting to the very serious practice of circumventing the solvency requirements of the EU 's insurance directives , which consists in counting the same capital twice in order to cover risks for which insurance has been issued by different companies .
After the first reading , the Council showed a very cooperative attitude in that it accepted the great majority of Parliament 's amendments in its common position .
I also feel justified in expressing satisfaction at this spirit of cooperation .
Valverde López report ( A4-0279 / 98 )
We are voting for the report because it is necessary to prevent Chapter 2 aircraft , which generate more pollution and noise , from the USA ending up in EU countries when they are no longer permitted in the USA .
Even ' hushkitted ' Chapter 2 aircraft cause more pollution and noise than ' proper ' Chapter 3 aircraft .
In order to reduce noise pollution , we also support the ban on recertified aircraft taking off and landing at night .
There is a general need for a further tightening-up of noise reduction measures in the air transport sector in Europe and the world as a whole .
However , we strongly oppose Amendment No 1 .
This area must continue to be regulated by a directive rather than a regulation .
Regulations enable further powers to be taken away from the national parliaments , and we cannot support such a transfer of legislative power from democratically elected bodies to the EU Commission .
It is regrettable that despite Parliament 's almost unanimous approval of the amendments to the Green Paper on combating noise proposed by myself as rapporteur for the Committee on the Environment , we should now be presented with these modifications which are far from adequate for achieving noise reduction in the air transport sector .
It is unbelievable that aircraft fitted with hushkits should still be allowed within the EuropeanUnion , and that the exemptions granted in Article 4 ( 1 ) should be abused .
Amendment No 5 to the Commission 's text does seem reasonable . It guarantees citizens ' sleep , banning night flights .
I come from the Balearic Islands and have personal experience of the torture caused by Minorca airport , where there is no regulation of noise pollution during the busy tourist season .
It appears that the Parliament 's unanimous position against noise on the occasion of the debate on the Green Paper went unnoticed .
The Environment Commissioner did not even deign to attend , despite sending out splendid ' soundproofed ' messages during the recent Copenhagen conference on noise .
Christodoulou report ( A4-0396 / 98 )
Mr President , last July the Europe of Nations Group spoke out against the actions of the Commission which , having been condemned by the Court of Justice for implementing expenditure without the appropriate legal basis , then came to Parliament and asked for its support .
The Commission was backed up by a host of letters from associations which were benefiting from these illegal appropriations . All these associations did of course claim that they were on the verge of collapse and that the most impoverished of them would suffer terribly if the European Union did not continue to pay subsidies to them .
We refuse to take part in this game .
We believe that aid for socially oriented projects will be more carefully and efficiently distributed if it remains under the control of governments and local authorities .
Today there is absolutely no reason to deviate from this principle , other than the Commission 's wish to intervene in all areas and to build up a grateful client base .
Also , as the current Treaty requires a legal basis for expenditure , we find the Commission 's proposed solution - an agreement between the institutions which interprets the Treaty rather liberally - completely unacceptable , since it would allow the Commission to continue behaving as it has been doing .
The Treaty was adopted by the people of Europe , and the Brussels institutions do not have the power to change its meaning without consulting the people once again .
Our position of principle was made clear in July and was strengthened today when we read the text of the draft agreement .
The text endorses all the Commission 's requests to implement expenditure on its own initiative for hypothetical pilot schemes or preparatory actions or even for specific or indefinite measures resulting from its institutional prerogatives , and this last category does not even have an established maximum limit .
We consider this draft agreement to be unacceptable and we call on the Council to reject it .
Mr President , I voted against this report both for legal reasons and on a matter of principle .
I explained the legal reason for voting against this report during the final vote .
I would like to reiterate the fact that the Treaty calls for a dual legal basis before implementing any Community expenditure . There must be a financial basis , so it must be entered in the Community budget , and there must be a legal basis , so a secondary act must have been adopted .
In its judgment of 12 May , the Court of Justice highlighted these requirements .
Such bases were only not required for actions described as non-significant .
The Court held that actions limited in time or with a restricted budget could be other than nonsignificant .
The draft interinstitutional agreement does not comply with the Court 's decision .
It allows expenditure to be implemented for pilot projects of an experimental nature , for preparatory actions and for specific measures .
As my colleague Mr Berthu pointed out , specific measures with a considerable budget can easily be drawn up in this way without a legal basis .
And then there is the matter of principle , which is very simple .
We cannot continue to have a European Union that is as devoted to interinstitutional agreements as this one currently is .
We demand that Treaties be drawn up and that they be ratified by Parliament , yet we deny the people the right to comment on the Treaties by using these interinstitutional agreements which do not go to the people or to national parliaments for comment .
Through such agreements , we add things , we amend things , we change the Treaties .
- Echelon system
The excellent STOA working document - An appraisal of Technologies of Political Control - does not appear to have received the attention it deserves : certainly not from the Commission , which denies knowledge of any agreements when it is known that a memorandum of understanding was signed by the EU states in 1995 but remains classified .
Also , it seems to me that only the Green Group exhibits any real understanding of the problem .
The main gatherer of information in the EU for the United States is the spy base at Menwick Hill in North Yorkshire , England .
This is a spy base set up by agreement between the British Government and the USA in 1948 among other purposes to monitor communications between the West and East and within the East in the cold war .
While many US bases in Europe have closed since the end of the cold war , Menwick Hill has expanded considerably and is currently having new security precautions installed .
With its powerful surveillance systems there is considerable evidence that while military-type spying continues , much of the surveillance is of private and business conversations .
Much commercial advantage is believed to be obtained and used to aid US firms in gaining an advantage over European firms in global competition .
There is no democratic accountability of the activities of Menwick Hill base and in view of all the evidence I believe it should be closed immediately .
An explanation by UCLAF is urgently required .
Transparency first and last .
It is self-evident that the two largest trade and economic powers in the world can and should develop a dialogue .
The question is , under what conditions , with what aims , and for whose benefit .
It should not be possible for the draft of an agreement to be rejected by the Council , indeed with some countries seeming to have imposed a veto banning its adoption , because it comes into radical conflict with the interests of European countries , and then , after just a few months , and in essence after changing just the title of the agreement , for that draft to be accepted under pressure from the United States and major capital .
It should not be possible for organisations financed by the Community itself to find that the economic and private lives of the EU 's citizens and the telecommunications and electronic systems of its bodies are subject to monitoring and espionage on an extensive scale , via the Echelon system which penetrates worldwide telecommunications systems , and for the information it gathers to be used to the benefit of the United States , as for example in the case of the GATT negotiations , and for the Commission to allege that nothing of the kind has been reported to it .
It should not be possible for the EU to be a co-signatory to an agreement with the United States , which supposedly safeguards the interests of European companies against extraterritorial US legislation , such as the Helms-Burton Act on sanctions against companies which violate the economic embargo imposed by the United States on Cuba , and for Mrs Albright then to announce exactly the opposite to Congress , in other words that Europe is subject to US legislation .
In the face of this continual pressure from the United States and major interests , the European Union responds with continual concessions , in obedience to exactly the same monopolistic interests .
According to our information , the European Union 's response to unacceptable monitoring by the United States of electronic and telecommunications systems and more generally the media of the digital combined services network , is to decide to set up an analogous system in collaboration with the FBI , quite beyond any democratic control and in clear contravention of the directive on the protection of natural persons in relation to the processing of personal data .
The aim of this dialogue should be to achieve developments which benefit working people , which safeguard and extend their democratic and labour rights both in the European Union and in the United States , and indeed which take into account that one is the other 's largest partner in both trade and investment .
Unfortunately , however , that is not possible , because both sides are protagonists of the worldwide capitalist system and the attack it has mounted against working people , and seen in that light , the agreement being promoted supplements the mechanisms which serve their aims and ambitions .
A characteristic example is provided by demands for the more effective protection of investments by the adoption of basic principles such as expropriation and compensation , through the related Understanding between the European Union and the USA , which attempts to forestall even the Multipartite Agreement on Investments in the context of the OECD , which has not yet been accepted because of the enormous reactions to which it gave rise .
Campoy Zueco report ( A4-0235 / 98 )
Mr President , waste management is an extremely important matter for public health .
A country which is unable or unwilling to manage its waste in an ecological manner will have polluted waters and air filled with toxic elements churned out by bad incineration methods . On top of all this , that country 's population will feel the full force of this pollution through its food supply .
So , as well as spongiform encephalopathy , hormones and genetic manipulation , we must now also reckon with the accumulation of dioxins and organochlorates in our food chains .
In this context , the use of sewage sludge in agriculture - although this may be stating the obvious - should be controlled by extremely stringent public health standards , since sewage sludge often contains high levels of heavy metals and other active substances .
The rapporteur is therefore right to be concerned over a certain degree of laxity being shown by the Member States .
However , how does he hope to initiate infringement proceedings against Member States when , as he himself freely admits , Community legislation is neither transparent nor coherent ?
The Commission 's role should be to advise and to provide the necessary tools for a certain degree of convergence between Member States , not to intervene in a policing or fiscal capacity .
It is a shame that this idea slightly taints the overall tone of this report .
Mr President , I just wish to say that there is very little point in spending time debating and adopting environmental legislation if it is not going to be implemented .
We know there is a very low level of harmonisation in this field , which is of vital importance for the single market .
Is it not absolutely amazing that you see the manic determination to complete the single market with regard to duty free and nothing being done here ?
It makes you stop and wonder .
In the short time available to me I wish to correct a remark made yesterday in plenary by my constituency colleague , Ms McKenna , and reported in the Irish Times today .
My understanding is that the study in the Lancet magazine referring to dangers for pregnant women living near landfill sites refers to sites where hazardous and toxic waste - not normal waste - is being dumped .
In this regard the Irish Government and authorities are not at fault .
Indeed , many references to Ireland in the report are out of date .
The only two legal cases pending against the Irish Government include one with regard to the provision of waste management plans ( similar cases are being taken out against several Member States ) .
Plans are now being rewritten for Ireland and are practically ready for resubmission and so it is likely that this case will be dropped .
The second case pending against the Irish Government concerns the failure to supply the Commission with information on hazardous waste installations .
Again , I am assured by the Commission that this matter is now being addressed , and it is likely that legal proceedings will be discontinued .
Finally , I would urge the Irish authorities to address , without further delay , the deficiency we have with regard to recycling facilities and also the fact that in Ireland agricultural waste is not considered waste , and so we have the spectacle of beautiful lakes - like the lakes of Killarney - being full of phosphates and so on and fish being killed because agricultural effluent is going into these lakes .
I wish the authorities could do something about the fact that we still have a landfill site in Rogerstown estuary in north County Dublin , in an area which is a natural habitat for wild birds and so on .
I am deeply concerned about the festering waste crisis in Ireland .
At present the EU is taking action against Ireland for failure to implement a proper national waste management plan and in particular for failing to deal with hazardous waste .
Ireland has not been measuring up .
The EU is now demanding a major overhaul and a national hazardous waste plan with individual local authority plans .
Once more Ireland has been seen to be dragging its feet .
Toxic and hazardous waste have been the subject of studies in the UK which show that pregnant mothers are still at risk if living within two miles of a hazardous waste facility .
Babies born within two miles of landfill sites where hazardous waste is dumped are at serious risk of birth defects .
Deformities and illnesses such as spina bifida , hole in the heart and faulty blood systems have been noted in children born to mothers who live near industrial landfill sites .
Ireland has officially been exporting hazardous waste .
However waste has been found illegally dumped around the country and the Commission will be investigating complaints .
The key question is , who is going to pay for the increase in cost of waste disposal as the EU noose tightens on Ireland ?
If the polluter pays , this means a revolution with waste reduction and recycling playing the primary role and decreasing the need for landfill to 20 % .
This is an indictment of the lax attitude in this country to the enforcement of waste laws .
Our green image is being undermined .
Agriculture is the biggest cause of river and lake pollution in Ireland and yet agricultural waste has been ignored in previous waste management plans .
The Commission is specifically aware of this .
A recent plan for County Waterford failed to provide for the management of approximately 1 million tonnes of agricultural waste per annum .
While the Irish Government is pussy-footing around legislation , the waste builds up and destroys our environment .
The Commission has called for a deadline for reports in September 1998 .
Will Ireland meet the deadline or will fines be imposed ?
It is very disheartening to note that no Member States have incorporated the European Waste Catalogue into national legislation and that the definition of waste therefore differs from one country to another , leaving large loopholes in the implementation of sustainable environmental legislation .
It is also particularly regrettable that the Member States do not implement the common policy on waste adopted through the four directives in question more effectively , let alone honour their obligations on reporting to the Commission .
Thus the individual Member States are failing to apply key environmental principles and , generally , to promote and apply a waste policy which meets the needs of human health and welfare .
We therefore favour giving the European Environment Agency powers to collect the necessary data on the implementation by individual Member States of the common policy on waste management , if these comparative analyses can promote the codification of European waste policy .
Nevertheless we are very critical of this report .
On the one hand , we do not feel that waste should be regarded as a commodity that can be traded across frontiers and hence be regulated as part of the internal market .
Waste policy is really an environmental matter and should therefore only be dealt with in the context of environmental policy .
On the other hand , the report recommends in paragraph 3 that the question be covered by a regulation rather than , as now , by a directive .
This is not the way to improve implementation of the common environmental policy , let alone to pursue more effective , committed and democratic Community policy in general .
Through regulations , which have direct legal force in the individual Member States , power is taken away from the national parliaments .
They are deprived of influence on decisions affecting the concrete national implementation of Community law .
We cannot endorse this transfer of legislative power from democratically elected bodies to the EU Commission .
A genuine and responsible environmental policy cannot be forced through by legislation - otherwise many more Member States would have honoured their obligations - but requires a fundamental change of attitude .
The common environmental policy is indeed necessary , but not sufficient in itself .
I would first like to congratulate our colleague on the clarity and openness of his report .
Such openness is relatively rare and so is worth highlighting .
Also , I would like to show my support for the requests made by Mr Campoy Zueco and point out a few environmental truths .
Unfortunately , the Member States ' reluctance to apply the directives on waste management is not limited to environmental matters alone .
I would also like to express my frustration at the repeated statements of good intent made by our governments , when their actions are so far removed from these declarations .
There is no point in drawing up a list of such breaches of regulations .
It is of the utmost importance that those in power fully assess the importance of the environment issue as the new millennium approaches .
At the risk of repeating myself , we cannot offload our problems onto future generations indefinitely .
The threats hanging over us are real and very worrying .
I would also like to show my support for the rapporteur 's suggestions , both on a conclusive definition of waste and on taking all the necessary steps against recalcitrant governments . I agree with most of the analyses and proposals made by our colleague .
Lastly , although I am in favour of some tax incentives , there is a considerable risk of finding ourselves hemmed in by tightening budgets .
It is very likely that the next few years will be particularly rich in terms of environment policy , and we will have to show our strength , in this field as in others .
Of course we must help , but we must first punish those who do not respect the law .
Despite the good intentions of the Campoy Zueco report and despite the critical matters the report deals with , we cannot support it .
We think that the Campoy Zueco report touches on the fundamental problem of the EU , which is that the EU does not have legislative legitimacy .
This means that the Member States often choose to set aside EU legislation , despite the fact that they themselves joined in adopting it .
The Campoy Zueco report addresses breaches of the EU rules on waste management .
Let there be no doubt that we find it reprehensible that EU countries - and moreover other countries too - resort to sloppy practices in their management of waste , to the detriment of their own citizens , the national environment and the global environment .
Thus we can only call on all countries , not least the industrialised countries , to take their global environmental responsibilities seriously , also where waste management is concerned .
Our position is that the proposals of the Campoy Zueco report on an increased role for the Commission and the EC Court of Justice with respect to the Member States are unlikely to help all that much .
They are not proposals that will strengthen the EU 's legitimacy in the eyes of the citizens of the EU Member States .
The best means of strengthening the will of the countries to take their environmental responsibility seriously is to strengthen national and local democracy , so that the citizens themselves can ensure that the elected authorities are aware of their responsibilities .
What we need is not more EU government from the top , but more democracy .
Waste management is such an important economic and environmental issue that we must step up our efforts in this field .
Firstly , on behalf of the Europe of Nations Group , I wish to protest at the fact that , at Commission level , the definition of ' waste ' in the European Union was deliberately omitted , even before the single market was established and therefore before customs checks were abolished on commercial transactions .
As a result , different interpretations of the definition of ' waste ' in Member States have meant that hazardous waste has been channelled through some of the less diligent countries , and this is the main reason why we have seen a certain level of hazardous waste traffic develop .
Our group has tabled two amendments on ecotaxes .
For several years , we have seen ecotaxes becoming more common on packaging , and in this particular field , all measures introduced by the Member States must be coordinated at Community level .
All too often , these ecotaxes are established to hinder the internal market , and this is not acceptable .
In Germany and France , we have developed a common logo - a green dot - which means that all packagers marketing finished products in these two states must make a contribution and help solve waste-related environmental problems .
This sort of easy , clean and efficient measure must become more common and must be used to counter measures introduced by other Member States such as Belgium , which is trying to promote its national production by imposing particularly heavy and discouraging procedures .
Finally , on a more general note , the Europe of Nations Group can only regret the fact that European legislation is so cumbersome in the field of waste management .
There are in fact 20 different legal acts on this matter , undermining the principle of transparency , and this is further compounded since the concept of waste is not defined in the same way in the different Member States .
Consequently , we would like to ask the Commission to fulfil its proper role , rather than constantly creating a role of political initiative on all matters for itself , which it is not meant to do .
Its role is to coordinate and simplify legislation on waste management and related issues .
It is perhaps worth the House reminding the Commission of this .
Mohamed Alí report ( A4-0167 / 98 )
Mr President , we all agree with our colleague Mr Mohammed Alí in that Averroës is an important figure , just as the Arabian Montesquieu , Ibn Khaldun , was an important figure .
But if we are to believe Maimonides and the Catalan philosopher Raymond Lulle , Averroës could be the man who wrote the booklet ' The Three Impostors ' about the Hebrew , Christian and Muslim religions .
So , to use this strong and free spirit to represent the new dogma of multi-ethnic society or the sentimental defence of human rights is an affront to his memory .
We all agree that a university should be set up , with Mediterranean sponsorship , to celebrate the 800th anniversary of Averroës 's death , but to use this man to symbolise violent and arrogant immigrants is a rather odd thing to do with such a refined spirit .
Can you imagine Averroës going to a rap concert in Córdoba , or selling drugs on back streets , behind the wheel of a BMW , all made up and deceiving tourists on the street ?
Are we , in fact , talking about two Muslim worlds ?
The world of Al Mansur dominated the West through its intellectual superiority , but today 's Muslim world dominates us through its barbarity .
So we should not make Averroës the godfather of the Taliban , nor of the jihad , since if he were alive today , there would be a fatwa out against him and his throat would have been cut by Muslims , by the same Muslims that we want to use his memory to represent .
Mr President , I voted against the Mohamed Alí report , but not because I could not wholeheartedly endorse its underlying intentions .
I merely believe that a report which is so short that it only scratches the surface of its subject simply cannot do justice to this highly complex issue with which we are confronted .
There is much in the report that I can wholeheartedly support , for example its representation of the situation of women in Islam , but there are also parts with which I cannot agree .
I just believe it does not make sense to try and cover such a sensitive , complex , broad and important subject with a report of this kind .
It is the wrong approach .
The European Parliament has just adopted Mr Mohamed Alí 's report which calls for Europe to celebrate the 800th anniversary of the death of Ibn Rushd - Averroës - a twelfth century philosopher with a liberal interpretation of Islam .
This report is accompanied by a rather unusual explanatory statement which describes Averroës : ' Averroës was born in the year 520 / 1126 and was called Abu-l Walid Muhammad ibn Ahmad Ibn Rushd , which perhaps explains why we have since the Middle Ages preferred the much shorter name Averroës , just as we prefer to say Avicenna when referring to the other great Islamic philosopher Ibn Sina ... Your rapporteur will first seek to familiarize you with Averroës , asking you to take an imaginary trip to the. cinema , to see ' Le Destin ' by Youssef Chabine .
The splendid images , the music and the dancing tell the story of Al Mansur , vizir of Córdoba , the sheik Riad and Averroës . And the fact is that few of us were acquainted with the life of the cadi of Córdoba before we saw this film .
Averroës was the doctor of the emirs Yusuf and Al-Mansur , and a philosopher .
He was attacked by the advocates of strict religious orthodoxy , fell into disgrace , was exiled and latterly rehabilitated . Averroës , who died on 10 December 1198 , ended his days as the premier doctor of the Court of Marakesh .
Of all Spaniards , he is the one which has left the deepest imprint on human thought . '
The text which Parliament has adopted does not conceal its aims , since in the first recital , it announces that ' European society has multicultural , multi-ethnic and multi-religious roots which are vital features of its heritage and its multifaceted identity ... '
I am sorry to say that I do not agree with these claims .
The various societies of European countries are indeed different , but they have some very deep-rooted common references which come from their Christian identity and , if we go further back in time , from their Celtic , Gallic , Roman , Greek or Germanic roots .
Even if several religions have contributed to a common European background , their contributions cannot be regarded as having equal weight .
Islam in particular has helped forge our identity as much through contrast with it as through the positive contributions it has made .
In view of this , I am sorry to say that the Mohamed Alí report misjudges our identity .
Also , it concludes with some absurd proposals , such as calling on Member States of the EU to ' promote the vocational and academic training of imams and other religious leaders in Europe ' .
We must admire the rapporteur 's attempt to keep a balance , as he did write ' and other religious leaders ' after mentioning imams .
Nonetheless , we would like to make our disapproval felt , as we do not believe that Member States should have to make compulsory payments to finance religions when some of the fundamental aspects of these religions go against the principles of our democracies .
Averroës was a brilliant scholar but , at the same time , he was a symbol of failure - the result of trying to combine Greek philosophy with Islam .
This is a lesson for all those who dream of seeing a distorted and secularised Islam which incorporates a human rights ideology .
I do not think that Islam will betray its own nature in this way .
I also believe that the nature of Europe is rather different , as it is Graeco-Christian .
Aristotle was more successful in the West than Averroës was in the Islamic world .
In his work ' Politics ' , Aristotle explains that all democratic cities are culturally uniform and that uncontrolled immigration can destroy the city .
We should therefore heed this example .
As regards Muslims resident in Europe , they should be able to practise their religion with dignity and in private .
Yet on a public level , Islam has no place in Europe both for its sake - so that it can maintain its purity - and for our own .
Other schools of thought , with the best of intentions , may wish to see a demagogic mix of people , yet history has shown that such hopes are in vain .
This is why Averroës was more successful in the West than in the Islamic world .
We should face up to this and learn from this clear lesson .
Our colleague Mr Mohamed Alí has single-handedly delivered this report .
His own-initiative report was conceived two years ago and has just been born .
In my home town , on the border between the French and Belgian Hainaut regions , when a mother-to-be is late giving birth , we say she will give birth to a donkey .
In spite of the two-year pregnancy , I find the new-born report we have just seen to be rather underhand .
By introducing us to Abu-l Walid Muhammad ibn Ahmad Ibn Rushd as Averroës , the rapporteur portrays him as a link between Islam and the Graeco-Roman civilisations . He is using a deceit to make a bitter pill easier to swallow .
I would like to emphasise three truths ; firstly , religious matters do not come under the competences of this Parliament and so this report should never have been born .
Secondly , Averroës was rejected by Islam and severely criticised by Christian theologians .
And lastly , we cannot talk of tolerance when mosques are springing up at a rate of knots in Europe , but the same cannot be said of Christian churches in Islamic countries .
The 800th anniversary of the death of the visionary and philosopher Averroës would be an excellent chance to review links between the European Union , Islam and its Muslims , a subject often viewed with suspicion and incomprehension by both sides .
Averroës 's modern and humanist thinking should lead us to question the place of Muslims in Europe , without any prior ideological misconceptions .
The sensible proposals put forward by our Committee on Culture should be carried out in each of the Member States .
These proposals will be much more efficient than the security-based obsession with fighting a small minority that refuses to combine religion and modernity .
However , I think it is a shame that such a small amount of space was given over to the concept of secularity in the report , as this would help us to overcome divisive feelings and would be a true exercise in tolerance .
I also hope that more relevant future actions will be undertaken which will allow us not only to avoid social deprivation becoming the territory of a few fundamentalist movements , but also to make it easier for non-practising Muslims and all those who practise Islam privately to become a full part of society . I would like to point out that more than half of these people are nationals of one of our Member States .
I agree with many of the proposals , but this is not a matter for the EU or the European Parliament .
The problems described must be dealt with in alternative ways . And this applies to other religions too .
We voted against the report drawn up by our colleague Mr Mohamed Alí on ' Islam and European Averroës Day ' .
This was mainly out of respect for the principle of subsidiarity - it is up to each of our different Member States to consider the questions posed by the presence of Muslims in their particular country . We also voted against the report because history is different from one country to another and there are different understandings of integration and secularity .
Also , as regards paragraph 12 , point C , it is not up to Member States to provide training for imams , even if the author of the report does describe this as ' vocational and academic scientific and professional training ' .
This is a rather odd and simplistic way of viewing it , and could even be deemed outrageous from an Islamic point of view . The Muslim community itself is responsible for training imams and it must therefore distance itself from , and even turn down , imams sent by Saudi Arabia and other Islamic countries .
After some heated discussions in the Committee on Culture on the distinction between secularism and secularity , our colleague did claim to respect secularity .
At the root of secularity are Christ 's words from the gospel : ' Render unto Caesar the things which are Caesar 's and unto God the things that are God 's ' .
I do not doubt the sincerity of this report , but I am sorry to point out that this only represents the author himself , who does not claim to represent other members of his faith in any way .
There is also a certain ambiguity in the explanatory statement , as the rapporteur sometimes makes claims for Islam on a purely cultural level and sometimes for Islam as a religion .
But is such a distinction possible when seen from the Koran 's holistic perspective , a perspective which states that the Islamic faith is inseparable from a religious way of life ? It is indeed a culture but it is also a body of political legislation , a family code and so on , and it is the duty of the faithful to live by these rules as soon as they have the means to do so .
We therefore cannot agree to several of the demands made by Mr Mohamed Alí .
Nonetheless , there is one point in paragraph 11 , point F which , if amended , does seem very interesting .
Averroës day would be the ideal opportunity to set up a ' Euro-Islamic ' university in one of our European countries to address matters such as the relationship between faith , religion and politics , from the point of view of Judaism , Islam , Catholicism and other Christian faiths in comparison with , for example , secularity and freemasonry .
What is the relationship between philosophy and theology according to all these different points of view ?
Such an initiative would be a way of honouring Averroës 's memory , whose thinking was undeniably important for European philosophers but - and this does not bode well - his thinking was not as important for the Muslim world .
The ' Euro-Mediterranean partnership ' is not only a fervent wish .
It is based on a historical reality which , regrettably , is still largely ignored .
The European West would still be a nonentity today if it had not been able to develop over many centuries as the protégé and ' poor relation ' of the rich and civilised Orient .
This applies quite specifically to Islam too , without the culture , literature and philosophy of which neither the modern ' enlightened ' Europe nor the Latin Middle Ages , in which some of the main social and intellectual seeds of the Enlightenment were sown , would never have come about .
Without the Jewish and Arab , Talmudic and Islamic reception of Aristotelian and other Antique philosophy , from which the leading Arab and Islamic philosophers developed key concepts such as the univocity of being ( Avicenna / Ibn Sina ) and the differentiation of truth ( Averroës / Ibn Rashid ) , the world would never have experienced either the flowering of Scholasticism , the Renaissance , or the modern sciences with the sense of mission that was shaped for them by Bacon and Descartes .
The historically conditioned suppression within Western Europe in the early modern age of the decisive contribution made by the Islamic East to the constitution of both the Christian and the humanist West has now become , if it was not already so , an ideological shackle in the quest to understand reality and in cross-cultural dialogue .
We can therefore only support emphatically anything that will help to create the conditions for our overdue broad dialogue with the Islamic world : colloquia , universities , educational curricula , religious equality , commemoration days , etc .
Instead of continuing to pursue a mythical Christian definition of the European identity , we should finally open our eyes to reality - to the multi-religious and philosophically pluralist reality of our common history , the multicultural reality of our societies and the multi-centred reality of the vast Mediterranean region , the peaceful common development of which demands , among other things , robust and mutual cross-cultural understanding .
( The sitting was suspended at 1.35 p.m. and resumed at 3 p.m. )
Customs Union with Turkey
The next item is the report ( A4-0251 / 98 ) by Mr McMillan-Scott , on behalf of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Security and Defence Policy , on developments in relations with Turkey since the entry into force of the Customs Union .
Madam President , during the debate in the European Parliament in the autumn of 1995 on Parliament 's assent to the Customs Union with Turkey , the Commission undertook to submit an annual report to Parliament on the evolution of relations with Turkey .
That was to include consideration of the economic and political aspects - among them the democratic process and the human rights situation in Turkey .
The Commission forwarded its first report to Parliament on 30 October 1996 , followed by a second report on 3 March 1998 and then the European strategy for Turkey in July of this year .
The Commission 's reports were divided into five sections : functioning of the Customs Union ; other aspects of implementation of the agreements ; economic situation in Turkey ; the political situation ; and human rights .
In both reports the Commission gives a favourable assessment of the functioning of the Customs Union , remarking on positive aspects such as the setting up of a competition authority , the signing of free trade agreements with a number of Central and Eastern European countries , progress in harmonising tariffs , and so on .
Mention of course is made of the political difficulties within the EU in making operational the financial instruments agreed by the Council .
As far as the economic situation in Turkey is concerned , the Commission notes the strong growth achieved but , at the same time , points to the difficulties in sustaining that growth - Turkey 's ability to control inflation , currently at about 100 % , its public deficit and other structural problems .
Some may consider the Commission 's report unduly pessimistic .
In the political , diplomatic and human rights fields the Commission sees few signs of encouragement and little in the way of progress .
With regard to human rights , the public recognition by the authorities at the highest level of the need to tackle this serious issue is seen as a positive development .
The European Parliament voted in favour of the Customs Union in December 1995 despite considerable reservations in the light of the political situation in Turkey .
In so doing , Parliament wanted to stress the importance of this partner in the geopolitical context ( Turkey is a NATO member , a WEU observer and a participant in the new Euro-Mediterranean partnership ) , and , at the same time , to register a gesture of confidence in the Turkish Government , to encourage it to pursue the anchorage of Turkey in the democratic values of Europe .
Parliament has also reached an agreement with the Commission that a joint working party of the two institutions will examine whether the MEDA programmes with Turkey are in accordance with its resolutions , particularly that of 15 September 1996 .
Myself - along with Piet Dankert , who is co-chairman of the EC-Turkey Joint Parliamentary Committee - are members of this working party .
The economic effects of the Customs Union appear so far to have been substantially beneficial for the EU .
I am very grateful to the REX Committee and its rapporteur , Mr Schweiger , for its examination of this particular point .
It should also be remembered that the Luxembourg European Council , on 12 and 13 December , confirmed Turkey 's eligibility for EU accession and stipulated that it would be judged on the same criteria as the other applicant states .
Turkey was also invited to take part at the European Conference on 12 March - confirmation that it would in future figure in the enlargement process .
However , we are disappointed at Turkey 's failure to appear at that meeting .
The entry into force of the Customs Union is an essential stage on the road to Turkish accession .
Although Turkey does not at present meet the accession criteria , its eligibility to join the EU at some stage has never been in doubt .
It has been confirmed on various occasions .
The Union 's general objective must be to help Turkey overcome its problems and continue its integration into the EU .
The Association Agreement and the Customs Union Agreement form the basis for the establishment of ever closer political and economic ties .
As part of this process the EU must give special emphasis to the following points : firstly , moving Turkey towards full democratisation and safeguarding human rights ; secondly , establishing good neighbourly relations between Greece and Turkey ; thirdly , observing the principles of international law ; and lastly , finding a solution to the Cyprus question .
Madam President , the excellent report by our colleague Mr McMillan-Scott on the development of relations with Turkey has aroused a great deal of interest in the Committee on Budgets . The committee has tried to improve the report slightly by proposing six amendments which we hope will be considered favourably by the House in the final vote .
I believe that the European Union has a duty to offer a helping hand to Turkey .
Does not the word ' Europe ' come from the banks of the Bosporus , a place of magical exchange between East and West and also the birthplace , over twenty centuries ago , of modern day Athens and scene of the Trojan war ?
I would like to be able to say today , as Jean Giraudoux said , that ' the Trojan war will not take place ' and that the efforts made over recent years by the Turkish authorities are enough for us to open the doors of the EU to Turkey .
However , there are still a few remaining obstacles which are included as amendments .
The Committee on Budgets first asks that we examine in more detail the budgetary impact of the implementation and strengthening of the Customs Union in relation to the EU 's revenue .
We would then ask that , as part of the MEDA programme , the work of the working party on democracy and the protection of human rights should be taken into account , since Parliament attaches particular importance to it .
In the third amendment , the Committee on Budgets calls on the Council to notify Parliament of initiatives jointly undertaken with the Turkish authorities to unblock the adoption of the financial regulation on special aid for Turkey .
Amendment No 4 highlights Parliament 's interest in Turkey 's participation in the Youth for Europe , Leonardo and Socrates programmes .
Lastly , Amendments Nos 5 and 6 note the need to use the European Union 's budget to consolidate the Customs Union , which was also highlighted by the Commission .
But the Committee on Budgets would like to take this opportunity to remind the House of the role of codecision in the annual budgetary procedure and therefore of the need for the committee 's approval if funds are to be made available .
Madam President , Commissioner van den Broek , ladies and gentlemen , in all its reports and opinions concerning Turkey , the position of the Committee on External Economic Relations has been based on practice and actual problems .
Its motto has been ' Out with all-or-nothing postures and in with a gradual deepening of relations ' .
What we are discussing today is not the question of Turkish membership but the consolidation of the achievements of the Customs Union and the implementation of the accompanying policies that have not yet been put into effect ; these things need to be done in a spirit of partnership and equality between the two sides .
Every step taken by the European Union and Turkey , separately or together , to solve the problems relating to the Customs Union and to develop accompanying policies injects fresh impetus into political cooperation and brings eventual Turkish membership a little closer .
It is therefore particularly gratifying that , in its memorandum of 23 July 1998 , the Turkish Government responds to the proposals of the Commission and Parliament , abandons the path of confrontation with the European Union and returns to the step-by-step approach as formulated in Cardiff by our side , by the European Council .
We in the Committee on External Economic Relations support most of these proposals , such as the intensification of dialogue on the liberalisation of capital movements and the coordination of economic policies in general , as well as closer cooperation in the agricultural sector .
We are also gratified to note that the Turkish side is favourably disposed to our proposals on the opening-up of the market in services and calls for a relatively high consistent level of integration in the framework of the association agreement .
Initial steps towards this goal are a technical study and negotiations on the mutual recognition of diplomas and certificates .
The flexibility of the Turkish side on freedom of movement for Turkish workers in the European Union must also be welcomed .
However , the Committee on External Economic Relations also calls on the European Union and Parliament to remove obstacles and prior conditions where they still exist and to ensure that the accompanying measures provided for in the agreement on customs union are adopted at long last .
As Mr Giansily said , and as was also expressed in Mr McMillanScott 's excellent report , we should let Turkey enjoy the benefits of the Leonardo , Socrates and Youth for Europe programmes as soon as possible so that it can work with us on these programmes , since they help to strengthen pluralist society and consolidate democracy .
The regulation on special financial aid for Turkey should also be released from the Greek veto as soon as possible and enter into force .
Here too the Commission bears particular responsibility in the search for a means of finally ending this blockage .
The same applies to Turkish participation in the tourist-related Interreg , Leader and Philoxena programmes , the specific conditions of which remain to be negotiated .
There is also a need for small and medium-sized businesses to be promoted through the extension to Turkey of the third multiannual programme .
The same applies to the Euro-Info Centres , PC Net , Europartenariat and Enterprise .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , in contrast to the previous speaker , whose task on behalf of his committee was to highlight the economic aspects of cooperation within the Customs Union , the Committee on Civil Liberties and Internal Affairs has to examine the Customs Union from a different perspective , namely in terms of the human rights situation and the development of democracy in Turkey .
In his extremely interesting report , Mr McMillan-Scott addressed a number of such points , on which I should like to reiterate three fundamental observations that played a significant part in the debate on the Customs Union back in 1995 .
In a two-stage process , the European Parliament held two debates in the spring and in the winter of that year to pave the way for its decision .
These debates were invariably dominated by three points .
Firstly , the intensification and advancement of democracy in Turkey is an indispensable condition for the development of the Customs Union into an instrument of ever closer cooperation .
Secondly , as a regional power , Turkey also has an obligation to proceed on the principle of peaceful resolution of external and internal conflicts and to be active in search of solutions .
Thirdly , as a partner of the European Union , Turkey must ensure that human rights are fully protected and defended by the Turkish State within its territory .
How do things look in practice ?
In practice , it looks as though some progress towards democratisation may have been made here and there .
The external and internal military conflicts remain unresolved .
On the human rights issue , although the freely elected government is trying hard - I certainly will not dispute that - it cannot be said that human rights are fully protected by the authorities in Turkey .
On the contrary , in some cases the authorities are still the instigators of human rights abuses .
That is why our committee does not believe that the circumstances we criticised in 1995 have altered very much in the intervening period , a view I can substantiate by reference to the Kurdistan conflict , the situation in the Aegean and the cases of torture that still persist .
Nevertheless , I do not wish to deny that Turkey has made progress , and we can only appeal to the politicians in Turkey to keep trying to achieve still higher levels of compliance with the criteria I have enumerated .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , as draftsman for the Committee on Civil Liberties and Internal Affairs , I would like to join Mr Schulz in expressing my general satisfaction with the excellent report drawn up by our colleague Mr McMillanScott .
As far as general principles are concerned , there are three elements in this report which we believe should form the basis for relations between the European Union and Turkey .
The first guiding principle should be that of non-discrimination .
Mr McMillan Scott quite rightly reminds us that Turkey should not be treated any more harshly than any other candidate country .
Any request for membership should be examined solely on the basis of respect for the Copenhagen criteria .
The second principle is not being too lenient .
We must not turn a blind eye to serious violations of human rights because Turkey is an ally , or because it is in a strategically important position , or because the majority of Turkish leaders are constantly announcing their desire to join the EU . Nor should we turn a blind eye to the lack of respect shown for minorities , the constant use of violence , or the temptation to resort to violence to solve problems with neighbouring countries .
This application for accession is a demand for quality .
It should not be considered as a safe conduct to do as they please , and nor is it a passport for impunity .
The third principle is to reject a policy of isolation .
The European Union will not make a worthwhile contribution to development and democracy by isolating Turkey .
It is in the interests of development and democracy that Mr McMillanScott 's report suggests holding planned ministerial meetings , fully honouring all aspects of the Customs Union and developing aid for Turkish civil society .
On behalf of the Committee on Civil Liberties in particular , I would like to express my pleasure at finding two requests in this report which match our priorities and which have already been pointed out by other speakers : the enlargement of the Socrates , Leonardo and Youth for Europe programmes and the need for the Turkish Government to cooperate fully and actively with the European Union in the fight against organised crime and drug trafficking .
Before giving the floor to Mr van den Broek , I would inform the House that he unfortunately has to leave us after his speech for pressing reasons connected with the situation in Russia .
I would make it clear that Mr Monti will take over from him immediately .

My thanks to Mr McMillan-Scott and his colleagues Messrs Giansily , Schwaiger , Schulz and Deprez for their contributions to the debate and for Mr McMillan-Scott 's report which I read with great interest .
More generally , I am grateful to him for his efforts to move forward our often rather complicated relations with Turkey , both as rapporteur and above all as a member of the European Parliament 's contact group or Joint Working Party .
The conclusions of this report of Mr McMillan-Scott 's broadly square with the Commission 's own findings .
We share your view that generally speaking the Customs Union is working satisfactorily , despite a very considerable trade surplus in the European Union 's favour .
At the same time , we note that progress has not been good enough in the areas of democratic reform and human rights , though I am happy to agree with Mr Schulz that there are signs of improvement here and there .
You rightly pointed to the importance of not isolating Turkey .
I think we have a duty to remain actively involved in developments in Turkey .
Using the means open to us and the MEDA programme on democracy , we must cooperate with nongovernmental organisations and give support wherever possible to positive and democratic forces in Turkey , with a view to consolidating civil society as a basis for stable , democratic developments in that country in future .
Turkish participation in student and teacher exchanges under the Socrates , Leonardo and ' Youth for Europe ' programmes can make a very positive contribution here .
I am happy to echo Mr Schwaiger in saying that .
And I hope Parliament will be quick to support the Commission 's proposal on that .
The European Parliament has always followed the progress of relations with Turkey very attentively and has played a very prominent part in them .
Through the Joint Working Party you are kept informed of what the Commission is doing under the MEDA programme .
Cooperation in this group is certainly working satisfactorily at present , we believe .
So far the Commission has accepted virtually all the European Parliament 's opinions on project proposals .
So I honestly see no virtue in proposals to change the operation of this group even though in essence it is , I have to agree , an institutional anomaly .
Your report urges the Commission to submit an annual report on the functioning of the Customs Union to the European Parliament in advance of the budgetary procedure , before the end of October .
I promise you that the Commission will make every effort to get the report out as swiftly as possible .
But I should add that there may always be reasons for delaying publication , as you will recall from last year when the intensive discussions with the Turkish authorities , prior to the European Council in Luxembourg , warranted delaying the publication of that report .
And this discussion continued in Cardiff , as you will remember , where the conclusions of the European summit expressly reaffirmed Turkey 's eligibility for membership of the Union .
As you know Turkey did not - much to our regret - take part in the first European Conference in March 1998 and also decided at the very last moment not to attend the proposed Association Council meeting in May .
And Turkey 's decision following the European Council meeting in Luxembourg to break off political dialogue with the European Union in areas we regard as very important , namely Cyprus , Greek-Turkish relations and issues of human rights and democracy , naturally did little to move forward our relations in general .
I am convinced , Madam President , that the European strategy for Turkey which the Commission adopted in March and which received the blessing of the Heads of State and Government in Cardiff points the way towards a deepening of ties between the European Union and Turkey .
Turkey herself reacted positively to this document and the two sides will shortly be consulting on a programme and timetable for implementation of this strategy .
I hope that Turkey , in tandem with the deepening of the relations between us based on the Ankara Agreement of 1963 , the Customs Union and the European strategy , will come to the realisation that she has everything to gain from reopening the political dialogue .
Cardiff reaffirmed that Turkey 's future lies in Europe .
It was also decided that an annual progress report would be compiled for Turkey and for the ten countries in Central and Eastern Europe , plus Cyprus .
It was stated in Cardiff that this report had to be based on Article 28 of the 1963 Ankara Agreement and on the conclusions of the European Council meeting in Luxembourg .
This report is no different , in terms of its approach , from the reports for the other countries .
I think it is in Turkey 's interest to take part in the second European Conference scheduled for 5 October , given that issues of mutual concern will be discussed there .
But I understand , if the rumours are correct , that Turkey is not at present intending to take part in this meeting on 5 October .
As you know , the Commission made it clear in its document on a European strategy for Turkey that certain proposals could not be implemented without appropriate financial aid .
The Member States also acknowledged that in Cardiff .
Thus the Commission is currently , also at the request of the Heads of Government , studying the various ways and means of putting a proposal to the Council accordingly and it goes without saying that the European Parliament too will play an important part in that process .
To conclude , Madam President , I believe the European Union has made considerable efforts to get relations with Turkey back on track .
Madam President , we are delighted that at long last we have received the McMillan-Scott report in plenary .
It is a very important report that gives us the opportunity not only to look at the operation of the Customs Union but to give some preliminary reflections on the future direction of relations with Turkey , in anticipation of Mr Swodoba 's report which hopefully we will have before the end of the year .
It also gives us a very important opportunity to stress once again in public to Turkey that as far as we are concerned : they are a strategically important country ; we recognise their European vocation ; and they will be treated exactly the same as other countries which seek to join in the European Union in terms of applying the Copenhagen criteria .
It is clearly important that we keep stating and restating that case .
Having said that , we should always bear in mind that Turkey is essentially an agrarian society rapidly transforming itself into an industrial society .
Many of the economic , political and social problems that we identify stem from that single fact .
Clearly part of our job is to aid that transformation to an industrial society and aid the transformation to a modern democratic , pluralistic society .
The Customs Union is part of the strategy which , as Commissioner van den Broek has indicated , the European Community has been pursuing since 1963 .
Notwithstanding what Mr McMillan-Scott said about the asymmetrical nature of the Customs Union benefitting us more than it has benefitted Turkey , that position is definitely beginning to change gradually .
One of the effects of Customs Union is to encourage the business community and greater entrepreneurial activity .
That is the area we should be concentrating on in the development of the Customs Union ; encouraging more entrepreneurial activity , more activity with the business community , more activity with the free and democratic trade unions .
We also need to improve administrative and professional standards in Turkey which are frequently woefully inadequate .
We must focus on that and indeed encourage the development of better academic and professional standards through exchanges and interrelations with academia in the European Union .
I am also told that one of the problems we have in Turkey is that there is often very poor quality of translation into Turkish from European Union languages , which leads to misunderstandings about standards .
Again , we could be working on those areas .
That is not to say we should ignore the areas which have been outlined by Commissioner van den Broek and Mr McMillanScott .
We still have to state constantly and categorically our concern for human rights and democracy in Turkey .
We also have to make it clear that Turkey has to recognise the right of Cyprus to negotiate to join the European Union if we are to develop relations .
Finally , I urge us to work with the media , work with politicians who are looking to liberalise Turkey and work with lawyers and members of the judiciary to improve standards in Turkey as a means of developing greater political dialogue .
Madam President , it is most unfortunate for the European Union and for the Turkish people that the leadership in Ankara and their lackeys in the occupied parts of Cyprus have no intention of complying with the basic principles of international law , or indeed with the rationale of pragmatism .
It will soon be a year since the Luxembourg decision which defined very clearly the conditions that would allow Turkey to extend its association with Europe and improve its prospects of accession .
Ankara 's reactions during that time have been through every manifestation of unreasonableness : anger to begin with , indignation , abuse , threats , and an astonishing disregard for Europe 's fundamental principles .
More particularly , against its neighbour Greece which , let it be noted , out of all 15 of our countries would be the one which stood to gain most satisfaction and benefit from Turkey 's approach to the European family , Turkey escalated its harassments in the Aegean , which could have led to the outbreak of war , escalated its disputes affecting Greece 's territorial integrity , and sabotaged every attempt to begin a constructive dialogue .
And top Turkish leaders were brought into the part of Cyprus still under military occupation , to direct its incorporation into Turkey if Europe 's declared policy on the accession of that independent republic were brought to a successful conclusion .
Now , in the face of the impasse brought about by this intransigence , which has been confirmed by every envoy sent by Europe and America , Mr Denktash has set off like a firework the idea that he is disposed to negotiate a confederal solution , believing that some people might be naive enough to think that he has softened his attitude .
In reality , he is proposing to consign the successive UNO decisions to the dustbin , to reward the Turkish invasion and to perpetuate the 24-year tragedy of Cyprus .
Only if the European Union stands firm will any Turkish leadership see reason and open the way towards the closest and most effective possible cooperation , to the benefit of both Europe and the Turkish people .
Madam President , my thanks to the Commission for its reports on the operation of the Customs Union and , it goes without saying , to Mr McMillan-Scott too for his very readable and interesting document .
I expected nothing less from him .
The Commission 's reports give us every opportunity to trace the pattern of developments in Turkey .
There is every reason why we should , because after all these years relations between the Union and Turkey have got considerably worse .
The Turkish Government 's refusal to take part in the European Conference and Turkey 's action in breaking off the political dialogue with the Union are bad and regrettable developments .
Commissioner van den Broek was right in identifying them as such .
The Union 's position is plain .
Turkey is treated just like all other applicants , very simply , on the basis of criteria , the Copenhagen criteria .
Turkey is and remains a candidate for membership .
But she does not meet the criteria which have been set . It is entirely up to her : if she changes things , the situation can be reviewed .
Meanwhile we have to work with the instruments we have to keep relations with Turkey on a good footing .
Happily , the Customs Union is working well .
The Commission is quite properly looking to see if ties can be consolidated in other areas too .
The impasse over the MEDA funds and the financial protocols is a cause for concern , but we hope that creative thinking on Europe 's part and moves towards democracy on Turkey 's part will lead us out of the impasse .
The Customs Union was not only about free markets , but also about European aid to Turkey .
Europe is willing to help .
All the Turkish Government has to do now is to act on its word - its word of March 1995 .
We are still waiting for an improvement on human rights .
We are still waiting for a change in Turkey 's position on the Kurds .
We are still waiting for a breakthrough on Cyprus .
Instead of a willingness to compromise , Turkey is showing rather the opposite , with a process of gradual but at least verbal annexation .
I urge the Turkish Government to resume its dialogue with the Union .
Only through talking can we find common ground .
Only then can we survive together .
Only then can we find solutions to the problems we share .
Only then can we make progress along the road to Turkey 's accession .
Madam President , in his report Mr McMillan-Scott sets out all the problems which tarnish relations between the European Union and Turkey , and attempts with his well-founded comments to indicate , mainly to Turkey , the path it should follow if such debates are to become unnecessary in the future .
The problems are familiar and have often been explained .
In December 1995 , the European Parliament gave the green light to the agreement on a Customs Union with Turkey , but it laid down specific prerequisites concerning human rights , which are constantly being violated , the Kurdish problem , and the more general issue of relations between Turkey and Greece - a Member State of the European Union - and the situation in Cyprus .
The Commission is still responsible for strict monitoring of the situation and for keeping Parliament informed well in time before the next year 's budget is considered , and it is encouraging that Commissioner van den Broek promised to do this a little while ago .
The rapporteur stressed all this and also explained that any harsh statements he made apply to those in power in a Turkey under military control and not to the Turkish people , who have themselves had much to put up with .
Unfortunately , however , as we all know , nothing has changed in Turkey since the Customs Union .
Human rights violations have intensified and threats outside Turkey have multiplied .
On the other hand , in the West there are many who speak in favour of Realpolitik .
Europe , they say , has major economic and strategic interests in Turkey , so large , it seems , that it often sets aside some of its principles to accommodate them . But the question remains : what is to be done ?
Mr McMillan-Scott 's proposals are very interesting .
The idea is not to isolate Turkey , but to make it understand that Europe has set certain terms and that it insists absolutely on them .
Most of the measures proposed by the rapporteur go in the right direction , and so do the amendments tabled by the Committee on Budgets , which Mr Giansily referred to earlier and which we should support .
Madam President , I feel that at this stage , we need to ask ourselves two basic questions .
Firstly , how has the situation in Turkey developed since December 1995 ? Secondly , how far has the entry into force of the Customs Union , approved by this Parliament at that time , influenced developments ?
I believe that the answers to both questions are fairly obvious , but also disheartening .
No positive developments have taken place in Turkish political life .
There has been no progress concerning democratic principles nor in respect for human rights .
Turkey is failing to observe international law and to control its dirty war against the Kurdish people .
In this sense , we did not send out the right message when we approved the Customs Union in December 1995 .
The authorities in Ankara were not encouraged to move forward , to restructure and modernise the State , and start to transform Turkey into a fully democratic state , subject to the rule of law .
On the contrary , the effects of the message were patently harmful .
However , a few months ago , in Luxemburg , the European Council returned to the position of requiring exactly the same from Turkey as it does from all other countries , exactly the same as is required from any individual .
We have to be in favour of a relationship on equal terms between the European Union and Turkey . This relationship must be shown to be open and of mutual benefit , whilst contributing to the development of the country .
Anything else would be a mistake .
There is a great deal of truth in Mr McMillan-Scott 's report , although it is , in my view , too weak .
Perhaps , on the occasion of the award of this year 's Sakharov Prize - I understand that Mr Birdal has been nominated - Parliament will be able to send out the right message .
Madam President , I am especially pleased to see Commissioner Monti here with us today , but no national parliament would tolerate the minister responsible leaving the chamber during the debate .
Anyway , now to the matter in hand .
It is somewhat surprising to hear from the Commission or read in the Commission 's dossier that more than two years on from the introduction of the Customs Union between the European Union and Turkey , that Customs Union is working satisfactorily .
Particularly of late , relations between the Union and Turkey have never been more tense .
We have been on the very brink of a crisis .
I think we should be worried , ladies and gentlemen , that since the introduction of the Customs Union the economic benefits have been so unilaterally in the Union 's favour , with so little benefit to Turkey .
I know there has been a slight improvement , but unless the balance is redressed properly in the near future this will naturally be perceived in Turkey as a very bad thing .
I well recall hearing a majority view during the debate here in the European Parliament that this Customs Union ought to benefit to both sides .
In economic terms at least , our finding is that this is not yet altogether the case .
Nor has this Union brought much by way of the hoped-for improvements in human rights , protection of minorities and so on .
But I very much feel that the prospect of membership should remain open , though that does not mean we can scale down the demands we have to impose by way of political criteria .
But I would like to make the point that the argument of non-discrimination , so clearly adduced here by everybody , would have carried greater weight if the European Union had taken a tougher line on Slovakia , since the Commission document clearly states that Slovakia does not meet the political criteria either .
Lastly , I hope that in the interests of the Union and the Turkish people , relations within the framework of the Customs Union will help to foster prosperity and democracy in both areas .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , if the European Union was as it should be , we would not be here today debating the Customs Union with Turkey .
And the reason for this is very simple ; Europe should be European and Turkey is not European .
Whatever the advantages , respect or friendship we can offer to this large country , the truth is that it does not share our common European civilisation .
Turkey is not similar to Europe , neither geographically , historically , culturally nor religiously .
And although for geopolitical reasons , stronger relations between the Europe and Turkey may seem an attractive prospect , to bring these relations into the EU 's structures and to talk of possible membership is preposterous .
Yet the fact that we are indeed doing this shows how dangerous the current idea of Europe is , since it misjudges our identity completely in order to concentrate on purely commercial needs .
Worse still , on a purely economic level , all the indications are that bringing Turkey further into the EU will damage our productive apparatus because of major structural differences between Turkey and Europe , in particular the low labour costs in Turkey .
And this is without mentioning the fact that Turkish immigration in western Europe is destabilising the social balance of our nations .
Consequently , it is rather surprising to see the European Union consistently easing the conditions it claims to impose before granting aid . It is an appalling situation for the Union to be in , almost begging for greater cooperation with Turkey .
For our part , the National Front does not approve of the Customs Union and we refuse to accept Turkey 's membership of the Union , whilst maintaining friendly relations , as such a policy is against the essence and the interests of Europe .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , today we are examining the success or failure of the Customs Union with Turkey .
I should like to congratulate Mr McMillan-Scott on his report and to thank him for our close cooperation .
Since I am to present the next report to the House , this cooperation was very important to me .
As far as economic success is concerned , there is every reason to conclude today that , as Mr Titley has already said , after an initial phase of disequilibrium , a balance is gradually being established in economic relations between Turkey and the European Union .
To that extent the Customs Union can certainly be termed a success .
In social terms it is also possible to speak of success , in so far as those elements in Turkish society with an interest in a Western-style democratic republic have been strengthened .
I refer primarily to the entrepreneurs , employers ' associations and trade unions , who can now cite the benefits of Customs Union to back up their call for a modern Turkey , for a country organised in accordance with the rule of law .
From a political point of view , however , I sadly have to note that progress on the way to parliamentary democracy , respect for human rights and the will to resolve the internal and external political problems and conflicts in a peaceful manner are not as much in evidence as we would wish .
For that reason , let me appeal most earnestly to the Turkish Government to remember that it not only needs good economic relations with the European Union , that it not only needs to develop democracy in Turkey but that it also needs to live in a peaceful environment if it is serious about joining the European Union .
I should like to stress once again that Turkey certainly has the potential to accede to the European Union and must be equipped to do so .
We shall assess Turkey against the same criteria , the Copenhagen criteria , which we apply to all the other candidate countries .
But Turkey should also make greater use of the existing Customs Union in order to carve out its own path towards the European Union .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , it is a fact that relations between the European Union and Turkey have deteriorated over the past few months .
There are many different reasons for that , and we need not discuss them all today .
What is clear , however , is that Turkey has contributed to this worsening of relations through the defiant attitude it adopted after the Luxembourg summit .
Our concern - and the purpose of Mr McMillan-Scott 's report , to which I add my support - is to find a new beginning .
Now that our colleagues have given us all these economic data on the Customs Union , it is time to make political progress , and there are some questions here for the European Union to answer .
For example , there is the question why we have not yet put the financial part of the Customs Union into effect after all this time .
Why have we failed to provide ECU 30 million to train customs personnel and to equip the customs services when there are Turkish customs posts at the external border of the European Union ?
Is this the proper way to proceed ?
We have this coordination between the Commission and Parliament under the MEDA programme , and rightly so , but if we want to put our relations with Turkey on a sound footing again , we must face up to our own responsibilities .
That is why our group seeks a new beginning .
Despite the lack of progress on human rights and democracy , we want the Customs Union to be implemented in a balanced manner and we do not want to block its financial resources any longer .
We have tabled some amendments to this end , and I hope that the amendments proposed by the Committee on Budgets pursue the same objective , because at the end of the day how can we make it clear that Turkish accession is possible in the distant future if we cannot honour our own obligations pursuant to a valid international agreement ?
That is why I argue that , despite all the problems we have with Turkey on human rights problems , the issue of the Kurds or relations with Greece , it is high time we fulfilled our obligations and thereby created a new basis for EU-Turkish relations .

Madam President , the McMillan-Scott report provides a basis , it contains a few ambiguities , but I believe that with the amendments it will turn out to be a good resolution .
As for Turkey , the issue must be made clear .
The problem is not that Turkey is an Islamic country , nor that much of it extends into Asia , nor that it has a large population , nor that it has underdeveloped zones .
Like any other European country , Turkey indeed has a right to become a member of the European Union , but it also has corresponding obligations .
Those obligations have been clearly stated with a view to justifying the Customs Union : the Cyprus and Kurdish problems , human rights , and relations with its neighbours .
But it has taken not a single step towards meeting those obligations , and that is why both the Turkish Government itself and the European Union 's bodies are in an exposed position .
I think we must insist , we must say that the doors are open and that the ball is now in Turkey 's court .
Especially today , we must lend weight to two issues and I call on the Commission and the Council to mobilise their efforts towards them and abandon their inertia .
One concerns the fact that with the presence of Turkey 's Minister for Foreign Affairs the Denktash regime has rejected the UN basis for a solution to the Cyprus problem , in other words a federal two-zone entity , and is talking about a confederation and separate states .
The other is that Turkey must take steps to withdraw its forces so that more general demilitarisation can take place on the island .
Madam President , we expressed the view on 15 December 1995 that the vote on the Customs Union with Turkey could be nothing other than an act of political flexibility in recognition of that country 's key strategic role , given the upsurge in intolerable and highly dangerous religious extremism affecting a number of Turkey 's neighbouring states .
At the same time , we demanded a strong reminder of the need to respect human and political rights , above all those of ethnic minorities , first and foremost the Kurdish people .
Since then we have kept a careful eye on the delicate shifts in Turkey 's domestic political situation : the formation of the 55th government and the Constitutional Court 's decision to dissolve the Islamic party ; the constitutional situation , including most recently the new law on police custody , while the irregular role of the army in society remains a cause for concern ; the human rights situation - the Commission has provided a good deal of useful assistance to NGOs in this field - in particular the Kurdish question , the deterioration of which has caused the exodus that has brought thousands of Kurds to EU countries , Italy in particular , in search of refuge and a future .
Here we would reiterate the advisability of an exclusively political solution , in parallel with the one for Cyprus , as was agreed at the Edinburgh summit which - in point of fact - dissociated the start of accession negotiations from the peace process .
On 29 April 1997 , the Union confirmed to the Association Council that Turkey was eligible to join the EU , stipulating that it would be judged on the same criteria as the other applicant states .
The same view emerged at the Luxembourg European Council .
Therefore , although the Commission 's report points out that there has been little progress concerning human rights and democratisation in Turkey , Europe is still of the opinion that Turkish accession is a useful and sensible aim ; the Customs Union was a significant step in this direction .
The Alleanza Nazionale intends to vote in favour of the McMillan-Scott report . We share in particular its assessment of the importance of the democratisation process and the safeguarding of human rights - including those of the Kurds - as well as the aim of establishing good neighbourly relations between Turkey and Greece , partly through a settlement of the Cyprus question .
Finally , Alleanza Nazionale endorses the proposal to open up Community programmes to Turkish youngsters , and calls on the Commission to appeal strongly to the Turkish authorities to step up their efforts to combat drug trafficking .
Madam President , I am speaking on behalf of Mr Roubatis , who is a member of the Committee on External Relations and cannot be here today .
I read Mr McMillan-Scott 's report very carefully and I must say I find it very good .
I would like to congratulate the rapporteur and assure him of my support .
I also noted the amendments tabled by the Committee on Budgets , and I hope they will be adopted because I believe they correctly express the call for a closer analysis of the financial consequences of Customs Union and for Parliament to be informed about any political initiatives undertaken by the Council together with the Turkish authorities .
I would also like to remind the House that when it approved the Customs Union on 13 December 1995 , it specified a series of conditions such as compliance with international law , democratic functioning and the protection of human rights .
The consequence of non-compliance with those conditions is that Parliament should not be disposed to approve the items necessary for operation of the parallel financing protocol , as Mr McMillan-Scott rightly stresses in paragraph 8 of the resolution .
In many of its resolutions since 13 December 1995 , the European Parliament has expressed its dissatisfaction with the meeting of those conditions .
There is no need to go into all that again .
The facts are known .
There is aggressiveness towards my country , the Cyprus problem is worse , there are violations of religious freedom in Turkey itself and , of course , the decision by the European Court of Human Rights on compensation for those who lost their fortunes and on their reestablishment in northern Cyprus was rejected .
That is a slap in the face for Europe 's bodies and of course makes it impossible to see Turkey in a good light .
Madam President , I will end by saying that I both know what Turkey must do to become a member of the European Union , and assure you that I wish for it .
What it must do is what was done by a former province of the Turkish State , namely Greece .
It achieved a substantive change-over to democracy , which Turkey has not accomplished .
And until it does , I fear that it cannot possibly become a member of the European Union .
Madam President , when we discuss the question of the Customs Union with Turkey , we are dealing with an extremely sensitive subject .
The strategic aspects of this will be discussed in relation to Mr Swoboda 's report later on , so I would simply like to make three comments .
The first observation is that when discussing relations with Turkey - beyond the question of the help we are now providing - we should ask what more we could do to reinforce democratic structures in Turkey , particularly by developing sectors such as energy , the environment , vocational education and administrative reform .
This is indeed what our rapporteur said , and he is quite right .
In order to do this , it is perhaps worth considering how financial aid to Turkey is managed and possibly unblocking certain budget lines .
My second comment is related to the MEDA programme .
I believe that this should be fully implemented , as the rapporteur suggests , including those aspects of the MEDA programme which enhance democracy .
The third comment concerns our working party .
It is a unique institution that was set up for cooperation with the Commission .
But I do wonder what the future of this party ought to be . I believe that an interim assessment of how the working party operates should be carried out and the possibility of it being institutionalised should also be discussed .
Madam President , when the European Parliament voted for the agreement on a Customs Union with Turkey , it was with great misgivings .
Parliament nevertheless voted in favour , in order to show confidence in Turkey .
What has Turkey given in return for this confidence ?
The answer is ready to hand .
Very little .
Let me give a few examples : arbitrary arrests , critics of the system who suddenly disappear , prisoners dying in political detention , laws which set aside the personal rights of ordinary people for up to three years , 6000 Kurds murdered in 1997 alone , prisoners of conscience like former Member of Parliament Leyla Zana , who was sentenced to 15 years in prison without evidence .
Until critics of the system like Leyla Zana and Celim Sadak are released , Turkey will fall far short of the EU 's standards for a state governed by the rule of law .
If Turkey is still serious about membership , it needs to make many and radical changes , and it must do so right away .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , almost three years ago this Parliament assented to the Customs Union with Turkey .
Before I deal with that , may I thank Mr McMillan-Scott for the excellent work he has done in producing his report .
I can fully endorse its contents .
Let me take you back to the time when we took that difficult decision .
We took it because we wanted to give Turkey a tangible token of our trust .
At the same time as we gave our assent , we expressed four expectations .
Some Members have already referred to these , but I should like to list them again : progress on human rights , progress in democratisation , a constructive contribution to the solution of the Cyprus problem and a peaceful resolution of the conflict with the Kurds .
I can see today that our 1995 decision was based on a twofold error of judgement . We made the mistake of putting faith in the promises made by Mrs Çiller , and the Turkish Grand National Assembly made the mistake of doubting the seriousness of our intent .
I also note that the situation in Turkey has not improved in any of those four respects and indeed has deteriorated dramatically in some areas , for example in relation to Cyprus and the Kurds .
Let me categorically express my regret that relations between the EU and Turkey have reached this new low , because I was one of those who consented to the Customs Union at that time in the hope of bringing Turkey closer to the EU and offering her a chance of future accession .
Every day the policies pursued by the Turkish Government erode our hopes and undermine our quest for rapprochement .
There is little point in our trying - perhaps slowly but none the less steadily - to draw closer to Turkey if she is going to drift faster in the opposite direction towards an uncharted and risky future .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Situation in Kosovo
The next item is the statements by the Council and the Commission on the situation in Kosovo .
Madam President , very briefly : we have the statements by the Council and the Commission about Kosovo , but because a coup is under way - things in Albania have not quite been settled - and because Albanian issues are related to those in Kosovo , I think this would be a suitable opportunity - today , and not tomorrow when it might be too late - for the Council and the Commission to express their position on events in Albania and their support for the legitimate democratic government of Albania .
Indeed so , Mr Alavanos .
- Madam President , I would like to say that the coup d 'état took place over one and a half years ago , cloaked in the scandal which we are now aware of , and so it is not linked to last week 's events .
What took place last week is the logical outcome of what has happened in the past .
Ladies and gentlemen , you will be dealing with all this when you come to speak , and I do not think that these are points of order .
I should like to welcome Mrs Ferrero-Waldner , President-in-Office of the Council .
I shall give her the floor in a moment .
Mr van den Broek is still detained elsewhere , but I would remind you that the Commission is a collegiate body and that Mr Monti is here with us .
He is perfectly competent to listen to our debate and Mr van den Broek will be rejoining us as soon as possible .
) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the Kosovo conflict still constitutes an extremely long-term threat to European security and stability interests .
This conflict had been smouldering for years .
Again and again it was pointed out that it could explode .
Unfortunately , as it turns out , the international community 's efforts here have proved inadequate .
After President Milosevic failed to respond to the peaceful policy of the Kosovo Albanians under Ibrahim Rugova for seven years , the province found itself in a kind of apartheid situation with the abolition of its autonomy and the Kosovars turned radical .
The assassinations by the KLA , the Kosovo Liberation Army , provoked violent retribution on the part of the Serb security forces .
The situation today is alarming .
There are now between 250 000 and 300 000 refugees and displaced persons .
Fifty to seventy thousand of them sleep out in the open in the forests and hills .
New refugees join them almost daily .
Some people have cautiously returned to their villages and towns in recent days and weeks , but they are heavily outnumbered by those forced to abandon their houses and villages by Serb police and military action .
As I am sure you know , the approach of winter will unleash a humanitarian disaster unless the situation improves soon .
Those most at risk are of course the most vulnerable population groups , babies , children , women , the old and the sick .
It is quite plain that the Yugoslav Government is chiefly to blame for the large number of refugees and displaced persons .
The Serb and Yugoslav authorities keep repeating that they are merely defending themselves against terrorists and separatists , and that the military offensive , which has in fact continued unabated since late July , is simply a response to KLA raids and attacks .
That may be so , but anyone who has been to Kosovo recently knows that the military and police actions against the civilian population can only be described as disproportionate .
When you see the shelled houses , destroyed villages , burnt-down farms and schools , when you see the wheat fields casually set alight and the slaughtered cattle , it becomes clear that the reaction of the Serb police and the Yugoslav army to KLA attacks is excessive and indefensible .
Of course the KLA also bears heavy responsibility for the deteriorating security situation .
But we must keep a sense of proportion .
There are now 35 000 Yugoslav soldiers in Kosovo , supported by 20 000 Serb police and the notorious paramilitary troops of Seselj and Arkan .
These troops have heavy-calibre machine guns , tanks and artillery , which they indeed use .
The KLA , on the other hand , seems to consist of a core group of between 500 and 800 regular troops , plus several thousand , perhaps even tens of thousands of volunteers .
They may not always be fully organised but they are certainly prepared to use their weapons to defend what they consider worth defending , be it the ideal of an independent Kosovo or simply the safety of their village or family .
These figures show that neither side can achieve a military victory in this conflict .
That is a fact that the EU presidency is constantly trying to impress on both sides .
But unfortunately they both seem to be convinced that they can achieve their aims on the battlefield , the Serbs by the military destruction of the KLA , the Kosovo Albanians by waging a lengthy guerrilla war .
This bloodshed must be brought to a stop as soon as possible !
Clearly , a political solution is the only viable way .
There are three priority aims here . First , the Serb-Yugoslav offensive must stop and a ceasefire must be observed , informally at least .
Secondly , the humanitarian situation must be improved rapidly and radically .
Only when these two conditions have been satisfied can the third priority be achieved , namely the start of meaningful negotiations .
The EU presidency has taken a number of measures to bring the military action to a halt , ranging from calls for moderation to various economic sanctions .
But since both sides still seem to believe in a military solution , these endeavours have not so far proved successful .
Of course , military intervention by the international community could change the situation .
But that is not within the European Union 's remit .
Moreover , most EU states are convinced that any military intervention would have to be authorised by the UN Security Council , and this is not the case , for the time being at least .
It would not be realistic to count on a UN resolution to this effect in the foreseeable future because of the balance of powers and interests in the Security Council .
I turn now to the second priority , the humanitarian situation .
Given the increasingly intolerable state of affairs here , the European Union is trying to step up its humanitarian activity .
Following an initiative by foreign ministers Mr Kinkel and Mr Védrine , the presidency has set up working parties in Belgrade and in Geneva made up of interested EU states , Russia , the UNHCR , the IRCC and the ECMM and KDOM observer missions .
Their aim is to take concerted and locally determined action to identify villages and areas to which the refugees now living in the open can return , in safety and dignity .
That would make it much easier to provide humanitarian aid .
The main obstacle to their return , apart from the mass destruction of housing as a result of Serb military action , is their fear of further persecution .
Incidents such as those in Orahovac , where the police took away returning Kosovars - especially males fit for national service - for so-called interviews and searched the houses to which they had returned , do not exactly encourage the inhabitants to come back .
The first priority , therefore , is for returning Kosovars to feel it is safe to come back ; but only the Serb security forces themselves can ensure that .
The European Union and its partners can play a part here , if their observer missions carry out frequent patrols in the areas concerned , to convey the sense that there is some form of international monitoring .
The purpose of the Geneva and Belgrade working parties is , therefore , to identify localities suitable for projects of this kind that will encourage the inhabitants to return .
At present we have four such local projects : in Klina , Urosevac , Orahovac and Djakovica .
But this initiative is hindered by the constant clashes in these areas too .
If , as I said , the fighting comes to an end at some point and a substantial number of refugees can return , then political negotiations could begin between the conflicting parties on the future status of Kosovo .
The European Union has joined in the efforts of the international community from the outset .
Via a number of Member States and the current presidency , the EU is closely involved in the contact group that has drawn up a document setting out the options for the future status of Kosovo , which it has transmitted to the warring parties .
This document discusses possible means of reaching an acceptable solution to the question of autonomy .
Furthermore , the EU presidency is in close contact with what is known as the Council of Europe 's Venice Commission , which is looking the constitutional aspects of the problem and trying to identify possible solutions .
The EU is also supporting the efforts of Christopher Hill , the US special envoy , who is currently examining the possibility of a three to five-year interim agreement , after which negotiations would begin on the final status of Kosovo .
At the informal Salzburg Council meeting of 5 and 6 September , the Foreign Ministers cautiously welcomed Milosevic 's acceptance in principle of an interim agreement of this nature .
With regard to Kosovo 's status , we support the following . We support neither Kosovar independence nor the continuation of the unacceptable status quo .
In realistic terms , the only possible lasting solution is for Kosovo to have a large degree of self-determination .
It is not so important whether this self-determination is called autonomy or by another name .
What will be more important is for the people of Kosovo to be able to decide and arrange their own affairs themselves , without interference , to have an adequate say in federal matters and for the rights of all population groups and minorities to be guaranteed in line with European standards .
Whether this self-determination is to be achieved in the framework of Serbia or of the Yugoslav federal state is up to the conflicting parties .
The EU sets no priorities here , but nor does it want either of these options to be excluded a priori .
The contact group 's option paper sets out various European models of autonomy that Kosovo could adopt , ranging from South Tyrol via the Finnish Aland islands to Tatarstan in Russia .
Obviously none of these models could be taken over in its entirety , but perhaps various components of some of them could be singled out , put together and usefully adapted for Kosovo .
Each side has appointed a negotiating team , most recently Kosovo on 13 August this year .
Although this negotiating team includes only representatives of the self-styled President Ibrahim Rugova 's KDL party and its coalition partners , the political parties opposing Rugova have not objected to it .
That is encouraging and means that the months of attempts by the EU presidency to persuade the parties in Kosovo to form a united political platform have succeeded to a degree that should not be underestimated .
International representatives will observe the negotiations , and they must be conducted without any preconditions .
Each side must have the right , at least at the beginning , to set out all its major demands .
What other initiatives is the EU presidency pursuing ?
In relation to the returnee project which I mentioned earlier , we are also endeavouring to bolster the ECMM EU observer mission .
The ECMM and the diplomatic observers from EU states working with it form the European contingent of what is known as the KDOM , the Kosovo Diplomatic Observer Mission , which also has an American and a Russian contingent .
In order to implement these returnee projects , the current European presence of 28 observers will be stepped up to 44 .
But we must not forget that simply increasing the number of international observers will not in itself improve the situation of the civilian population .
It could even prove a mistake visibly to increase the number of observers while the humanitarian situation and safety of the civilian population in Kosovo worsened , since then these civilians might well complain of the inefficiency of the international community .
With each side constantly accusing the other of appalling war crimes , of mass shootings and even humanitarian crimes against women and children , the EU presidency has mounted an initiative to send a team of experienced international forensic medical experts to Kosovo .
In the past , Belgrade has in principle accepted the idea of international forensic tests , so we hope it will approve our recent request for visas and for the graves to be opened .
The European Union has imposed a variety of sanctions as a means of exerting pressure on Belgrade , including the refusal to issue visas to members of the security forces , freezing the foreign assets of the Serb and Yugoslav governments , a ban on new investment in Serbia and , most recently , the boycott on Yugoslav airline flights and landings .
The presidency is aware that so far the sanctions have not had any real impact on Yugoslavia 's attitude .
But more incisive measures can be taken only if a qualified majority of EU states so decides , which is not the case at present .
Moreover , there is an EU-wide consensus that the sanctions must not harm the civilian population or the neighbouring states which have close economic ties with Yugoslavia and would find themselves in serious difficulties in the event of an embargo on Belgrade .
At the informal Council of Foreign Ministers ' meeting in Salzburg , the European Commission agreed to investigate any loopholes in the current sanctions by the time of the October Council summit and to propose improvements .
The neighbouring states of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia are already suffering severely from the Kosovo crisis , especially Albania and FYROM .
Given the highly unstable environment , it is most gratifying that in spite of the difficulties , Skopje has managed to retain a high level of stability .
We hope that the elections on 18 October will produce positive results .
In view of the current situation , I must add a few words on Albania .
After the disturbances at the beginning of the week , the situation is now a little calmer .
Yesterday 's demonstrations in Tirana only tempted a few hundred people onto the streets and there have been no more acts of violence .
Yet the situation remains extremely tense , not least because Fatos Nano 's government , which has gained strength again , is threatening ex-president Sali Berisha with arrest and proceedings for high treason , which is punishable by death .
Whether the unrest on Sunday and Monday really represented an attempted coup by Berisha , as the government alleges , or simply an uncontrollable outburst of popular anger at the murder of the much-loved opposition politician Azem Hajdari , as Berisha believes , can be discussed in due course .
The fact remains that Albania is still not really stabilised , that there is still a high risk of violence and uprising , so that unrest may erupt again at any time , and that neither Nano 's government nor Berisha 's opposition have behaved openly .
At any rate , Berisha was certainly largely responsible for the deterioration in the situation .
Ultimatums and threats from both sides will not help stabilise the country .
And the EU presidency is trying to impress that on the Albanian politicians .
Furthermore , we support the efforts of President Mejdani to organise all-party talks with a view to resolving the crisis .
Yesterday the presidency appointed a special emissary , who left for Tirana today .
Moreover , the EU presidency is taking part in a joint mission of the presidencies of the OSCE , the Council of Europe and the EU , which will be travelling to Tirana on Friday .
It is particularly important at this moment for the international community not to leave Albania in the lurch but to make even greater efforts on its behalf .
The international Tirana conference scheduled for late October will represent a suitable forum , provided of course that it can take place under present conditions .
We will continue to work towards regional stability , not just for abstract political reasons but primarily in order to protect the people against violence , expulsion and oppression .
Thank you , Madam President-in-Office , for that very full and informative statement . I shall now give the floor without further delay to Mr van den Broek , on behalf of the Commission .
Madam President , the presidency has made a comprehensive statement , so for the moment I need only add just a few brief remarks .
Firstly , the Commission is liaising very closely with the presidency to coordinate everything we can do by way of humanitarian aid as effectively as possible , not only with the presidency but also of course with a wide range of international organisations with which we routinely cooperate in this area .
My second comment is that the Commission is of course undertaking an important task in putting forward proposals for a package of sanctions and the like ; as the presidency intimated just now , we shall be examining the feasibility of a joint front on that .
I think it is only right to say that the Commission initially suggested a number of tougher measures and that the end result was a package which we hope will be adequate , but which we for our part would have liked to be rather more robust .
I hope that a solution can be found to the problems which two Member States had with earlier decisions on the boycotting of flights by Yugoslav carriers , because it is naturally not credible first of all to have a joint decision to impose that boycott and then to have a number of Member States unable to take part in enforcing it .
But again , I have reason to hope from latest reports that the problems which seemed likely to arise in this connection can be overcome .
We are waiting for news from the capitals concerned .
My third point is this .
Since March of this year we have had the problem of what is going on in Kosovo .
We now have between 250 000 and 300 000 refugees and displaced persons whose predicament is increasingly serious as the onset of winter approaches - one more reason why we should not simply give humanitarian aid and merely treat the symptoms , because that is what we are doing , but should focus more directly on the causes of the conflict .
Consequently I am somewhat encouraged , as I imagine the presidency is too , by the apparent initiative of the French President , who spoke to the Russian President with a view to a meeting of the Contact Group next week in New York to discuss the possibility of a Security Council resolution on the situation in Kosovo .
The aim of this is doubtless to look again at whether tougher measures can be taken to force a cessation of hostilities .
It is extremely frustrating for the Commission , and I think for all of us , to be trying out of a sense of great involvement to ease the human suffering in one part of Kosovo , whilst in the other part the aggression and the fighting continue , with new flows of refugees and more and more people being driven from their homes .
We are in the middle of this vicious circle .
The Commission believes , and we have discussed this with the Council of Ministers too , that it is vital to bring greater pressure to bear on President Milosevic .
There are lessons to be learned from Bosnia and we are currently seeing the emergence of scenarios suspiciously reminiscent of what we saw in Bosnia , when the international community reacted too late .
The Commission feels that cannot be allowed to happen .
The Commission feels it must not be allowed to happen .
And the Commission feels that the European Union should push for a firm , clear position in favour of a tough Security Council resolution with chapter seven paragraphs .
Lastly , I should say that developments in Albania , which the President-in-Office also commented on , make it a matter of even greater urgency to seek an end to the fighting in Kosovo .
The destabilisation in Albania is extremely serious .
There is still a very great risk that the fighting may spill over in one direction or another .
So the European Union too must make a big effort here .
We very much welcome initiatives which have been taken , among others by the presidency , in consultation with the Italians , I gather , to see how measures might be taken , and perhaps to ask the Western European Union to consider a stabilising police force or something of the kind to try to restore order .
I would remind you that we had this selfsame debate about a year ago when the collapse of the financial pyramid schemes was followed by popular unrest , and there too we were too slow off the mark with our decisions .
Three months after the intensive debate , which produced no consensus , we then had a ' coalition of the willing ' led by the Italians and a stabilisation force was sent to Albania .
I hope that decisions can be taken here promptly this time .
We say that , I repeat , out of a deep sense of duty that we must remain constant in tackling the consequences of these conflicts .
We are more than willing to help ease the lot of the persecuted , the displaced and the refugees , but the citizens of Europe will not be impressed if we address only the effects of the suffering and not its causes .
So I trust that forceful action will be taken both on Albania and Kosovo .
Mr President , Madam President-in-Office , Commissioner , in principle I quite agree with the basic points you made .
But the Commissioner 's words suggest a certain dissatisfaction that more stringent measures were not taken .
I would like to know what these measures or proposals were and why the Council did not take them .
I am in favour of stronger measures .
I was appalled at the difficulties that arose when it came to imposing the ban on flights .
What can Milosevic think of a Europe that finds it so difficult to take even such a minor measure ?
In that respect , I endorse what the Commissioner said .
One thing I wish to make clear . We must openly oppose all - and I mean all - the forces of nationalism , no matter how large , medium or small their responsibility for the current crisis .
This certainly applies first and foremost to the Yugoslav forces .
There is no doubt whatsoever that most of the blame lies at their door .
But it also applies to the KLA , which must realise that it too bears its share of responsibility and that its activities are certainly making it difficult for Europe to intervene .
The peaceloving forces , especially those around Rugova , must be supported .
Unfortunately , as I have said on several occasions , they were not supported at the right time .
Secondly , the situation is Macedonia is very precarious .
We are well aware that Kosovar independence or a greater Albania would create serious internal difficulties for this country .
But at the same time we must ensure that the policy Macedonia is adopting in principle , namely respect for the Albanian minority , is pursued consistently and , where possible , developed further .
Thirdly , Madam President , let me add a small footnote in regard to your approach to Albania .
As you indicated , Berisha is exploiting the situation in Kosovo to the hilt in order to destabilise the situation in Albania too .
Of course I too believe that Fatos Nano and his government must observe the rule of law in their pursuit of accusations , crimes , and so forth , and must not fan the flames .
But it must be made clear who is chiefly to blame for the current conditions .
In the final analysis , the pursuit of full independence would create the same difficulties and problems that arose in Bosnia .
This could further boost the growing power of the nationalist forces as reflected in the elections .
My final point concerns the refugee question .
Here we must offer our full support and oppose any tendency in Europe to say that because we did much for Bosnia , we cannot do as much for Kosovo .
We must do everything in our power to help the Kosovar refugees .
Mr President , Madam President-in-Office , for some months now - and in some cases for the past eight years - we have literally been begging the Community to do something !
But the Council talks and talks , with very little too show for it .
It can never find its way to actually act .
We have just heard again today that working parties have been set up in Belgrade .
Nobody is quite sure what their purpose is , or who indeed their members are .
As you said , the situation down there has to improve .
That sounds all well and good , but how is it to improve ?
What are we Europeans actually doing ?
Just think back to the flight ban that two colleagues and the Commissioner just mentioned , which was decided in Cardiff in July .
It is now September !
It has not been implemented yet .
That is ridiculous !
It is quite inexplicable to anyone .
Madam President , I believe it was your boss who said that our foreign policy is like a bus with 15 drivers !
Each wants to drive at a different speed .
Some even want to change direction , while Milosevic sits there looking on and laughing at our antics .
For this not only harms the suffering people of Kosovo ; it also damages the reputation of our Union among its citizens .
How long can a criminal head of state go on unscrupulously and with impunity even denying his citizens humanitarian aid ? Sixty per cent of the 50 000 or 70 000 refugees trying to subsist in the open in the forests of Kosovo are children !
They need food , drinking water and blankets .
They are beginning to die of typhoid , while we look on and say the situation has to improve !
This cannot be true !
The Serbian Government and the West are calling on the refugees to return to their villages .
But what does that mean ?
It means they go back to the villages that Mr Milosevic has razed to the ground .
Is that where they are supposed to go back to ?
Where are they supposed to go in these villages ?
Who is to keep them safe ?
The situation has to improve !
Madam Presidentin-Office , this is not your fault , but we only have you to talk to here .
So I believe we must realise that Milosevic planned this attack on civilians .
The KLA is a by-product that suits him well because it allows him to say that he is dealing with terrorists .
He planned this attack on civilians , children and women and indeed carried it out .
We cannot send these people back home without guaranteeing their safety .
Let us finally turn to deeds ; appeals will get us nowhere !
You too have made many appeals today .
And you know a great deal about the situation ; but that does not interest Milosevic at all .
He has not kept a single promise in Kosovo .
Do you believe he will keep this promise ?
Mr Milosevic 's language is the language of force !
So let us finally address him in his own language .
Only then is there a chance of finding a negotiated political solution .
Unfortunately I have no time to discuss Albania now , but perhaps one of my colleagues will do so and perhaps you can tell me the name of this nice special envoy who is perhaps now to achieve something in Albania .
Mr President , as we have heard yet again today the Cardiff Summit has reiterated the foundations of EU foreign policy in Kosovo , which calls for the cessation of violence , a return to the negotiating table and engagement in a vigorous political process as the only solution to the Kosovo crisis .
These are good , decent , nice ideas but they are simply not working .
In the past few months the political process in Kosovo has suffered serious reversals and has not progressed .
The situation has altered substantially .
The time has come now to countenance a qualitatively different policy response .
The sad truth is that Mr Slobodan Milosevic is the only leader in Europe today with a clear vision for Kosovo and the political will and military means to see it through .
By his own standards , Mr Milosevic has learned the lessons of Bosnia and is applying them .
In the past , high profile genocidal outrages like Srebrenica provoked sufficient anger to galvanise the international community into action .
But by lowering the intensity without changing the objective , Milosevic knows that a village a day is keeping the West away .
He has learned to play the international community like an old violin , instinctively knowing how much pressure he can put on the strings without causing them to break .
It is clear from the ethnic subjugation in the past few months that Milosevic has nothing but contempt for our studied , nuanced and impotent words of diplomacy .
He is a regional bully and unless he is stopped he will go on bullying .
Several months ago , in a useless bout of sabre-rattling that might even have further radicalised Albanian Kosovars by sending false signals , NATO launched Operation Determined Falcon .
This proved to be nothing more than an expensive dead duck and was seen and treated as such from the outset by Milosevic .
Gestures will not halt his aggression any more than our words or resolutions .
We have to learn the lessons of Bosnia and apply them as well .
A cessation of violence was the fundamental precondition for the creation of a climate for political dialogue at Dayton .
It took determined international action to open the way for politics to reassert its primacy .
Ten days of limited , focused , proportionate bombardment stopped the aggression then .
That could have been any ten days in those sorry four years .
If we fail to act quickly we can anticipate humanitarian disaster in the Balkans next winter .
We have the moral , ethical and political duty to act .
As far as my group is concerned , the purpose of the European process is to ensure that this kind of horror never happens again .
For ten years Kosovo has beckoned us .
If we fail these defenceless people , then our foreign policy aspirations are a failure .
Madam President-in-Office , I listened to your report with interest but noted your use of a euphemism : you said that a battle is under way between the KLA and the regular Yugoslav troops to settle the Kosovo problem by force .
That is not the case .
Let us establish the true facts : firstly , the population of Kosovo is under attack from a criminal known as Slobodan Milosevic ; ethnic cleansing is being perpetrated by a criminal who goes by the name of Milosevic and wishes to rid Kosovo of its Albanian population , which - as is well known - holds 90 % of the area .
So much for the true facts .
Secondly , I have heard it said , even by distinguished colleagues , that we cannot discuss the refugee question because we have already discussed the Albanians ; rather , we should send them back to the villages razed to the ground by Milosevic .
I should like you , Madam President-in-Office , and the Commissioner to tell me how we can think of sending the refugees back to those villages which have been destroyed and occupied by Milosevic 's troops .
Thirdly , I heard Mr van den Broek refer to a firm Europe : he said that our response must be a firm one .
Until now Europe has been inactive , impotent and cowardly ; we have made ourselves a laughing-stock for the umpteenth time , as happened over Bosnia .
Our foot-dragging is allowing Milosevic to pursue his belligerence in the face of total impotence from the international community and Europe .
Parliament has outspokenly drawn attention time and again to the danger for Kosovo , but neither the Commission , nor the Council , nor the international community has listened to us .
The tragedy is worsening .
I now hear talk of working groups and special envoys : I hope that this will not amount to the usual comitology , useful only for counting the dead and displaced persons .
Mr President , the situation in Kosovo has become more complicated since July .
Obviously , those most affected are the refugees , the people who are dying .
The situation has also become more complicated politically , not only there but in all the countries surrounding the region .
Take the situation in Albania , for example where Berisha is again attempting to subvert the democratic order and put the government against the ropes .
It may not have been a very effective government , but it was the government the majority of Albanians wanted .
The fact is that , once again , the European Union has been shown to be lacking in muscle . It has not been in the right place , it has been weak , it has failed to act as a body .
Initiatives have sprung up all over the place , a whole range of appointments have been made , boycotts set up but not applied - I am not referring to the country which is forever being condemned , it is the United Kingdom which claims that international contractual obligations prevent it from applying the boycott of air transport .
What must be done ?
Pressure on those responsible has be increased .
Those responsible are Milosevic and his government , for whom things are not complicated in the least , as they are on their way to getting what they want by fire and the sword .
Kosovo must certainly be granted self-determination within a democratic Serbia .
Mr President , I have listened to what the Council and Commission representatives have said , but in my opinion , the events in Kosovo call in addition for a short digression into history .
For over a decade , the Albanian community in Kosovo has been attempting politically and culturally to alter a state of oppression through non-violent means .
Moreover , throughout these ten years , the appeals for help to the international community from the Albanian political leaders in Kosovo have fallen on deaf ears , and non-violence has been taken for impotence or slavish acceptance of Serbian oppression .
It is , unfortunately , not surprising that now , in the face of such culpable inertia on the part of the EU institutions among others , the situation has degenerated and those involved have taken up arms .
The result has been many deaths , villages destroyed and 300 000 refugees ; a peaceful solution now appears less and less likely .
All of this compounds the already grave situation in Bosnia and the earlier , similar policy of ethnic cleansing pursued by the leaders in Belgrade .
They clearly take succour from the passivity of the European Union , which regrettably is devoid of a real common foreign and security policy .
Decisive policing by the international community is required in such a dire situation , exacerbated by the crisis under way in Albania , so as to bring about an immediate cessation of all armed activity within the context of a United Nations mandate , under the auspices of the OSCE , with active participation of the EU Member States .
A ceasefire is vital , both to prevent the conflict spreading to neighbouring countries and to initiate a dialogue leading to a real peace process , one which cannot overlook the legitimate aspirations of the Kosovo population for real autonomy in their own lands .
But peace will not be possible unless the displaced persons are allowed to return to their homes under international protection - partly because of the enormous difficulties which they would face in the winter - and unless homes are provided for those refugees whose villages have been destroyed .
This calls for full support for the humanitarian organisations , which must have complete freedom of movement in Kosovo .
One first symbolic act from the Commission could be the student housing project in Pristina , by way of demonstrable support for reconciliation among university students .
In conclusion , Mr President , the Green Group hopes that the Council and Commission will become more active in promoting a peaceful settlement of this conflict within the very near future .
Madam President-in-Office , Commissioner , I think that we have all felt and heard the indignation expressed over this unbelievable situation we are seeing develop .
It is beyond belief that , after Croatia and Bosnia , almost exactly the same scenario is developing - a policy of aggression , more than a police operation , and a policy which is creating 250 000 refugees .
Here we are looking at the third phase of a war started in Croatia by Mr Milosevic nearly eight years ago .
It is a war he has planned , a war he is organising and implementing little by little and which he will see through to the end , so that 50 or 60 % of Kosovo is completely free of any Albanian presence . He will see this through so that he can then stand before you , before the Council , and say ' I am the man who has brought peace .
Let us reach an agreement as we did with Bosnia , let us make a nice little partition which will not be called one at first , but which will be a de facto partition with de facto ethnic cleansing in Kosovo . '
We are not talking about a future plan here , but rather a plan that is being put into practice day after day .
Madam President-inOffice , Mr van den Broek , 250 000 refugees is a sufficiently high number to warrant intervention beyond fact-finding missions or beyond the ' plastic surgery ' type of operation we have seen in the past few years .
We must go straight to the heart of the matter .
The root of the problem is Mr Milosevic and he must answer directly to The Hague for his crimes over the past eight years in Bosnia , Croatia and now in Kosovo .
There is no time to lose .
We do not need to send in assault tanks , nor do we need to send planes .
All we need to do is send a summons for him to appear before the court in The Hague . This can be done tomorrow morning and would put a stop to this man .
We are talking here about a man who has killed 200 000 people and who is responsible for two million refugees .
Currently , there are already 250 000 Kosovar refugees .
Of course , we could carry on discussing the CFSP , or the majority decisions to be made , we could talk about the European corps we should send , but it would take two months for the first feasibility plans to be drafted .
We must look to something other than the Amsterdam Treaty which is now showing its true worth - nothing at all .
We must take action , we must create a European Union which is not powerless , as it has been for the past ten years .
It is not only the Members here today who have had enough , but our citizens too who no longer have any faith .
These are our citizens and yet we are surprised at the way they vote .
They will stop voting soon because they no longer have any faith in this European Union .
Mr President , this debate is really a kind of sad exercise in repetition .
This is the umpteenth time we are discussing the situation in Kosovo and nothing much has changed for the better .
There is no prospect of a real solution and the situation has , if anything , become more rather than less complicated .
We are not quite up to date with the reality here , a reality which is primarily shaped by the Serbs and their brutal aggression ; the President-in-Office has just brought us up to date on the facts .
There is constant talk elsewhere , as here , about tougher action by the international community .
But so far there have been only half-measures , for example the boycott on Yugoslav flights and the difficulties in enforcing it .
There are plenty of ideas , but how are they to be implemented ? I am glad to hear the Commissioner say that as far as he and the Commission are concerned , tougher measures of this kind should be taken against the regime in Belgrade .
This House too is discussing ways in which the international community might actively intervene .
The resolution drafted for this debate more or less intimates that the European Union might on its own initiative have to consider military intervention . My group is opposed to that .
I am more inclined towards forcing the UN Security Council to pass a resolution which will open the way to possible military intervention , and both the President-in-Office and the Commissioner have hinted at that .
Let us go down that road first , and there is nothing to stop the European Union from taking that initiative and making it clear to Milosevic that there are limits .
It will also give an answer to Milosevic 's insidious tactics which the Commissioner described when he compared present events with what happened in Bosnia .
We think there has to be a ceasefire , not only so that talks can begin , but also so that the necessary emergency aid can be given .
What we want , and this remains the starting position of the Socialist Group , is to keep trying for a political solution , because we do not believe the situation can be resolved by military means alone and we think that military intervention must always be part of a political approach .
So we reject this resolution because it baldly suggests that the EU must impose independence for Kosovo by military intervention .
We are against that independence , because we think this would open up a Pandora 's box and lead to borders in Europe being challenged , in this particular region but elsewhere too .
In the case of Kosovo this not only goes too far because it makes a political settlement that much harder ; we also think that solution is totally unrealistic , as witness what the President-in-Office of the Council has said on the subject .
Madam President-in-Office , Mr President , I believe that a new strategy is currently being tested in Kosovo .
Last week I had a chance to see it in action out there .
The new strategy is a scorched earth and ethnic cleansing strategy .
That is a method we simply cannot tolerate .
We cannot allow the militant Serb forces to roam freely three kilometres left and right of the main traffic routes and create a firing range there , destroy every tree and every house and leave scorched earth behind .
Nor can we check the flows of refugees into our countries , since we have no means of access there .
Apparently some 60 000 refugees are now living in the open in the forests or in inadequate shelter .
We do not know the exact numbers because we have no access .
But we should demand access by all possible means and under all possible circumstances .
We must be more specific in our statements .
When we refer to autonomy , whatever form it is to take , we must also set certain basic , minimum conditions , such as very clear control of the police , the administration and the judiciary by democratically elected Kosovar forces .
That is one minimum condition we must set in our demands .
We must also use plain words to Mr Milosevic .
Let me say one thing quite clearly : the experience of the past eight years has shown that one cannot negotiate with him ; at best one can negotiate about him , and that must be in The Hague .
Let me now also make a few comments on Albania . After all , this is not the first attack on Mr Hajdari .
He was murdered on the third attempt .
We must not forget that on the first attempt he was shot at in parliament by a representative of the government party .
On the third attempt he was murdered .
We must not forget that it was a representative of the government party who fired at him in parliament the first time round .
I am very glad that Mr Swoboda has spoken up again ; hearing him say that Fatos Nano is acting in accordance with the rule of law really makes me doubt his understanding of the law .
Fatos Nano is not observing the principles of the rule of law .
Think of the blockade of the Democratic Party headquarters yesterday evening - which does not say much about his understanding of the law .
We must use plain words and we must act !
Madam President-in-Office , Commissioner , all we can do here is talk .
But we should not use euphemisms and must speak plainly to those responsible .
First of all , I am fed up with hearing that we should learn lessons .
The tragedy has been going on for eight years , and everyone who saw and heard about the situation in Bosnia knew that Kosovo would be the next time-bomb waiting to explode , the next disaster .
Yet nothing was done for years .
Secondly , the civilian population is quite deliberately being driven out by military terror and deliberately being decimated .
That is quite clearly a war crime .
And it needs to be said .
Next : who is responsible ?
Milosevic of course !
That too has been said often enough .
But we should also say quite plainly that the national governments of our Member States meeting in the Council bear their share of responsibility after failing for years to find the appropriate political measures to tackle the situation .
These governments share the responsibility .
But two governments , those of Greece and the United Kingdom , bear special responsibility today , because they were not even prepared to endorse the Cardiff decisions on airline sanctions .
They are primarily responsible for the situation .
Let no one try to talk his way out of this : the lives of 300 000 people are at risk .
Anyone who is partly responsible but does nothing and does not apply sanctions bears a share of the blame .
That needs to be said quite clearly !
Mr President , I did not intend to speak about Greece , but I think that Greece has very many problems which we do not always grasp very clearly , and crises of this kind can arise very easily .
I refer to Kosovo .
It has been mentioned that there are over 250 000 refugees and as winter approaches , some of them are expected to face greater problems .
There is information - the Commissioner already said as much - that the turmoil which has continued for months has had serious consequences for crops , which may result in a shortage of wheat during the winter .
So far , the international community has rather confined itself to the role of an observer , while a new danger is now on the horizon , namely the recent and very worrying events in Albania , which affect Greece a great deal ; Greece , which has a lot of very strange neighbours , though we often forget that here . If these events continue , they may trigger chain reactions .
In that context , the safe return of the refugees is essential , as also is any mediation to normalise the situation . The Kosovo problem is centuries old .
With things as they have become today , however , we must intervene with all the means at our disposal - the Commissioner mentioned them , as did the presidency of the Council - to put a stop to extremes and back the moderate forces in the area .
The absolutely unacceptable and foolish violence exercised by Belgrade and the atrocities by the Liberation Army must be stopped by any possible means , and a satisfactory solution must be sought for Kosovo without the right to break away , as the President-in-Office said .
That solution must be acceptable to all the interested parties , so that any other unpleasant developments can be averted .
Mr President , each time we in the European Parliament speak about the situation in former Yugoslavia , or in the Balkans more generally after the break-up of the former Yugoslavia , for which the European Union bears a heavy responsibility , militaristic voices abound in the European Parliament , with calls for military solutions to the problems .
There is one thing we must all realise : there is no military solution to the problems faced by the Balkans and Kosovo , the only chances lie in the direction of a peaceful political solution .
The question is : does the European Union support such a prospect ?
Recently , Milosevic made a proposal which was accepted by Rugova .
The Council 's response was to ban flights by the Yugoslav airline to the European Union .
Whom is the European Union supporting with that attitude ?
Is it not backing the intransigence of the Liberation Army ?
And did not precisely such support for intransigent forces lead to the encouragement of those forces in Albania which has brought the danger of destabilisation in Albania itself today ?
Madam President-in-Office , let us ponder these responsibilities .
Mr President , I must say that the greatest humanitarian aid which the European Union could offer would be to bring an end to hostilities in Kosovo , because the continuation of the unsettled situation in Kosovo has direct and very unfavourable consequences for events in Albania .
The continuing situation or unrest , call it what you will , in the Kosovo area has a destabilising effect in Albania , where there is a very delicate balance , because Albanians in Albania have various beliefs and religions and it would consequently not take much to produce an uncontrolled situation .
In view of all that , I wish to put some specific questions to the Council .
There is an initiative by Mr Hill who , according to the press , has brought the Milosevic and Rugova sides very close together , and we should support him .
But I have heard no support for him here , no support for this hero , so that a dialogue could begin .
But dialogue is not enough .
Dialogue , or an agreement in principle about dialogue should go hand in hand with the presence of a military policing force in Kosovo .
What was done after the Dayton agreement should happen again .
There is a precedent .
Dayton succeeded , and since it did I do not see why , within the scope of a more general agreement between the regime in Belgrade and Rugova , that agreement 's implementation should not be safeguarded by the presence of a military force with a policing mandate .
Mr President , if the mass murderers Arkan and Milosevic were sitting here in the gallery and listening to us , they could rub their bloody hands with glee .
Our shameful policy of cowardice has given them victory time and again over the past several years .
Winter will soon be upon the refugees in the mountains of Kosovo .
They are without food , medicines and protection from the cold .
Milosevic wants to make them hostages by only allowing aid in special reservations , which he himself controls .
But as Emma Bonino has said : it is like letting Dracula stand guard over a blood bank .
No , Mr President , we must not permit a repetition of the mass murders in Srebrenica , where 7000 men were sacrificed to our policy of cowardice .
It is bad enough that our own governments are timid and indifferent to our ideals .
If we do not even dare help people in need , then the policy of cowardice has gone too far .
Emergency aid must be sent in convoys by land or by air , with or without authorisation from the UN , and the aid must be protected .
If the convoys are fired on , they must be permitted to defend themselves , and they must be armed to do so .
It was the democracies ' fear that made Hitler smell blood .
NATO and the EU were set up to prevent a repetition of those events .
We must now show a minimum of courage , we must at least insist on aid to the victims without turning them and ourselves into hostages .
Mr President , it did not take much political acumen to realise that the desperate situation in Kosovo would have a negative and destabilising effect , as has happened in the entire area and in Albania .
It is an age-old story : Kosovo is the spark for a fire which is spreading throughout the Balkans .
What can be done ?
Words are powerless . Milosevic was extremely cunning in the timing of his clamp-down - July and August , when Europe 's politicians go on their holidays .
And we duly went on our holidays !
The statements made , the policy of containment and the sanctions announced by Mr van den Broek have failed ; as has been recalled in this House , not even the Cardiff agreement has held .
Madam President-in-Office , you said that armed intervention is unthinkable .
One might agree , but how in practice can pressure be exerted ?
At the same time , the German Minister of Defence has stated that NATO is to intervene within three to five weeks , once Milosevic has been notified .
Which line is Europe following ?
I wonder whether it would be possible to step in with a policy of stabilisation , deploying troops along the Kosovo border , putting on pressure and , above all , achieving stabilisation in Albania , where the wrongs and rights are not so clear-cut - although Berisha has wrong on his side , so too does the Nano government .
We must not come out on one side or the other .
We must intervene to ensure respect for the rules of democracy , but those rules also entail the right of opposition .
If we fail to intervene , our policy will yet again have been a disappointment , and I should not wish the Austrian Presidency to be held responsible .
What is more , I fear that the cost for Europe could rise further still , as happened in Bosnia .
Ladies and gentlemen , clearly this debate is not just about Kosovo but also about the common foreign and security policy and what we can do in institutional terms .
I am sorry to say that we have simply not made any progress on the institutional aspects .
But as you know , the principle of unanimity applies in the Council and regrettably there are always some states that do not wish to take certain measures .
Unfortunately I have to say the same of the Security Council .
There too some permanent members , but perhaps others too , do not accept certain decisions that some of us would certainly like to implement .
So we are still in a situation where military threats are empty words .
That is not to say that they might not succeed in future .
But as I said earlier , at present there is little prospect of that .
I am glad to hear , which I did not know before , that unlike in the past the French might after all be interested in drafting a new Security Council resolution , for that could of course bring about at least some change in the situation .
Let me briefly address the question of stronger measures - measures other than military intervention - being discussed but not accepted in the end .
The measures we took to halt investment and also to freeze bank assets are fairly weak .
But here again it is because this was the lowest common denominator we managed to agree unanimously .
I must say that as President of the Council I have to defend this position for the moment ; but that does not mean I necessarily support it .
Then I wish to turn to the question of who our special emissary in Albania actually is .
It is Ambassador Grobmeyer , who worked in Albania last year as representative of former Chancellor Vranitzky . He is very familiar with the situation , can immediately open a new dialogue with all the parties concerned on the spot and will of course also coordinate with the OSCE and the other institutions .
I agree with the Commission that of course we must look at other options too , but unfortunately we did not manage to send a WEU mission to Albania in the past either .
In the final analysis , the OSCE did very good work there for a brief time , but as we can see , it was of course not in a position to build up the institutions in Albania again .
The question of safe havens was raised .
Of course we know the events that led to disaster in Bosnia cannot happen again in Kosovo in the same form .
I myself have discussed the refugee problem at length with Emma Bonino and , believe me , we too realise that what has been proposed so far is little .
But it is very difficult to take further-reaching measures at this point and try to achieve the maximum .
There was a dialogue between the European Union and the United States .
And in that framework we considered whether we could create a multi-ethnic police force to monitor the return of the refugees in situ and guarantee them a degree of safety .
But for the time being - I must say for the time being - that is not feasible either .
So the least we could do was to combine the ECMM and the KDOM , in other words to strengthen the two missions I referred to in my opening statement , for I believe one thing always worries Milosevic : monitoring and information being passed on .
I wish to address one further point . It was said that there is no means of contacting the refugees .
That is not entirely true .
The UNHCR and the International Red Cross Committee certainly have means of access .
Sometimes obstacles are put in their way , it is true ; but by and large they have quite good access .
Emma Bonino , who was there herself recently , confirmed this to me .
Mr President , I still believe that there was a degree of consensus that the absolute priorities must be to achieve a ceasefire in Kosovo and to improve the disastrous humanitarian situation .
I believe we also more or less agreed that only when these two preconditions have been achieved will it be possible to engage in meaningful negotiations on the future status of Kosovo .
We will certainly continue to devote all our energies towards that end .
Mr President , I regard this debate as extremely important .
We cannot expect all the Members of this House to listen to the reports of the Austrian Presidency and the Commissioner , but I would ask the presidency of the sitting to invite at least those who speak to be here for their replies .
That is surely a necessary mark of respect to Parliament .
I appeal to your good judgement , which is well known to me !
Mr Bianco , this is a particularly important debate , it is true , but that rule should apply to all our discussions .
Mr President , let me first announce the good news that the presidency and the Commission have just received a note from Robin Cook stating that the United Kingdom has ordered all flights by Yugoslav carriers to the UK to be banned with immediate effect .
So our optimism that we would make headway there was not misplaced .
My final remark is that , on the basis of the experience and information that we all have - the experience of Bosnia and the information about Kosovo - it is quite clear that as long as there is no ceasefire , as long as the violence does not stop , there will be no meaningful political negotiations and there will be a continuous flow of refugees and displaced persons .
That misery will continue .
That is our experience and there is no indication that in this case it might be different .
To all those who have difficulty , as we had in Bosnia at the time , in making a clear distinction as to who should be considered the aggressor , who should be addressed as the main cause of the misery , I would say that the 250 000 people we are speaking about are not Serbs .
They are Albanians in Kosovo .
That does not mean that the UCK does not use violence as such , but the one who carries the main responsibility should be addressed first .
In conclusion - and here the presidency has been very frank in depicting the situation within the Union - it is nevertheless extremely important for Parliament to speak as far as possible with one voice and encourage the Union to take responsibility .
That is why I repeat that I am very pleased to hear that , if the press information is correct , the French President has said this situation is intolerable and has told the Russian President that we need a meeting of the Contact Group and we need to speak about the Security Council .
I know that France and the vast majority of our Member States believe that the use of any type of force to end the violence should be covered by a Security Council resolution .
That is a legitimate point of view .
But I hope it will not take too long to pass such a resolution and bring about the peace that is needed before negotiations can be started to find the ultimate political solution , because for Milosevic and the UCK there is no military solution .
But I fear that outside pressures will be necessary to stop the violence and get the political process running .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Associated companies
The next item is the report ( A-0299 / 98 ) by Mr Secchi , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy , on the proposal for a Council Directive on a common system of taxation applicable to interest and royalty payments made between associated companies of different Member States ( COM ( 98 ) 0067 - C4-0195 / 98-98 / 0087 ( CNS ) ) .


Since it is essential to adjourn our debate at 5.30 p.m. for Question Time with the Council , I would call on Mr Secchi to present his introductory remarks as rapporteur , but I would inform him that we shall be obliged to continue the debate this evening after 9 p.m.

Mr President , I shall begin by protesting at what you have just said .
I find it rather odd to embark on a discussion of such a major topic and then adjourn it for several hours , during which time colleagues might quite naturally lose sight of the issues at stake and the various opinions expressed .
Surely the efficiency of Parliament 's work would not be impaired if we were to run a few minutes behind schedule - especially as there has already been a good deal of slippage today .
Mr Secchi , in that case we could postpone your introduction until 9 p.m. this evening .
But we simply cannot hold up Question Time with the Council .
So it is as you please : either now or at 9 p.m.
Mr President , I am presenting the report adopted by the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs on the proposal for a Council directive on a common system of taxation applicable to interest and royalty payments made between associated companies of different Member States .
This proposal was put forward by the Commission as part of the so-called ' Monti package ' which , as colleagues will recall , is designed to implement the approach to fiscal coordination proposed by the Commission , and fully backed by Parliament . It is an attempt to steer the Member States ' taxation systems in directions that are compatible with the smooth functioning of the internal market , averting the adverse effects of so-called harmful tax competition .
On 18 June , the House adopted an initial report on the first element of the package , namely the Code of Conduct for business taxation ; today we are examining the second element , and the Committee on Economic Affairs has already begun its consideration of the third : the proposal for a directive on the taxation of nonresidents ' income from savings .
This brings me to Amendment No 3 , which has been adopted by the Committee on Economic Affairs and argues that the phased adoption of the various elements of the package should not be used as a tool by Member States to delay its implementation .
Ideally these provisions should be simultaneous , but they will inevitably be implemented as the legislative process advances .
The purpose of the measure before us is to eliminate double taxation between associated companies of different Member States in the single market .
The Committee on Economic Affairs also proposes , in Amendment No 2 , that this system should gradually be extended to all companies operating in the single market so as to avoid double taxation .
In Amendment No 1 , we stress the importance of this measure , especially for small and medium-sized enterprises , which are less well equipped to face such problems .
We therefore believe that the rapid adoption of this directive will speed up the process of Europeanisation and allow full advantage to be taken of the internal market .
In Amendment No 4 we propose restricting the Member States ' discretion in the implementation of the directive .
I realise that this is a very sensitive area , but I do think it was right and proper for us to make the suggestion .
In our fifth amendment , we propose that the adoption of this directive should be an incentive for Member States to undertake a general review of their company taxation systems , in keeping with the spirit of this directive and of the whole package , in particular the Code of Conduct , in order to promote the process underlying this entire set of measures .
Finally , our sixth amendment asks that at the end of the three years , when the Commission has to report on the operation of the directive , there should also be a review to ensure consistency with the other elements of the new approach to taxation .
Mr President , I should like here and now to express my opposition to four amendments tabled by the Green Group : No 7 is superfluous and open to misinterpretation , No 8 repeats ideas already contained in Amendment Nos 1 and 3 by the Committee on Economic Affairs , No 9 is better worded in our Amendment No 4 and , finally , No 10 seems to me contradictory , in that it grants the Member States two additional years to implement the directive .
I shall end there , Mr President , but it is unfortunate that the debate has to be adjourned .
Thank you , Mr Secchi .
I appreciate that the fact that we have to interrupt the debate now is causing you some inconvenience , but you will know that our Rules of Procedure state that the order of business is adopted at the start of each of our part-sessions , and we have agreed that Question Time is to begin at 5.30 p.m.
Question Time ( Council )
The next item is questions to the Council ( B4-0482 / 98 ) .
Question No 1 by John McCartin ( H-0724 / 98 )
Subject : Schengen Agreement
Can the President-in-Office state whether any negotiations have been undertaken at Council level with the British and Irish Governments with a view to incorporating these two States into the Schengen Agreement , thereby extending the possibilities for passport-free travel to citizens of these States ?
I should like to welcome Mrs Ferrero-Waldner and ask her to reply to Mr McCartin 's question .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the United Kingdom and Ireland are fully involved in all Council negotiations and take part in all Council working parties , especially in regard to incorporating the Schengen Agreement in the acquis of the European Union and to the negotiations with Iceland and Norway .
At present Ireland and the United Kingdom are not bound by the Schengen Agreement , nor , pursuant to Article 4 of the Schengen Protocol , will they be so after the Amsterdam Treaty enters into force .
However , they can request the full or partial application of that agreement at any time .
But there is no such request at present .
I thank the President-in-Office for her reply .
The difficulty with Ireland is that it already has freedom of movement between Ireland , Northern Ireland and the rest of the United Kingdom .
Therefore , if Ireland were to ratify the Schengen Agreement without the United Kingdom , we would impose new restrictions on the movement of Irish people which would create great difficulties .
My concern is that the Single European Act , which both countries have ratified , obliged all members who ratified it to eliminate all borders by 1 January 1992 .
In the intervening period we have observed that other countries of the European Union , by going their separate ways , have in a rather roundabout way put the Single European Act into effect .
But the United Kingdom and Ireland have stayed out .
Can we oblige those countries to live up to their obligations under the Single European Act ?
Mr McCartin , Article 7 of the Single Act was never really accepted , which is why I must repeat that so long as Ireland and the United Kingdom have not submitted a request for the incorporation of some or all of the provisions , there can be no negotiations in this regard .
If the United Kingdom or Ireland or both countries make such a request , the Council will discuss it and take a decision .
Under Article 4 of the Schengen Protocol , this requires a unanimous decision on the part of the 13 Schengen members and the applicant or applicants .
That is what I have to say on the subject .
As the author is not present , Question No 2 lapses .
Question No 3 by Alan Gillis ( H-0727 / 98 )
Subject : Algeria
Given the current appalling situation in Algeria where hundreds of innocent men , women and children are being massacred by militant Islamic extremists , and given the apparent lack of will on the part of the Algerian Government to take action to protect their own citizens , what steps does the Council envisage in order to impose on the Algerian Government the need to take radical steps to end these gruesome murders of innocent citizens ?
I give the floor to the President-in-Office to answer Mr Gillis 's question .
Mr President , Mr Gillis , the Council shares the honourable Member 's concerns about the continuing violence in Algeria , whose main victims are innocent civilians .
It has on several occasions called on the Algerian Government to make every effort to protect its citizens from terrorist attacks and acts of violence .
At the same time , given the criticism that has been voiced about the measures the Algerian Government is taking to combat terrorism and fundamentalist violence , the Council has emphasised that these measures must comply with international human rights standards and the principles of the rule of law .
Furthermore , the Council has pointed to the need to tackle the underlying cause of the violence -namely the poor progress made with political , economic and social reforms - if the threat to Algerian society emanating mainly from extremist groups is to be overcome .
I myself took part in the Council 's troika mission on 19 and 20 January 1998 and familiarised myself with the situation at first hand .
I have also kept in contact with several leading figures with a view to examining possible solutions .
Even if the reform process was not pursued as energetically as it should have been , some signs of greater transparency seem to have emerged since the troika 's visit to Algiers , as also since the European Parliament delegation 's subsequent visit in February - I am sure you have more detailed information about that .
The Council is looking very closely at the political and legislative decisions needed to bring forward the political reform process .
The Council also hopes that the recent visit of the group of senior officials appointed by the UN Secretary-General - led , as you know , by Mr Soares - will strengthen the cooperation between Algeria and the international community and further improve the situation .
For the rest , the presidency remains in active contact with Algeria with a view to preparing for a broadly based dialogue .
Indeed we are expecting a meeting between the troika and the foreign minister Mr Attaf in Vienna in the near future .
One of the main issues to be discussed there would , of course , be how to bring the violence to an end and what role the Union could play there .
We have always indicated that we are ready to play our part .
I should like to thank the President-in-Office for her answer .
I am encouraged that there are some developments and possibly we will get some breakthrough .
Obviously , serious reforms are needed and will have to be pursued .
I am wondering if there is any further action .
We need to try to get the maximum amount of action to encourage an end to this bloodshed and violence .
If we can do that I think we have moved very far .
Mr Gillis , there is no further action at this time .
However , we hope that further political dialogue will be possible during the troika visit , which has been scheduled in principle , and that we can then review all the questions raised during the earlier troika mission .
Of course they included the question whether the European Union could provide humanitarian aid , which Algeria rejected out of hand at the time .
As you know , Algeria kept returning to the question of aid to combat terrorism , to which the European Union replied that the Union as such is not competent here , although the individual states could of course assist Algeria in this respect .
Naturally , there are ongoing contacts here .
Question No 4 by Alexandros Alavanos ( H-0728 / 98 )
Subject : Inspection of vessels in the Dardanelles , in violation of the Montreux Convention
The rules governing the passage of vessels through the Bosporus and Dardanelles straits are set out in the international Montreux Convention .
Major economic and political interests of the Community and its Member States , together with the interest of countries on the Black Sea are immediately bound up with the correct implementation of the provisions in the above convention .
Since Turkey has in the past and more recently been carrying out inspections on such vessels and preventing their passage through the straits , justifying its action with reference to their freight , can the Council say whether , under the Montreux Convention , Turkey is entitled to carry out inspections if no legal proceedings are pending regarding the vessels concerned ? Is it entitled to carry out inspections and prevent passage on the assumption that a vessel may be carrying arms ?
I give the floor to the President-in-Office to answer Mr Alavanos 's question .
Mr President , Mr Alavanos , I am sorry to have to tell you that it is not the Council 's business to give its views on the interpretation of an international agreement and , in particular , on the scope of the contracting parties ' rights and obligations .
This is a very brief answer , but there is little I can add .
Mr President , I must say that the President-in-Office quite disarmed me with her answer , with which I do not at all agree .
I think that transport through the Straits is of concern to all the European Union 's countries , especially those in the south , and in that sense I think she should comment on the fact that , despite the Treaty of Montreux , Turkey is trying to control it .
My question , then , is : does the Council not care that Turkey is infringing the Treaty of Montreux by illegally trying to control the shipping going through ?
Secondly , is the Council considering the possibility of discussing with Turkey the subject of the International Convention on Maritime Rights , which the European Union has signed but which Turkey rejects ?
Mr President , Mr Alavanos , the freedom of vessels to sail through the straits governed by the Montreux Convention applies to all states and not just to the small group of contracting states .
Article 7 of EC-Turkey Association Council Decision No 1 / 95 of 22 December 1995 on implementing the final phase of customs union provides that import , export and transit bans or restrictions are admissible for , among other things , reasons of public law and order and security .
These bans or restrictions may not , however , be applied either as a means of arbitrary discrimination or as a disguised means of restricting trade between the contracting parties .
With regard to the possibility of settling this dispute , let me point out that Turkey has accepted neither the binding jurisdiction of the International Court of Justice nor the dispute settlement procedure under the Convention on the Law of the Sea , since it is not a contracting party to that convention .
So let me repeat : unfortunately the Council is not competent to decide the interpretation of the provisions of an international - and I emphasise the word international - agreement to which Turkey is clearly not a contracting party .
Question No 5 by Friedhelm Frischenschlager ( H-0731 / 98 )
Subject : Road-use charges
Traffic within the EU has increased sharply in recent years .
The situation has worsened dramatically , particularly in the case of north-south transit traffic through the Alps .
France and above all Austria are suffering the effects not only of the general increase in traffic but also of the diversion in transit traffic caused by the special regulations in Switzerland .
What measures will the Austrian Presidency introduce in the direction of EU-wide , generally applicable road-use charges , which would permit the internalization of the external costs of road transport while at the same time providing an opportunity , on the basis of the revenue thus collected , for European rail ( freight ) transport to be subsidized by the more environmentally damaging road transport ?
I give the floor to the President-in-Office to answer Mr Frischenschlager 's question .
Mr President , Mr Frischenschlager , this question is broadly covered by the proposal for a directive on levying charges for the use of certain transport routes by heavy goods vehicles .
The Commission presented this proposal , commonly known as the ' Euro-Vignette ' directive , in July 1996 .
The Council is still deliberating on it and the Austrian Presidency will do all it can to reach a conclusion as soon as possible .
The discussion of this dossier will , therefore , continue apace during this six-month term , and this item was thus put on the agenda of the Council of Transport Ministers .
It was not debated at the informal Council meeting in Feldkirch .
Madam President-in-Office , following on from what you said about the Feldkirch meeting of the Council of Transport Ministers , the problem , after all , is that because the negotiations with Switzerland were not completed , Austria and France are suffering severely from the diversion in transit traffic .
Since we keep being told the negotiations are nearing their end , although in fact no headway is being made , the following problem also arises : could the European Union not allow France , Switzerland and Austria to harmonise their road-use charges so as to put a stop , for the time being at least , to the transit traffic diversion ?
I am putting this supplementary question because of what the French Transport Minister said at the Feldkirch meeting , where he openly supported an ecological transport policy for the Alps , which after all are not just Austrian , but indeed European .
Mr President , Mr Frischenschlager , let me go a little further into this question .
Transit transport within the Community can really only be resolved by certain new provisions in the road cost directive , the Euro-Vignette .
The suspension of the transit traffic diversion caused by the Swiss regulations would also ease the situation .
But this can only be done in the framework of the negotiations between the EU and Switzerland .
Austria wants to keep the Brenner toll at the existing level and to put an end to the traffic diversion resulting from the restrictions applied in Switzerland .
At present , as we know , Switzerland restricts heavy goods vehicles to 28 tonnes .
Austria believes it is crucial to have a comparable charge level and structure in Austria and Switzerland .
Higher charges in Switzerland should result in equally high toll rates for the Brenner Pass .
At the Council of Transport Ministers on 10 and 11 December 1997 , the ministers called on the Commission actively to pursue the negotiations with Switzerland , while strictly observing the principle that Swiss charges , like Community charges , must be geared to infrastructure costs .
A breakthrough came in the EU-Switzerland talks at the meeting between Mr Kinnock and Mr Leuenburger , the Swiss minister of state , on 23 January , in the form of what is called the Kloten compromise .
It brought political agreement on an average charge of ECU 200 for the longest transit route through Switzerland , namely Basle to Chiasso .
Other points agreed were : the 40 tonne quota for transit through Switzerland , 120 000 journeys a year for the time being , then 300 000 from the year 2003 , and no restrictions from the year 2005 .
The ban on night driving ban was to remain in force in Switzerland .
That too was part of the settlement .
Moreover , in case train use declined , Switzerland was to be granted a protective clause .
In March this year , the Commission believed there was little room for manoeuvre left in the talks with Switzerland and that the ECU 200 road toll was now a fixed rate . It regarded the calculations submitted by Switzerland as by and large plausible .
The Commission also pointed to the advantages of concluding an agreement with Switzerland , especially because if the talks failed , Switzerland could autonomously levy a road toll , that it could then also take account of the external costs and that this would put any further tunnel building in Switzerland at risk .
On the other hand , the conclusion of an agreement with Switzerland would mean that as from the year 2005 , 40-tonne HGVs could drive through Switzerland quite freely and the road-use charge system would be fair .
So the Commission regarded the transport negotiations with Switzerland as concluded , although Austria and most of the other Member States do not agree .
During the discussion , several Member States called for further improvements in the draft agreement and , in the event that this was not possible , for it to be rejected ; these states were the Netherlands , Belgium , France , Spain , Greece and Italy .
The others were in favour of accepting it .
We too believe that there is little margin for improvement .
That means that our acceptance or rejection of it depends on whether a satisfactory solution can be found to the question of the Euro-Vignette .
I must say that the matter you have just raised again is more or less what we have already discussed .
It is now up to the Commission to see whether there is a chance of achieving a uniform rate acceptable to all parties concerned .
As I said , there was only a short , informal debate on the subject and the next step envisaged is the initial consideration of overland transport under the Austrian Presidency in the Council of Transport Ministers on 1 October , although again merely as a policy debate , since presumably the question of charges will not be debated formally before the German elections .
As the author is not present , Question No 6 lapses .
Question No 7 by Jonas Sjöstedt ( H-0738 / 98 ) , deputised for by Mrs Eriksson
Subject : Leaving the EU
There is great dissatisfaction in Sweden with membership of the EU , and a series of opinion polls has shown that the majority of the population is against membership .
At the same time there is a debate on the consequences if Sweden voted against the third stage of EMU in a referendum , and whether this could put the country on a course to leave the Union .
For example , there is talk of the possibility of organizing a referendum on withdrawal after the people rejected EMU .
The matter is complicated by the fact that the Treaty contains no clear provisions on withdrawal from the Union .
What is the Council 's view ?
What are the requirements if a country is to leave the EU ?
What actual procedure would be involved ?
I give the floor to the President-in-Office to reply to Mrs Eriksson .
Mr President , Mrs Eriksson , pursuant to Article 240 of the EC Treaty , that Treaty is concluded for an unlimited period .
No provision is made in the Treaty for a Member State to withdraw unilaterally from the European Communities .
The Council has never been faced with this question to date and nor has it ever discussed it .
I know that the Council has not discussed this issue , but I would put the following consideration to the President-in-Office . Joining the EU is an act of free will .
Surely it is not unreasonable to call for discussion on what should happen if people , of their own free will , decide that they no longer wish to belong . It is high time we addressed this eventuality - and not just because of disaffection in my own country , Sweden .
Mr President , Mrs Eriksson , I can only add a few theoretical comments on what the doctrine is in principle , but it has in fact never been applied and no provision is made for it in the Treaty .
Neither the EU Treaty nor the three Treaties establishing the Communities provide for the right for an individual state to withdraw .
It follows that , in principle , it is out of the question for a Member State to withdraw or resign .
The Member States are the masters of the Treaties and their commitment to these Treaties is founded on their resolve to accept long-term membership ; of course in the final analysis - according to doctrine at least - they can suspend this by an act to the contrary , an actus contrarius .
But the withdrawal of one Member State would require the agreement of all the others and would probably require amending the Treaty and observance of all the general requirements set out in the Vienna Convention on treaty law .
Thank you for the answer , Madam President-in-Office .
Does that mean that membership of the EU bears no relation to international law and the Vienna Convention ?
Is it not possible under the Vienna Convention to terminate membership of a body , if the preconditions are no longer present or for other reasons ?
That was one point .
The other matter is that a question was put to Mr de Silguy yesterday , to which he replied that Sweden was obliged to participate in economic and monetary union and did not have the same freedom to decide for itself as Germany acquired under the Karlsruhe judgment .
Is it really also the view of the presidency of the Council that Sweden is obliged to participate in economic and monetary union and does not have the freedom that the German Bundestag enjoys ?
Mr President , Mr Bonde , I already said quite clearly in my initial reply that , firstly , the Treaty does not make provision for this matter and , secondly , it has never come up ; I have also explained the prevailing doctrine .
To consider a theoretical , hypothetical case is one thing ; the real situation is another , and in general terms , as I indicated , there is the Vienna Convention on treaty law .
That means I can only repeat what I just said .
If you like I will repeat it again .
Thank you very much , Mrs Ferrero-Waldner .
Mr Krarup , do you not feel that the explanation has already been repeated and that the President-in-Office made it clear that she had no further explanations to offer ?
If you insist , I can give you the floor for one minute , but I must remind you that subjects cannot be prolonged when no further discussion is possible .
You have the floor for one minute .
I agree entirely with you , Mr President , in that the President-in-Office has given an answer to the effect that , if all the other Member States agree , a Member State can terminate its membership , and that is , I suppose , selfevident in law .
At the same time , the President-in-Office referred to Article 240 , which states that the Treaty is concluded for an unlimited period .
I therefore understand the statement of the President-in-Office to mean that the EU Council of Ministers takes the view that a Member State cannot withdraw from the European Union unless all Member States agree .
In view of the prevailing uncertainty , I would like to ask the President-in-Office to confirm this understanding .
Mr President , Mr Krarup , I did not say that .
I said that I am speaking on behalf of the Council and that pursuant to Article 240 of the EC Treaty , this Treaty is concluded for an unlimited period and that there is no provision made for unilateral withdrawal .
But I also said that the question has been discussed in theoretical terms , and that is all I have to say on the matter .
I believe if you want to go into this question in more detail , you will have to consult an expert in international law , not the Council whom I represent here .
Question No 8 by Maj Theorin ( H-0742 / 98 ) , deputised for by Mrs Lööw
Subject : The white-slave trade
Trafficking in women is a serious problem which does not get a great deal of attention .
Thousands of young women are working as prostitutes in the Member States of the EU .
Many of them were lured or abducted from poverty and unemployment in the East to be exploited as prostitutes in the West .
Their lives are spent held captive by pimps in complete isolation from the outside world .
Their passports and identity papers are taken from them and , deprived of any rights , they are forced to earn the money the pimps paid for them .
This is a modern slave trade and it is beyond belief that it should be happening in Europe today .
What steps does the Council intend to take to prevent this abuse of human beings ?
I give the floor to the President-in-Office to reply to Mrs Lööw .
Mr President , Mrs Lööw , the Council is well aware of the serious problems raised by the increasingly worrying phenomenon described by the honourable Member and has taken a number of initiatives aimed at putting a stop to it , both in the general context of trafficking in human beings and with specific reference to trafficking in women for the purpose of sexual exploitation .
As regards trafficking in human beings in general , given the various dimensions of this phenomenon , the Council has taken action at different levels , covering aspects of migration policy and judicial and police cooperation .
On 29 November 1996 the Council adopted a joint action on the basis of Article K.3 of the Treaty on European Union , establishing an incentive and exchange programme for persons responsible for combating trade in human beings and the sexual exploitation of children , what is known as the STOP programme .
On 16 December 1996 , the Council adopted a further joint action , also on the basis of Article K.3 of the Treaty on European Union , extending the mandate given to the Europol Drugs Unit to cover , inter alia , the exchange of information and intelligence in relation to crimes involving clandestine immigration networks and traffic in human beings .
On 24 February 1997 , the Council adopted a joint action on the basis of Article K.3 of the Treaty on European Union , concerning action to combat trafficking in human beings and sexual exploitation of children .
These joint actions require the Member States to take specific action at national level to make trafficking a punishable offence under national law .
It also establishes forms of judicial cooperation in the investigations and judicial processes relating to trafficking in human beings .
From 24 to 26 April , an EU ministerial conference was held in The Hague with the aim of drawing up a list of measures in line with the UN General Assembly 's Resolution No 5 / 66 on combating traffic in women .
These measures are summarised in the final declaration of the High Ministerial Declaration and European Guidelines for Effective Measures to prevent and combat Trafficking in Women for the Purpose of Sexual Exploitation .
In addition , the Council is following with great attention the developments taking place in this matter within the United Nations , specifically the initiatives aiming at the conclusion of universal instruments against trafficking in children or trafficking in illegal immigrants .
The Council is coordinating the positions of the Member States with a view to a rapid successful outcome of these initiatives .
Concerning trafficking in women for the purpose of sexual exploitation , in particular , in April 1998 the European Union launched two information campaigns in Poland and Ukraine , together with the United States - and in the framework of the new transatlantic agenda - to combat such trafficking .
All I really wish to do is to thank the President-in-Office for a very thorough answer .
The purpose of Mrs Theorin 's question was to obtain an assurance that the Council agrees with the Commission and Parliament on the need to address this matter .
We are all aware of the difficulties involved .
It is a hidden problem and therefore not easily located .
An efficient system of police cooperation is required , and I am pleased to see that Europol has now had its mandate broadened accordingly .
The whole issue also needs to be raised in the context of enlargement .
We have an ideal forum here for real dialogue with the Central and Eastern European countries .
In Sweden at any rate , it tends to be women from the CEECs that are exploited the worst .
Mr President , Mrs Lööw , I certainly have a few more comments to make on this particular question .
In autumn last year , the federal minister presented a draft convention on trafficking to the UN General Assembly .
In his statement to the 52nd General Assembly , he said that this draft would probably be submitted to the next meeting of the UN Commission on crime prevention .
That has now been done .
After the very positive feedback from this initiative , it was agreed with Italy to pursue this initiative jointly , with the Italians concentrating mainly on the question of trafficking on the high seas .
At its meeting in April , the UN Commission on crime prevention decided to further pursue the project of an international framework convention against organised crime , although restricting its scope to general legal assistance and extradition provisions .
Specific crimes were to be dealt with in protocols to the framework convention .
It was agreed to draw up a protocol against trafficking as such .
It was also agreed to draw up protocols on traffic in women and children and on handguns .
With a view to formalising the negotiations on this framework convention and the protocols , the UN General Assembly 's Commission on crime prevention recommended the adoption of a resolution providing for the creation of an ad hoc committee to draft a framework convention .
This committee was tasked immediately to start negotiations on a trafficking protocol on the basis of this Austro-Italian initiative .
At the first informal meeting of the ad hoc committee in Buenos Aires from 31 August to 4 September this year , Austria and Italy submitted a draft protocol on trafficking supported by the EU , which was endorsed by the 60 or so delegations who attended it .
Formal negotiations on the protocol will begin in Vienna in January and it is expected that we shall conclude them by March .
The convention is scheduled for completion in the year 2000 .
On the question of traffic in women and children , it was emphasised that it is particularly important carefully to observe the procedure under the human rights convention for drafting an additional protocol to the convention on children 's rights .
But since we do not yet have a draft text for that protocol on traffic in women and children , the USA agreed to submit one no later than March ; so this too is an ongoing process .
In addition to specific provisions on police cooperation and combating trafficking on the high seas , the protocol provides in particular that the traffickers must either be punished or extradited to other treaty partners , aut dedere aut iudicare .
However , the illegal immigrants must not be punished as accessories .
They can only be accused of infringing immigration provisions but not of having committed a crime .
That is what I wished to add .
Question No 9 by Nuala Ahern ( H-0744 / 98 )
Subject : Proposed measures by the Council on the unacceptable risks to citizens and the environment posed by nuclear plants
What steps will the Council take during Austria 's Presidency to intervene in cases such as Mochovce in Slovakia and Sellafield in the UK , where nuclear plants pose unacceptable risks to citizens and the environment of neighbouring states ?
I give the floor to the President-in-Office to answer Mrs Ahern 's question .
Mrs Ahern , as I pointed out in my reply to you and Mr Rübig during Question Time at the July part-session , the Council attaches enormous importance to protecting the population from the risks of ionising radiation and to the question of nuclear safety both within and outside the borders of the European Union .
So it is closely monitoring the observance of the internationally recognised principles of nuclear safety .
It pays special attention to this question in external relations and in particular in its relations with the Central European countries that wish to join the European Union .
The principles , priorities and aims of Slovakia 's accession , of which the House has been informed , provide specifically that Slovakia must apply the internationally recognised principles of nuclear safety when the Mochovce nuclear power station comes into operation .
Furthermore , accession involves carrying out a realistic programme to shut down Bohunice .
The corresponding measures must form part of a long-term overall energy strategy , geared to efficiency and diversification .
The Council has regularly monitored the progress of work on the Mochovce nuclear power station and taken every opportunity to draw Slovakia 's attention to the importance of nuclear safety .
After the Austrian Government informed the Council at its meeting of 25 May of the imminent entry into operation of the Mochovce nuclear power station , the President of the Council wrote to the Slovak foreign ministry to repeat his concern and at the same time to express his confidence in the competence of the Slovak nuclear supervisory authority and his conviction that the Slovak authorities would cooperate closely with the International Atomic Energy Agency .
It is worth noting that Mr van den Broek has made a similar approach to the Slovak authorities .
In adopting Euratom Directive 96 / 29 fixing the basic safety standards to protect the health of workers and the general public against the dangers of ionising radiation , the Council also tightened up most of the existing Community provisions in this field , by making the relevant standards more binding .
In this respect , it should also be noted that this directive applies in all Member States , so that it covers the Sellafield nuclear plant to which Mrs Ahern refers in her question .
Your attention is also drawn to the provisions of Chapter III of the Euratom Treaty concerning health and safety and Chapter VII on safeguards for nuclear plants within the European Community .
As I said in July , the Council will examine any proposals submitted by the Commission on improving the health protection of the population and the safety of nuclear power stations with all due care .
Let me assure Mrs Ahern that these questions really are of central concern to the European Union and our presidency .
I have to say that , expressions of concern apart , there do not appear to be any concrete proposals .
It is quite contrary to what I heard from a government minister when I visited Austria with the Green Group in July for the commencement of the presidency .
We had assurances that Austria would act and be proactive and make proposals .
Has the Austrian presidency made any efforts to make proposals in relation to transfrontier contamination or emissions or accidents from radiation ?
Has it considered tabling any amendments or made proposals to do so to the Euratom Treaty to allow for peer review from another Member State for a neighbouring nuclear power station ?
Mr President , Mrs Ahern , let me emphasise yet again that we take very seriously any possible threats to the safety of the people of Europe arising out of possible defects in nuclear power stations both inside and outside the Community .
The Austrian Presidency takes the view that any reasonable policy of protection against nuclear radiation must involve full observance of the EU and international provisions in force , if not of more stringent rules .
By applying these principles , the presidency seeks to give new impetus to its examination of the Commission 's proposals on the accession of the Community to the nuclear safety convention and the joint international convention on the safe management of irradiated fuel and radioactive waste .
Mrs Ferrero-Waldner , please stay with us on this subject , since I have another supplementary question from Mr Smith .


However , before I give him the floor , I must say that I have been intrigued to see that Mr Smith has moved towards the right of the House , along with Mr Falconer , and I wonder if this has any political significance .
It is just a case of presidential curiosity on my part .
I give the floor to Mr Smith to put his supplementary question .
Of course , I have moved to my left and Mr Falconer has moved even further left .
That may give you some cause for concern .
I would like to thank the President-in-Office for having replied to Mrs Ahern and for her well-expressed concerns about safety .
I would therefore draw to her attention a report by the British Health and Safety Executive about the safety of the Dounreay nuclear installation where it says that the team ( Health and Safety Executive ) found many chronic safety problems and , in the fuel cycle area , conditions ranged from the good to the very bad .
It is my understanding that the directive applies to the United Kingdom .
The Euratom Treaty too applies to the UK .
Why has it taken so long to find out this serious state of affairs at Dounreay ?
Thank you , Mr Smith .
I am not at all clear as to what you consider to be the right and the left of the House .
I ought to warn you , however , that if you continue to move towards what you term the left , you will find yourself in the Group of the European People 's Party .
It is up to you .
Mrs Ferrero-Waldner , you now have the floor to answer Mr Smith 's supplementary question .
Mr President , Mr Smith , I would ask you to put this question about the Dounreay nuclear installation to the Commission , because it is up to the Commission to ensure observance of the Treaty and specifically of the provisions laid down by the Treaty .
So it has all the necessary information to give you a reliable answer .
But in general terms , let me tell you once again that of course the Council will always check to ensure very stringent compliance with the Community standards and international principles that are in force in the nuclear sector , especially with regard to accession negotiations .

Question No 10 by Sören Wibe ( H-0749 / 98 ) , deputised for by Mr Falconer
Subject : Relations with Israel and Palestine
It is most important that the outside world should put pressure on Israel to perform its part in the peace process .
What action does the Austrian Presidency intend to take to bring the collective pressure of the EU Member States to bear on Israel to persuade it for example to hand back the land it confiscated from the Palestinians and to repatriate Palestinian refugees ?
I give the floor to the President-in-Office to reply to Mr Falconer .
Mr President , Mr Falconer , the European Union is extremely concerned at the continued deadlock in the Middle East peace process , which is a constant threat to stability in the region .
The Union regards the peace process as the only means to achieve peace and security for Israel , the Palestinians and the neighbouring Arab states .
The Union is taking an active part in the endeavours to promote the peace process .
It will apply all its political influence to finding a solution .
In this context , the Austrian Presidency is seeking a dialogue with all the conflicting parties .
The visit to Vienna of President Arafat on 30 July , during which the Austrian Presidency gathered up-to-date information on the Palestinian point of view , forms part of that endeavour .
In spite of our attempts to enhance the European Union 's role in the region , we are aware that for the time being the USA will remain the main mediator in the peace process .
The EU will therefore continue to give strong support to the US mediation efforts in every way and to coordinate its own approach closely with that of the United States .
A few months ago , the USA launched a determined mediation effort to secure a further Israeli troop withdrawal from the West Bank in accordance with the Interim Agreement and the 1997 Hebron accords .
The European Union believes that the American efforts , which have been followed by the resumption of direct bilateral negotiations between the Israelis and the Palestinians , offer good prospects for getting the peace process started again .
With the appointment of an EU special envoy for the peace process in 1996 , the Union considerably enhanced its commitment and presence in the region .
Ambassador Moratinos is in constant contact with all the parties .
He is putting forward the European Union 's point of view and advancing specific EU initiatives , for example to overcome the effects of the Israeli policy of closures .
Another area of EU activities is the strengthening of the anti-terrorism capabilities of the Palestinians .
The EU is also preparing input into the final status talks on the autonomous area .
One area on which the EU is concentrating is precisely the question of refugees , which will be a central and very difficult point of the final status negotiations .
Since early 1997 , the EU , through its heads of mission in Tel Aviv , has been monitoring Israeli settlement activities , the situation in Jerusalem and the human rights situation in the West Bank and Gaza .
The Union has made public the information it gathered in extremely summary form .
As you know , the European Union is by far the largest donor to the Palestinians and will without any doubt continue this supportive role in the forthcoming pledging period , beginning in 1999 .
Supporting the Palestinian people economically and in the humanitarian field is in itself giving a strong political signal to Israel to break the deadlock in the peace process .
Mr President , I thank the President-in-Office for her answer to the question .
Israel is an island of pluralist democracy in that part of the world and obviously we all wish it well .
But we cannot stand idly by whilst it occupies land which belongs to others illegally in the face of United Nation resolutions calling for the land to be handed back , which was the crux of the agreement you referred to earlier .
May I draw the Council 's attention to its remarks about its role in certain matters .
This Chamber is empty because you are the Council , you are the cornerstone of democratic accountability , and it is not good enough to pass it over to the Commission .
Therefore , I ask you to coordinate a response with the Commission by examining our trade agreements in order to expedite this matter and perhaps assist in resolving this whole tawdry mess we have got ourselves into .
Mr President , Mr Falconer , the further Israeli troop withdrawal from the West Bank provided for in the Interim Agreement between Israel and the Palestinians is long overdue .
For several months now , the USA has been trying to mediate with a view to persuading the Israelis to withdraw from a further 13 % of the West Bank .
An agreement to that effect would enable the parties to resume the negotiations on the final status of the Palestinian autonomous area , which are due to be completed by 4 March 1999 according to the original timetable .
Although the US proposals do not match up to the Palestinian wishes , Mr Arafat accepted them .
The Israelis reject them on the grounds of security interests , but have proposed a 10 + 3 % formula , which provides that 3 % of the land around Israeli settlements would be a nature conservation area over which Israel would retain final responsibility for security .
Of course I know that the Security Council resolutions to which you referred are most important here .
And we are endeavouring to make the European Union 's role in the peace process more visible too , because the foundation stones for resolving the conflict remain - and I agree with you here - the principles of Madrid and Oslo , in particular ' land for peace ' , full implementation of the existing contractual provisions of the Israeli-Palestinian Interim Agreement and the relevant UN Security Council decisions .
We strongly support continued EU economic assistance to the Palestinian people .
Palestinian economic growth is a prerequisite for political stability .
Your other point , namely the question of trade agreements , does in fact primarily concern the Commission .
So I would ask you to put that question to the Commission .
Question No 11 by Jens-Peter Bonde ( H-0751 / 98 )
Subject : Right of access to documents and plea of confidentiality of Council discussions
The plea was concern for the confidentiality of Council discussions when access to documents was refused in 6890 instances in 1996 / 97 compared with 4490 in 1994 / 95 .
Why has confidentiality apparently increased so much when the desire for transparency has been trumpeted to such an extent ?
I give the floor to the President-in-Office to answer Mr Bonde 's question .
Mr President , Mr Bonde , the information the Council has on this matter does not seem to tally with the questioner 's .
For the second report on the implementation of Council Decision 731 / 93 / EC on public access to Council documents suggests that the proportion of documents transmitted rose from 58.7 % in 1994 / 95 to 78.3 % in 1996 / 97 , although the number of documents requested had increased substantially .
That means that of the 3325 documents concerned in the period 1996 / 97 , 2605 were made available .
Over the period 1994 / 95 only 378 documents were requested , of which the applicants were granted access to 222 .
This trend reflects the experience the Council and its General Secretariat have gleaned in the practical implementation of this policy and proves - as indeed the Council noted in the conclusions it adopted on 29 June 1998 - that Decision 731 / 93 / EC on openness and transparency has been effective .
The Council will continue its efforts to make its activities more transparent .
In this context , in its conclusions of 29 July this year , the Council expressed its resolve to ensure as wide as possible access to documents relating to acts that it issues as legislator and only to apply Article 4 ( 2 ) of Decision 731 / 93 / EC where absolutely necessary .
We have all noticed that many more documents are being supplied in both the Commission and the Council than before , and it is good that Parliament 's campaign for greater openness has hit home .
We are glad of that .
But in the latest report there is a tiresome tendency for the argument , which we really hate in Parliament , invoking the confidentiality of discussions to crop up more and more often as a reason for making refusals , which are - it is quite true - relatively fewer , but that justification - the secrecy of discussions - does crop up increasingly often , and I find it difficult to see what valid arguments support this view .
The public interest must weigh more heavily in almost all cases than concern for the confidentiality of past discussions .
Mr President , Mr Bonde , I have just given you detailed figures that show that confidentiality is in fact being applied less and less .
At the forthcoming extraordinary meeting of Heads of State and Government in Pörtschach in Austria , we will raise the questions of bringing Europe closer to the people , transparency , subsidiarity , and so forth .
This will certainly offer another opportunity to call for even greater transparency .
But by and large , I believe that these Council figures - and I am only speaking for the Council here - show that we are taking a quite different approach now from in the past .
Let me add that on 19 March 1998 it was decided to make a data register available to the public as soon as possible to supplement the existing system of electronic data transmission .
This multilingual data register will be available on the Internet so that every citizen can access Council documents by title , date and number .
Question No 12 by Olivier Dupuis ( H-0752 / 98 )
Subject : Georgia
Georgia is about to become a full member of the Council of Europe .
It has to contend with a bitter civil war in Abkhazia , brought about largely by forces and interests outside its control . It has taken a unilateral decision to bring its legislation into line with Union law .
It stands at the crossroads of communications with Central Asia , a matter of strategic importance to the Union .
It holds a decisive key to the vast Central Asian oil reserves .
However , notwithstanding all these considerations , it does not appear on any ' list ' of applicant countries .
Given that Georgia plainly has a crucial role to play on the European stage and the region in which it lies is of paramount economic and political significance for the EU , does not the Council believe that it would be in the Union 's best interests and highly desirable and essential from the political point of view to send a message to the Georgian authorities that any Georgian application to join the Union would receive the utmost attention ?
What moves , if any , has the Council already made in that direction ?
I give the floor to the President-in-Office to answer Mr Dupuis 's question .
Mr President , Mr Dupuis , when signing the partnership and cooperation agreement with Georgia on 22 April 1996 , the EU stressed the common values it shares with Georgia and recognised that both sides wished to strengthen existing links and widen established relations .
The EU further recognised in this context that support for the independence , sovereignty and territorial integrity of Georgia would contribute to the safeguarding of peace and stability in Europe .
The partnership and cooperation agreement established regular political dialogue on bilateral , regional and international issues of mutual interest and supported the wish of Georgia to establish closer cooperation with European institutions .
Pending the ratification and entry into force of the partnership and cooperation agreement , the European Community , wishing to ensure the rapid development of trade relations with Georgia , concluded on 29 April 1997 an interim agreement with Georgia , which entered into force on 1 September 1997 .
This agreement aims to provide for the speedy implementation of the trade and trade-related provisions of the partnership and cooperation agreement .
The Council considers that the full potential of the partnership and cooperation agreement should be implemented as a priority before considering new initiatives or agreements between the Community and Georgia .
I should like to thank the Minister for the long answer which she gave , but I fear that once again , although a great deal has been done , we have not done what is really necessary .
Georgia is in a strategic position , since it has common borders with Russia , which is currently not in a very good situation .
It is in a strategic position for the EU and for some countries within the EU , particularly the Minister 's own country .
I believe that we could do a great deal more , but we need a political signal , a political signal that has never reached the ears of the Georgian authorities . It is a signal which never reached the ears of the Yugoslav authorities either and led to the tragedy which we are all too familiar with , even though we were aware of the situation in the early 1980s .
There is also the parallel problem of Abkhazia in Georgia , or the problems in Ossetia - in fact there are many problems , but there are also some positive aspects .
Azerbaijan is very close to us and we could conceivably draw up a far-reaching plan which , using Georgia as a platform , would create an area of stability in this region .
Does the Minister think that we could go a little further and work towards a political approach to the situation ?
Mr President , Mr Dupuis , let me point out first of all that an application for accession represents a statement of political will on the part of a third country to become part of a wider community of states such as the EU .
But to date Georgia has not applied for accession to the EU .
For the rest , as you know , the European Union 's normal practice in its relations with third countries consists first of exhausting all the opportunities offered by existing agreements , such as the partnership agreement ; which has not yet been done to the full .
Prior to taking any other steps , the EU must first act within that framework and develop its economic relations and extend its cooperation with Georgia .
Let me also tell you that the Austrian Presidency of the Council did indeed initiate a new discussion of principle , at the informal Salzburg Council , where we considered how we could involve states that do not at present have any prospect of accession in a special partnership system , for instance a partnership for Europe , similar to the NATO partnership for peace .
We discussed that informally in the Council at the time , but many states still felt the time was not yet ripe and rejected the idea .
Question No 13 by Alex Smith ( H-0753 / 98 )
Subject : Radioactive and toxic waste
Following the ministerial agreement at the meeting of the Ospar Convention controlling the discharge to sea of radioactive and toxic wastes , held at Sintra in Portugal in July , what monitoring of policy commitments by EU Member States not to radioactively pollute neighbouring states is planned by the Presidency ?
I give the floor to the President-in-Office to answer Mr Smith 's question .
Mr President , Mr Smith , no proposal to this effect has been presented to the Council since the conference of Ospar contracting parties in July , and as the honourable Member surely knows , the presidency does not have the power to introduce an instrument or mechanism for monitoring whether the Member States have fulfilled their obligations in relation to environmental pollution .
The Council notes that Articles 21 and 23 in particular of that agreement contain provisions for monitoring whether the contracting parties are fulfilling their obligations and ensuring that they do so .
That means the contracting parties can do so , but not the Council .
President-in-Office , it is a pretty sad state of affairs if we have no instrument to ensure some monitoring of commitments freely entered into at ministerial conferences .
Could I ask the Council , before the end of the current presidency , to give us a progress report on how these commitments have been carried out during the presidency ?
Mr President , Mr Smith , I am sorry but unfortunately I have to deny your request , since it is not within the Council 's power to introduce environmental monitoring instruments .
Madam President-in-Office , we are all concerned about nuclear safety .
Can you envisage a new legal basis for settling nuclear safety questions on a Europe-wide basis in future ?
Mr President , Mr Rübig , this is a question the Council has not considered so far .
I believe we ought to discuss it in the appropriate working parties .
I am quite happy to do so .
But we do not have a proposal from the Commission , which is usually the first step .
And we must have a Commission proposal before we can discuss any options at all .
Madam President , Slovenia is operating a nuclear power station near the Austrian border .
We have been informed that irradiated waste is being stored in a surface storage facility , but that final storage has not yet been decided .
We find this unacceptable and unsafe .
If accession talks are held with Slovenia , will the question of nuclear safety and final storage also be raised in those negotiations ?
Mr President , Mr Pirker , in general let me say that this and similar questions are of course raised during accession negotiations , in particular the question of nuclear safety .
The Council will always ensure during accession negotiations that the Community norms in force , and in particular all the international principles in the nuclear sector , are stringently observed .
For the rest , the Austrian Presidency holds regular bilateral talks with Slovenia .
That is a subject I do not want to go into here , but the talks do also cover these specific matters .
As the author is not present , Question No 14 lapses .
Question No 15 by Wayne David ( H-0756 / 98 )
Subject : Human rights in Iraq
Is the Council aware that the Muslim spiritual leader , Al-Shaik Mohammed Al-Ghorawi and three of his aides were killed in Najaf , Iraq on 18 June , possibly by Saddam Hussein 's agents .
What pressure is the Council bringing to bear on the Iraqi regime in order to end abuses of human rights of this kind ?
I give the floor to the President-in-Office to answer Mr David 's question .
Mr President , Mr David , the Council is deeply concerned about the massive and systematic violation of human rights in Iraq .
However , the fact that Iraq is under a severe UN sanctions regime , and the very limited EU diplomatic presence in Baghdad , limits the Union 's possibilities for monitoring and taking steps in reaction to specific cases of human rights violations in Iraq .
I thank the President-in-Office for her reply .
I am encouraged to hear of the Council 's concern over the situation in Iraq and in particular the death of these four clerics .
I should like to emphasise the gravity of the situation .
Bad as these four murders are , there is a strong suspicion that Saddam Hussein 's government is seeking to eliminate the entire leadership of the Shiite Muslims in that country .
This is completely intolerable .
I would urge the Council in the strongest possible terms to do whatever it can to make sure there is at least some modicum of respect for human rights in Iraq .
I therefore call on the President-in-Office , as a matter of urgency , to make sure that all efforts are made to put the greatest possible pressure on the regime in Iraq to improve the situation .
Mr President , Mr David , let me reply as follows . In its resolution submitted at the 54th meeting of the UN Human Rights Commission in March / April 1998 , the European Union set out its position on the situation in Iraq and condemned the widespread and systematic violation of human rights and the use of terrorist measures .
The Union will do the same in a resolution to be submitted at the next UN General Assembly and will once again urgently call on Iraq to cooperate with the UN human rights agencies , and in particular with Mr Max van der Stoel , the special rapporteur for Iraq , whose mandate was extended for another year at the 54th meeting of the UN Human Rights Commission .
Unfortunately the European Union 's presence in sovereign Iraqi territory is extremely limited , which makes it impossible for the EU to denounce the human rights violations by Saddam Hussein 's regime and effectively monitor the respect for human rights .
But the presidency will not fail to seek detailed information about the case you have raised here and will then discuss this question again with the UN General Assembly and with Mr van der Stoel .
Question No 16 by José Apolinário ( H-0758 / 98 )
Subject : Political situation in East Timor
In view of the latest developments concerning East Timor , and , in particular , the positions taken by the Council , can the Presidency state what initiatives it intends to take over the political situation in East Timor ?
I give the floor to the President-in-Office to answer Mr Apolinário 's question .
Mr President , Mr Apolinário , in pursuance of the objectives set out in its common position of 25 June 1996 , the European Union continues to support the initiatives undertaken in the UN framework ; these may contribute to resolving the question of East Timor through a fair , comprehensive and internationally acceptable solution which fully respects the rights of the East Timorese people , in accordance with the relevant resolutions of the UN General Assembly and in conformity with the principles enshrined in the UN Charter .
The European Union sent a troika mission to East Timor , which was there from 26 to 30 June .
Following a Council decision , the troika mission report was published on 24 July .
The main outcome of this mission is as follows . Firstly , according to its members , any long-term solution to the East Timor issue must respect the wishes of the East Timorese people .
Secondly , a dialogue should be opened without delay , which should include the representatives of the East Timorese people .
Thirdly , all partners must show flexibility in the negotiations .
Fourthly , visible confidence-building measures should be implemented immediately .
Let me also emphasise that the all-inclusive intra-Timorese dialogue has now been held three times , with Austria acting as host on all three occasions .
The next round of talks is scheduled for October , again in Austria .
On 3 and 4 August , tripartite talks were held in New York between the UN Secretary-General and the foreign ministers of Indonesia and Portugal .
The European Union noted the results with satisfaction .
These include closer involvement of the East Timorese people in the search for a solution .
The members of the troika mission also supported this .
I believe it is enormously important that we make further progress in confidence building among the various East Timorese groups , and I believe that in future we must play an even greater role in seeking a satisfactory solution acceptable to all parties .
Mr President , I would like to begin by acknowledging and thanking the Austrian Presidency for its comprehensive , exhaustive and diligent answer to my question ; I would also like to emphasise that , since Austria hosted the Timorese discussions , we naturally have the highest expectations as regards the Austrian Presidency 's endeavours concerning East Timor and would urge it to pursue an active policy in order to advance the situation there .
I should also like to raise the matter of the steps the presidency intends to taken in the light of Parliament 's insistence on the unconditional release of all political prisoners , particularly Xanana Gusmão , and given that , in the context of relations between the European Union and the ASEAN countries , it is becoming necessary and desirable to enhance the protection of human rights and respect for fundamental freedoms and , finally , to secure the right of the Timorese people to self-determination through consultation .
I would like to acknowledge the presidency 's response and restate my confidence that the Austrian Presidency will persevere with the efforts begun by the Austrian Government in hosting and promoting intra-Timorese dialogue , thereby contributing to the advancement of this issue .
Mr President , Mr Apolinário , thank you for your words of encouragement .
Let me add a few comments .
On 22 July , shortly before the summer recess , I myself spoke with Ramos Horta in Lisbon ; he told me he was prepared to support the proposed autonomy provided this was only an interim solution , and that a referendum would be held on East Timor 's final status in a few years ' time .
Let me also say a few words about the matter of the prisoners that has been raised .
We too are monitoring the health of the prisoners being held in Dili jail with great concern .
Last week this matter was discussed in the Asia-Oceania working party .
The presidency 's representative in Djakarta is in constant contact with the Red Cross , which keeps him up to date on the health of all the prisoners on hunger strike .
He has also urged the Indonesian authorities to provide the necessary medicines and medical care .
According to the Austrian embassy in Djakarta , which represents the presidency , a doctor visits the hunger strikers regularly and has confirmed that the health situation is under control .
On Xanana Gusmão , let me point out that of course the question of the prisoners and the release of Xanana Gusmão was also raised during the talks with Ramos Horta , but clearly there will have to be further talks under the aegis of the United Nations in New York .
As you know , a few of the East Timorese who took refuge in the Austrian embassy in Djakarta are still there .
Here too , we are seeking a solution acceptable both to the East Timorese and to the two conflicting parties .
Madam President-in-Office , I have two quite specific questions .
The first concerns the proposal to demilitarise East Timor that keeps coming up in the discussions .
The second concerns the emergence of new parties in Indonesia , where a new phenomenon is arising , namely that some of them are Islamist .
We know that East Timor has a largely Christian population .
There are fears that this could create tensions , and I wish to ask whether it might not be possible to involve the newly emerging parties in Indonesia in the democracy programmes on a partnership basis .
Mr President , Mr Posselt , on the first question , demilitarisation , I can tell you that the talks held under the aegis of the United Nations in New York are quite certainly aimed at the withdrawal of the Indonesian troops so that the first stage of demilitarisation can commence .
The freedom fighters are pursuing the same end .
On the question of political parties , all I can say is that the Austrian Presidency is seeking to invite as many future parties as possible to the dialogue in East Timor in an attempt to move forward here too , as there is little chance of a future peaceful settlement without political parties .
As the author is not present , Question No 17 lapses .
Question No 18 by Jan Andersson ( H-0765 / 98 )
Subject : Structural aid to larger countries
Aid to particularly deprived areas of major cities is a completely new feature of European structural policy .
The application of the rules on aid to urban areas contained in the Commission 's proposal for a programme for cities in the European Union is , therefore , a somewhat inappropriate instrument in countries with a small , sparsely distributed population since the rules are geared to regions and not parts of cities .
The Commission should , therefore , exempt certain areas with low population density from the nominal criterion of 100 000 inhabitants .
What action does the Council intend to take on this matter to avoid the somewhat inconsistent treatment ensuing from the present proposal ?
I give the floor to the President-in-Office to answer Mr Andersson 's question , which will be the last in this Question Time .
Mr President , the Commission has submitted no proposal to the Council for a programme for cities in the European Union .
As the honourable Member is aware , certain general Community aid measures are provided for cities of more than 100 000 inhabitants under the URBAN Community initiative for the period 1994 to 1999 .
By its nature , this initiative falls solely within the remit of the Commission .
Furthermore , on 18 March 1998 the Commission submitted a proposal for a Council regulation laying down general structural fund provisions , which include structural aids for deprived urban areas .
The Council has not yet completed its examination of this proposal .
Nor has it determined the selection criteria for deprived urban areas .
So the Council is unable to answer the honourable Member 's question .
I am grateful to the Council for its answer .
I can appreciate that it has not yet adopted its position , but I would nevertheless like to draw attention to a problem arising from the proposal submitted by the Commission .
I can point to my own country , Sweden , as an example - although the problem undoubtedly also arises in Austria and several other countries - since only two per cent of the population can benefit from this aid , which in my country means 185 000 people .
We have no areas with 100 000 inhabitants , but some with perhaps between 30 000 and 50 000 inhabitants which are fictitiously depicted as having 100 000 .
In my country , this means that just one area is likely to be able to receive assistance , so that very little of this aid can be put to use .
I therefore hope that you will bear this in mind when considering this matter in the future .
Mr President , Mr Andersson , all I can say is this . There are two articles that provide for exemptions regarding the size of the target area .
Article 9 provides that , in exceptional cases , urban areas in fairly small cities - i.e. cities with fewer than 100 000 inhabitants - can also be included .
Article 10 of that European Commission communication defines this rule more precisely and provides that , in duly justified cases , support can also be given for actions in small and mediumsized cities suffering from general economic decline .
So this means that smaller cities can also be supported under the URBAN programme .
Thank you , Mrs Ferrero-Waldner .
Since the time allotted for Question Time has now come to an end , Questions Nos 19 to 43 will receive written answers .
I should like to thank the President-in-Office of the Council once again for attending , and for the high quality of her answers .
That concludes Question Time .
( The sitting was suspended at 7.05 p.m. and resumed at 9 p.m. )

Associated companies ( continuation )
The next item is the continuation of the debate on the report ( A4-0299 / 98 ) by Mr Secchi , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy , on the proposal for a Council Directive on a common system of taxation applicable to interest and royalty payments made between associated companies of different Member States ( COM ( 98 ) 0067 - C4-0195 / 98-98 / 0087 ( CNS ) ) .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I have closely examined Mr Secchi 's report , together with the opinions and the Council directive on a common system of taxation applicable to interest and royalty payments made between associated companies of different Member States .
The first point I would like to make is that it seems to me that we should be discussing this directive in conjunction with another draft directive relating to savings in general , about which we have already been informed but which has not yet been submitted to the European Parliament .
I therefore feel that attention should be drawn to a certain inadequacy in the coordination and discussion of such important matters as income tax harmonisation .
We could , indeed perhaps should , have drawn up a multilateral agreement on harmonisation which the different countries could have used as a basis for bilaterally regulating their interests in the area of investments , economic affairs and taxation .
However , an alternative approach was adopted and I should certainly say a few words about that too .
The directive still contains a number of discrepancies regarding particular definitions , such as the concept of the establishment of a company for tax purposes .
As we all know , traditionally the location of the registered office or effective administration has been the relevant factor in international tax relations .
Here , a different criterion has been adopted .
The concept of interest , for example , and that of permanent establishment will no doubt give rise to a number of problems , particularly between those Member States which enter into agreements to eliminate double taxation of income .
In my view , this topic needs to be examined in greater detail .
Mr President , the question which is before us for discussion here is certainly a difficult one , and one and a half minutes is really only long enough to examine one aspect of it .
I think that the point about reducing VAT on labourintensive jobs is the most far-reaching .
Here , of course , the extremely difficult question of delimitation arises .
If we include broad areas , it undoubtedly leads to endless debate .
We would have to establish very clear social and ecological criteria , including first and foremost the employment requirement , and we would have to define a limited list on which to negotiate .
Basic principles , then , will enable us to make headway along the right lines .
There is a willingness to tackle this issue , and individual Member States have generally had very positive experiences here .
If the Commission were able to make progress along these lines , then we could actually achieve political success in this otherwise very technical sector .
Mr President , we are beginning to make progress with the agreement to monitor fiscal differences , which are so counterproductive for the economic future of the single market .
I welcome this first directive , which sets us on the path we need to take , and my only comment is on the timetable for its development .
I think that this report by my colleague Mr Secchi , whom we should thank for his work , should give a certain impetus and specify dates and undertakings .
Progress on fiscal matters may have to be made ' slowly but surely ' , as we say in Spain , but we should not allow the fact that the directive is to be revised in three years ' time to create doubt as to whether what we approve will also apply to other companies .
I think that we should consider a three-year period long enough , and we should announce now that this measure that is being established today for associated companies will definitely be applied to all companies .
This would prevent associations from relocating and would give legal security to this process , which is what I think it needs most .
Fiscal harmonization requires maximum political support - which this Parliament is giving - and maximum legal security .
Congratulations Commissioner Monti , my dear colleague .

I should like to begin by thanking Mr Secchi not only for his excellent report on the proposed directive on interest and royalty payments , but also more generally for the guidance and support on taxation matters which he provides in this House .

I should like furthermore to thank the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy , the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights and , indeed , Parliament as a whole for your support for the Commission 's initiatives . Your speed of response is tangible evidence of your supportive attitude .
As you know , this proposal is one of three measures contained in a package adopted last December by the Ecofin Council , and I shall say a few words at the end on the state of play concerning the other two measures .
Like you , I too regard this instrument of Community law relating to interest and royalty payments as very important because , at present , neither unilateral measures introduced by the Member States nor bilateral agreements outlawing double taxation have succeeded in eliminating completely the phenomenon of double taxation on such payments .
I am delighted that the honourable Members are supporting this proposal .
I have taken careful note of the amendments put forward by Mr Secchi and , in particular , Amendments Nos 1 and 2 stressing the importance of the directive for SMEs and the advisability of extending the scope of the directive to non-associated companies in the future .
The Commission shares the spirit of these two amendments , Mr Secchi , and will endeavour to ensure that it is reflected in the wording adopted by the Council .
The other amendments from the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy , Nos 3 to 6 , stress that the approach designed to produce a package of measures should not be used as a means of destroying the various elements making up that package .
These amendments also seek to restrict the Member States ' autonomy to deny companies the benefit of this directive , and to ensure that this proposal is in keeping with the Code of Conduct and the other elements of the taxation package .
The Commission endorses the thinking behind Amendments Nos 3 to 6 .
The Commission nevertheless thinks that it would be inopportune to accept them at the moment and in their current form .
Indeed , the proposal for a directive was submitted in its present form after much thought , with the intention of balancing the interests of the various Member States : those wishing the directive to apply to all types of companies and those standing to lose a considerable amount of tax revenue following the abolition of withholding tax ; those wishing this directive to be closely linked with the other elements of the package and those wishing it to be taken in isolation .
You will appreciate that , in an area still governed by the rule of unanimity , it is not easy to find an ideal solution .
In any event , the amendments have been carefully noted and will all be taken into account during discussion in the Council , once the Member States ' positions have become clearer .
The same applies to Amendments Nos 7 to 9 from Mrs Soltwedel-Schäfer , Mrs Hautala and Mr Wolf .
As to Amendment No 10 , I agree with Mr Secchi that it would be inadvisable to delay the entry into force of the directive .
Once again , Mr President , I am extremely grateful to the Members of this House for their assistance .
I shall conclude with a few words concerning recent developments on the other two measures included in the taxation package , because we are all convinced of the need to preserve a close linkage - both logical and political - between these measures .
With regard to the Code of Conduct , all the Member States have emphasised their commitment to the principles of the Code drawn up last December , and have agreed a work programme and timetable ensuring that an initial report will reach the Ecofin Council by next December .
In order to conduct an initial assessment of the measures relating to inter-group services , financial services and off-shore companies , two sub-groups have been established under the Code of Conduct Group , which is , as you know , chaired by Mr Primarolo . One sub-group is likewise chaired by the Minister , Mr Primarolo , the other by Dr Noltz .
Several meetings of these sub-groups and the main group are scheduled for the autumn .
The proposal to ensure a minimum of effective taxation on income from savings is currently before the European Parliament .
The rapporteur has been appointed , and I am confident that this House will see fit to express its opinion within a few months .
In general terms , the Commission is to report on progress made with the various elements of the package in time for the Ecofin Council on 1 December 1998 .
We therefore have a ship that is not easy to steer , charting an ambitious course .
We are all convinced that its route will be followed with the greatest attention .
There will be no lack of opportunities to report back to this House , but let me take this opportunity to thank Parliament once again for its support on this difficult voyage which is in all of our interests .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Welcome
Ladies and gentlemen , Commissioner , you will see in the gallery a group of young Italians who have won a competition organised by the Italian organisation ' Movimento per la vita ' to mark the fiftieth anniversary of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights .
I welcome these young people to the European Parliament .
Common system of VAT - Products subject to excise duty
The next item is the joint debate on the following reports :
A4-0084 / 98 by Mr Langen , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy , on the proposal for a Council Directive amending Directive 77 / 388 / EEC on the common system of Value Added Tax ( the Value Added Tax Committee ) ( COM ( 97 ) 0325 - C4-0365 / 97-97 / 0186 ( CNS ) ) ; -A4-0064 / 98 by Mr Miller , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy , on the proposal for a Council Directive amending Directive 92 / 12 / EEC on the general arrangements for products subject to excise duty and on the holding , movement and monitoring of such products ( COM ( 97 ) 0326 - C4-0394 / 97-97 / 0181 ( CNS ) ) .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Professor Monti has just explained that tax policy in Europe is an example of how not to take the easy way out .
The matter we are dealing with here today - amending the VAT directive - also falls into this category .
This subject has been on our agenda once before , in March , and at that time we postponed the report because the Council had failed to reach unanimity .
We decided by agreement with Commissioner Monti to allow more room for manoeuvre so that a majority could be obtained in favour of an amended proposal , even if this were under the new Austrian Presidency .
In March this majority could not be obtained .
Professor Monti has now worked out a compromise proposal , which is going to be dealt with on 12 October at the ECOFIN Meeting .
It is not the full proposal from March , but an amended one , which should at least make a Commission committee responsible for dealing with the main problems arising from cross-border treatment of VAT issues .
Professor Monti , Parliament welcomes the fact that there has been progress .
I would particularly like to thank you on behalf of all my colleagues here , because you belong to that group of Commissioners who set such a good example in fostering cooperation with Parliament .
You are always telling us about the Commission 's latest initiatives , you involve us .
Although we unfortunately only have the right to be consulted and unanimity in the Council is required for tax harmonisation , I would nevertheless like to emphasise our gratitude - the Parliament compliments you for your exemplary attitude .
When we need to criticise , then of course we do so - but in this case we can only praise .
The Member States have been very selfish in this field , which is why we have not been able to reach agreement hitherto .
But I believe that , once we have a single European currency , the Member States will be no longer be able to maintain their delaying tactics on harmonisation of VAT and other excise duties ( Mr Miller 's report follows a similar line to my own ) .
The single currency is a fact .
It will come into force on 1 January 1999 and by 1 July 2002 at the latest it will be the only currency , the only means of payment in the participating countries .
If we have not resolved the interpretation question by then , we should not be surprised at the huge extent of VAT and excise duty fraud in Europe .
According to recent estimates from the European Court of Auditors , the volume of fraud is now on a par with the European Union budget .
The President of the Court of Auditors , during a hearing of the Subcommittee on Monetary Affairs four months ago , estimated the amount at about DM 150 billion - the sum total of the European budget .
If we fail to resolve these issues , we no longer deserve to be taken seriously in the fight against fraud .
Professor Monti has proposed that the existing VAT Committee , which up to now has had only an advisory capacity and could only present and discuss proposals , should in future have regulatory powers on matters of interpretation .
In Parliament 's Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs there was widespread support for this proposal .
I also believe that the fact that it is part of the overall Commission programme shows that we are thinking along the right lines .
Up to now the VAT Committee could only recommend non-compulsory guidelines , but in future , at least in the implementing provisions , it is to have wider powers to prevent double taxation and , conversely , to prevent non-taxation , in other words to excluding possible ways of legally avoiding tax .
I must admit that the Member States are being very reluctant about this .
The Federal Republic of Germany has said , with reference to Article 99 of the Treaty on European Union and Article 23 ( 2 ) to ( 5 ) of the German Basic Law , that the unanimity principle could be circumvented and the co-decision powers of the German Bundesrat no longer observed .
I consider that to be a superficial argument , because all the fundamental decisions will in future still have to be taken by a unanimous vote in the ECOFIN Council .
Professor , we have tabled two amendments .
If this Committee is to have greater powers , then we would like the Commission to draw up annual reports on its work .
Furthermore , we would like to see the administrative and legal provisions transposed by 1 January 1999 , in other words when the single European currency comes into force .
Mr President , I agree with a lot of what my colleague , Mr Langen , has said tonight , and he has covered a lot of the ground I was going to touch upon .
As Members will remember , we had to take this item off the agenda in March to allow the Commission and the Council more room to manoeuvre .
I understand that , as Mr Langen has pointed out , there is a compromise position going to the ECOFIN Council in October .
It might not have been ' the Full Monty ' that we would ask for in the UK but at least it is something .
Turning to the report on excise duty which is in front of us , one of the problems that a report like this highlights is that much of the decision-making within the EU is surrounded by secrecy , which , I am sure , a lot of citizens are very worried about .
At the moment there are about 43 comitology committees dealing with indirect taxation .
To me , that is 43 too many .
We have to accept that they are there , but what we have to do is make them far more open and transparent .
That is why I and the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy have submitted a number of amendments .
I shall begin by going through the amendments .
The first one I found to be somewhat ironic .
It corrects a statement made in the directive .
The directive states that : ' it should be borne in mind that the finishing line for Community harmonisation of excise duty was crossed only a few months before the entry into force of the single market . '
I do not know who wrote that or whether that person had actually been sampling some of the products of excise duty prior to writing it .
But if you go to places like Dover or Malmö and see the goods that have been brought in from other areas , you realise that there is no harmonisation within the field of excise duty .
For somebody to write that the finishing line has been crossed is a total falsehood .
Obviously we have to correct that .
I was gentle on him ; instead of putting ' finishing line ' I just said we have crossed a ' starting line ' , because I realise that Commissioner Monti is moving towards harmonisation in the field of indirect taxation , and I wish him all the best .
The other amendment I have tabled concerns the Plumb / Delors agreement , which , if my memory serves me right , was six or seven years ago .
It was an initial agreement in an exchange of letters between the President of the Commission at that time , Jaques Delors , and the President of Parliament , Lord Plumb .
That was supposed to have been implemented in order to highlight and open up the whole question of these comitology committees .
It has never been implemented fully .
We are asking the Commission to go back and look it .
We are not asking to have power over the committees , we just want to have a look at the work they are doing .
The third amendment by the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy concerns the computerised monitoring system .
We ask for that to be introduced when the computerised monitoring system for Community transit comes into place .
Again , a technical amendment , which I would have thought very acceptable to both the Commission and business .
We would also be prepared to accept the fourth amendment by Mr des Places .
It does not say a lot but in effect it says that the administration procedure should be improved , and nobody really could argue against that .
I wish to finish on the plea that these comitology committees are operating in secret .
We are not doing anything to remedy this .
We ask the Commission to please let us have more information , so that the public in the EU can see what it is doing .
Maybe that will dispel some of the mistrust that surrounds us today .
Mr President , the Commission 's proposal to change the status of the VAT Committee from an advisory to a regulatory committee and the two amendments in the Langen report certainly represent progress .
The current transitional system of VAT has done a great deal to help the development of the single market , but administrative procedures in the Member States and the different interpretations they have given to the basic directives affect the operation of the single market and the legal certainty that should be guaranteed .
Until there is a uniform interpretation and the VAT rules are applied uniformly the neutrality of the VAT system cannot really be guaranteed and we shall continue to have a problem .
The discrepancies in the way the legislation is applied in practice undoubtedly have something do so with the Commission 's lack of executive power .
The proposal to give the Commission the executive power it needs and to make the VAT Committee a regulatory committee will put both in a stronger position and should certainly mean that the implementation of the VAT regulations is brought into line in all Member States .
The Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy was right to agree to this , but of course we also need to ensure that we in the House can continue in our role as political watchdog over the executive arm , which is why the amendment proposing an annual report from the VAT Committee deserves support from all groups .
We shall certainly be voting for it .
Thank you , Mr President , and my congratulations to the rapporteur .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to start by supporting the speech I have just heard from Mrs Thyssen , which highlights two important aspects .
One is that unfortunately for years we have been using a provisional scheme for applying Value Added Tax , not for want of hard work and effort from the Commissioner responsible for the matter , Mr Monti , but because , as you know , in order to arrive at a definitive VAT system we need unanimity between the Member States , and this is unfortunately not possible .
We therefore welcome and approve the proposals to amend the relevant directives that we are examining this evening in these two reports on taxation . We support the main points proposed by the Commission and especially those aspects which refer to making progress , although in our opinion , and I suppose also in Commissioner Monti 's opinion , the rate is too slow .
However , we have to continue to make these efforts if we are to arrive at a system which we hope will be definitive .
I would particularly like to highlight one of the proposals put forward , because I feel it is especially relevant for the sector of business which is most important for economic development and employment in the European Union : small and mediumsized undertakings .
We understand that under the Commission 's proposal , the regulatory powers given to the committee - as highlighted by Mrs Thyssen - and the scope which this would then give the Commission itself , would obviously improve the way things work , simplifying the system , giving more security to all businesses and especially offering a greater guarantee for small and medium-sized firms , which form the basis of Europe 's economy .
Mr President , I should also like to welcome the comments from the Commissioner and , in particular , from the two rapporteurs .
The points that they touch on are very important .
The sixth VAT Directive , which was originally designed to allow the abolition of tax frontiers and the creation of a common tax system , is a very important political message , particularly now when we speak about a market of 340 million people .
It is essential that we simplify and modify the VAT collection system to guarantee that success .
However , as those speakers have mentioned , very little progress has been made on this , partially because of the unanimity requirement under Article 99 but also because of a lack of action on behalf of the Commission and other institutions to force out the boat with regard to giving proper representation to the true ideals of the single market .
Members have mentioned the question of comitology .
Last night in Parliament we had a discussion with Commissioner Oreja on comitology , the proposal coming from the Commission .
I highlighted to him last night , in the context of our discussion on Mr Miller 's report tonight , that when the issue of abolition of duty- and tax-free sales arose an excise question arose , namely where excise would be paid on sales etc .
The Commission , instead of submitting a proposal to Parliament and discussing with Parliament how to overcome this problem , referred the matter to the quango of unelected , unrepresentative officials from Member State governments , to make a decision in secret and not refer it back to Parliament .
What we are looking for is more consultation , more interaction .
The euro coming into operation provides an opportunity to simplify the bureaucratic procedures .
Finally , as my Liberal colleague said , we need to have a differential VAT regime to allow for employment creation and employment growth , in particular for small and medium-sized enterprises .
Mr President , I should like to start by apologising , as I have just opened up the wrong file in my head .
I have a belated comment to make on the Secchi report .
This is rather unusual , I know , but it is a practical point .
We tabled our amendments because we do not want the necessary changes that Mr Secchi has suggested to lead to new opportunities for tax evasion and tax avoidance being created .
We would like the Member States themselves and Community legislation to take steps to ensure this does not happen .
Moving on to the issue of the VAT system , I have already made some comments on this .
What has basically happened - and here for once I really am of the same opinion as Mr Langen - is that the single currency has made the Member States prisoners of their own selfishness .
If there is a way to break out of the prison then it is through binding Community regulations .
For that reason the Green Party also welcomes the regulatory powers that are being envisaged for the VAT Committee .
Like Mr Langen , we also believe that the report to the European Parliament , which will provide transparency and also facilitate dialogue , constitutes a type of precondition .
We agree , too , that the provisions must be transposed by 1 January 1999 if the system as a whole is to be efficient .
We also regard Mr Miller 's comments as useful .
We need to look at comitology once again , going back to its origins in the Plumb / Delors Agreement , and we need to be sure that we are indeed creating a logical and coherent system , one that guarantees transparency and efficiency .
That , however , is another matter .
Mr President , we are discussing the proposals for Council directives amending the Community 's taxation system .
In such a fast-changing world as that of the new market which is taking shape , as little as five years can render a directive obsolete , causing it to need updating in the light of a Community framework that is constantly moving closer to companies - especially small ones - on the one hand and , on the other , to consumers .
The current difficulties and limitations of the system of excise duty and VAT , necessarily geared towards harmonisation among the Member States , must be overcome so that a real single market can be launched .
The advent of the euro should accelerate fiscal harmonisation .
To this end - as rightly recalled by Mr Langen in his report , for which we thank him - it is essential to ensure neutrality of taxation and to eliminate the remaining obstacles to the free movement of goods and services between Member States .
The fiscal requirements of certain economic and social sectors , especially in respect of VAT , must be taken into account and paid greater attention in this and the forthcoming proposals for directives .
I am thinking here of the non-profit and voluntary sectors as well as , in the production sector , the hotel and restaurant trade , and , finally , in the tertiary sector , commerce and tourism above all .
A more efficient VAT system , not to pay fewer taxes but to pay them more effectively , should ultimately help these sectors to create growth and investment , and hence new jobs .
After all , unemployment regrettably remains the European Union 's number one problem .
Mr President , Commissioner , all of the groups in this Parliament are unanimous in criticising how slowly the VAT process is moving .
What could we do in order to move a little more quickly ?
Would we be able to explain to society just how much the inefficiency of not having fiscal neutrality costs ?
Perhaps we should mention those countries which , instead of thinking about the justice and fairness of the system , are thinking about how much more or less they would collect depending on the form of the Commission 's proposals ?
You are right , Commissioner Monti , to appreciate the political impetus which this unanimity between the groups gives Parliament .
And you should also take advantage of the impetus , the élan vital that is going to permeate so many areas of the economic life of the European Union once we have the euro , in order to try and speed this process up a little .
Once you have identified which countries do not want to overcome the cost of inefficiency , then , Commissioner , you will have - as you know - the complete support of this Parliament .
I think that we need to find a way to encourage the Council to see that adopting the definitive VAT system involves more than just calculating exactly what each Member State collects , and to bear in mind that the Member States have a lot to gain from the establishment of a definitive system .
I think that , in this era of the euro , if the single market is to be efficient , VAT needs to have a definitive procedure .
We will all support it , Commissioner .
I would like to thank the rapporteurs for the other reports that they have drawn up , and to encourage them , because we need to adopt a different tack if we are to speed up this inefficient process , the cost of which , I would suggest , Commissioner , should be assessed quantitively .
Mr President , it is doubtless a wonderful advertisement for the closer integration of Parliament into the law-making process when we do not only discuss abstract political subjects here in the plenary , but also talk about actual examples of implementation .
This morning , for example , we talked generally about comitology and debated the need for this House to be included in the process of formulating objectives , and now with the Miller report from the Committee on Excise Duties , we have the possibility of putting this into practice .
This Committee is a very important instrument .
It has more than an advisory role , it also ensures the uniform interpretation and application of provisions on excise duty .
Our concern is with preserving transparency and the rules of democracy , particularly because Parliament deals with common legislation .
We need to know about developments in the various committees and we have to implement parliamentary guidelines .
This also applies to the Committee on Excise Duties .
In this respect , then , I find the proposal from DirectorateGeneral XXI that the Committee should not apply certain procedures in Directive 97 / 12 and particularly Article 7 interesting .
That would automatically mean amending the law without involving Parliament .
That is why I would ask the Commissioner how this proposal ties in with the general wish for Parliament to have more say and with the policy being pursued by the Commission in its reform of comitology ?

I should like to begin by thanking the rapporteurs , Mr Langen and Mr Miller , and the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy for the support which they are giving , through these reports and resolutions , to the Commission 's general aim of applying the legislation on VAT and excise duty in a more uniform manner .
I am particularly pleased that the draft resolution calls on the Council to notify Parliament , should it intend to depart from the Commission proposal .
In this respect and in general terms , I deplore the fact that the existing legal base does not allow for greater intervention in matters of such importance for the functioning of the single market .
As concerns the report by Mr Langen , whom I thank for his kindness , the purpose of this proposed directive is that the Council should confer on the Commission the power to adopt implementing rules in the field of VAT .
The Commission will be assisted in this specific task by the VAT Committee , which needs to be endowed with regulatory powers to this end .
The procedure envisaged for the committee is that of Article 2 ( III ) ( a ) of Council Decision 87 / 373 / EEC , the so-called ' comitology ' decision .
The proposal is a response to the demands put forward unanimously by all economic sectors .
Indeed , operators wishing to transact business in other Member States find themselves facing difficulties caused by divergent application of Community legislation on VAT .
This prevents them from enjoying all the potentially considerable advantages of the single market .
In other words , operators find themselves without legal certainty and , often , exposed to the risk of double taxation .
This is one of the unnecessary costs which our operators have to bear when carrying out commercial activity in another Member State .
For some operators , especially those whose turnover is on the small side - and , as has been recalled , future economic growth and employment in Europe depends very much on these firms - the lack of uniform application of Community rules on VAT is an insurmountable barrier to the European market .
Such barriers can and must be removed .
The remedy consists in adopting the right measures to ensure uniform application of the Community rules on VAT throughout the European Union .
The proposed procedure allows the Commission , together with the VAT Committee , to address and overcome these difficulties .
The Commission welcomes Parliament 's favourable response , as demonstrated by Mr Langen 's report .
I fully share the spirit of the amendments tabled , and it is for purely formal reasons that I am obliged to reject them .
The Commission acknowledges Parliament 's desire to be informed about the work of the committees assisting it ; this aspect , however , is dealt with in a Commission proposal relating to a new decision of the committee .
In relation to the matter in hand , the proposal makes it possible , by way of an across-the-board approach , to avoid specific predictions in the individual legislative measures .
With regard to the second amendment , I fully agree that the date appearing in the proposal is unrealistic , in that it has already elapsed .
I am nevertheless rather uncomfortable about replacing it with 1 January 1999 .
That would in fact mean that we are very optimistic concerning the timetable for adoption and implementation .
Given that the proposed new procedure does not require transposition by the Member States , the Commission would prefer to remain free to set a new date once the proposal is on the point of being adopted by the Council .
To conclude on the Langen report , allow me to thank you once again for your valuable support which , I believe , will enhance the likelihood of early adoption by the Council .
I should now like to touch briefly on the report drawn up by Mr Miller - to whom I am also most grateful - on the proposal for a directive , presented by the Commission in July of last year , seeking to expand the regulatory powers of the Commission , assisted by the Committee on Excise Duties , in respect of the implementing rules for the Community provisions on excise duty .
This proposal became necessary because , once the ( limited ) existing regulatory powers have been exhausted , all the Commission and the committee can do to tackle new problems is to exercise their advisory role .
The major challenge of combating fraud and contraband calls for joint action by national administrations , for which common rules are indispensable .
Furthermore , the legitimate expectations of operators to be able to enjoy , here too , all the advantages of a single market are sometimes hampered in practice by the burden of bureaucracy which varies from one Member State to another .
There are , therefore , two reasons to call for increased regulatory powers .
So much for the proposed directive in general .
Turning now to the content of the report by the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy , the Commission has to express some reservations concerning Amendment No 2 , adding two new sub-paragraphs to Article 24 ( 2 ) .
The first of these additions basically seeks to confer legal status on the informal agreement of 1988 on transparency in the activities of committees , known as the Plumb / Delors accord ; the second aims to implement the Commission decision setting up the Advisory Committee on Customs and Indirect Taxation .
As far as the first addition is concerned , I would point out that last June the Commission submitted a proposal for a decision to the Council , amending Decision 87 / 373 / EEC which governs the activities of committees .
This proposal stipulates in particular that the European Parliament should be informed on a regular basis about the work of committees .
It will accordingly receive meeting agendas , draft regulations and the results of votes .
It will also be kept informed of all measures , or draft measures , sent by the Commission to the Council for adoption .
For this reason , a reference to the Plumb / Delors accord within the directive would appear superfluous .
Concerning the other matter , the Advisory Committee on Customs and Indirect Taxation is already operational .
Nevertheless , the Commission would prefer not to mention this committee in the proposal for a directive now before us , the purpose of which is to increase regulatory powers in respect of excise duty .
The joint Committee on Customs and Indirect Taxation , by contrast , is a purely advisory committee .
Finally , the Commission agrees in principle with the last amendment .
Computerisation of excise duty monitoring is one of the Commission 's priorities in this sector .
Certain initiatives have already been taken to this end , on the basis of existing provisions , namely Articles 18 and 19 of Directive 92 / 12 / EEC , and under the Fiscalis programme .
In this context the Commission has issued a call for tenders for a feasibility study to be carried out next year .
I would however point out that the establishment of a computerised system is not the responsibility of the Commission : excise duties , unlike customs duties , are national resources , and consequently subject to supervision by the Member States .
In other words , the Commission cannot conduct monitoring instead of the Member States , nor can it fully fund such a computerisation project .
I would conclude by thanking the European Parliament once again for its support , on which we are counting for the negotiations .
There are so many linkages between the different taxation initiatives under review this evening , Mr Wolf , that I can well understand how easy it is to confuse them .
I would also recall that , over and above the individual technical aspects of the efforts which - with Parliament 's support - we are making to better coordinate taxation , the ultimate object of the exercise is growth and , in particular , employment .
Without improved coordination of taxation it will be extremely difficult to create new jobs in Europe , especially for young people , who are so much in need of these job opportunities . Young people , then , are our main concern , and how well represented they are in this House this evening .
If I may , Mr President , I should like to add my voice to yours , and on behalf of the Commission welcome the large group of youngsters here this evening .
The joint debate is closed .
The votes will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Tax harmonisation
The next item is the report ( A4-0252 / 98 ) by Mr Castagnède , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy , on the report from the Commission to the Council and to the European Parliament in accordance with Article 12 ( 4 ) of the Sixth Council Directive of 17 May 1977 on the harmonisation of the laws of the Member States relating to turnover taxes - Common system of Value Added Tax : uniform basis of assessment ( COM ( 97 ) 0559 - C4-0119 / 98 ) .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , contrary to what the ambiguous title may lead us to believe , the report we will be debating today deals with the harmonisation of VAT rates in Europe and , more specifically , with areas eligible for reduced VAT .
As you know , current Community legislation on harmonising VAT rates provides for a minimum standard rate of 15 % .
It also authorises Member States to apply one or two reduced rates which may not be lower than 5 % and which may apply solely to the provision of goods and services described in the categories referred to in Annex H to the Sixth VAT Directive .
Every two years , the Council reviews the scope of reduced rates on the basis of a report from the Commission .
The last report , drawn up in 1997 , has been submitted to us for consideration .
Before getting to the essence of the report , we would like to highlight the importance of Parliament 's role in this matter , which is in effect to give its consent to tax in a field which is already widely communitised .
Also , given that we are discussing VAT rates within the EU , Parliament should properly fulfil its role as representative of the EU 's citizens .
Having analysed the current situation with the reduced rates , the Commission has confirmed that there are indeed considerable disparities .
Only one country , Denmark , does not apply any reduced rates .
Four countries apply two reduced rates but many states which are meant to apply only one rate do in fact apply several special derogation rates such as zero rates , superreduced rates and the so-called parking rates , as they are allowed to do during the transitional period .
The Commission does not believe that the current disparity between rates causes significant harm to competition , even if certain distortions to trade have been observed .
The Commission is also not in favour of changing the list of goods and services eligible for reduced rates .
For our part , we strongly believe that the current situation of reduced VAT rates within the EU is unsatisfactory .
It is not in accordance with the demands of the single currency in the single market , nor with the attempt to introduce a new common system of VAT based on taxation in the country of origin .
It is not even in accordance with the changes to fiscal policies required in order to keep pace with developments in economic and social needs .
Next year , when VAT-inclusive prices are displayed in euros , at least in participating countries , the lack of neutrality of VAT rates in intra-community transactions will become apparent and will cause distortions in competition and increased deflection of trade .
These problems will almost certainly be amplified by developments in electronic trading .
Consequently , it is easy to understand that , for political and financial reasons , governments prefer to maintain the status quo .
As soon as this proves impossible it would , in our opinion , be much better to prepare for change .
As regards the introduction of a new common VAT system , bringing rates closer together has , until now , been seen as the last stage or as the icing on the cake .
However , we believe that the excessive disparity in rates and the conservative attitude demonstrated by Member States on this matter have considerably hindered the transition to the final system .
In view of this , although full harmonisation of these rates may be an unrealistic objective in the short term , we do believe that efforts must be made to streamline the rates structure immediately on the basis of a progressive and realistic method .
This type of method should be based on adopting precise definitions of categories of goods and services eligible for reduced rates .
It should include a time-frame for eliminating derogations which would give countries a certain amount of leeway on fixing one , or better still , two reduced rates .
We are relying on the Commission to implement a mechanism to streamline the structure of rates and this mechanism will have to be subtle . The most important thing is that this process is started .
We also feel that the categories of goods and services eligible for reduced rates should not remained fixed .
Technologies develop , as do economic and social needs , and VAT is , by nature , a regressive tax .
The aim of applying the reduced rate is to make it applicable to a wider range of essential goods and services .
Certain categories in Annex H should be adapted in this way and this is why we are in favour of certain amendments along these lines .
Generally speaking , the structure of the EU 's tax systems is detrimental to one production factor - employees .
Commissioner Monti 's proposals are extremely interesting as they apply , albeit on a trial basis , to some labour-intensive activities .
This type of proposal could benefit employment and could lead to a decrease in the underground economy .
Above all , these proposals are a sign of the EU 's commitment to fighting unemployment and to encouraging full employment .
It is for this reason , above all others , that we will support this proposal .
Mr President , the operation of the VAT system in the European Union is not something we can be proud of .
It is in fact not one system but 15 variations on a system , which makes it extremely complicated .
We all know that the reason for this is the requirement in the Treaty that changes must be approved unanimously , which means in effect that national exceptions to the general rules are never going to be eliminated .
It may be that giving the VAT Committee regulatory powers , as we have just been discussing , could indeed promote harmonisation here , but the Castagnède report is a good opportunity to look in detail at the proposed changes to the system .
The Commission proposal is still to replace the country of destination principle in VAT with the country of origin principle .
In other words goods and services will no longer be zero-rated if they are being sent to other Member States , but will be taxed at the national rate applicable for those goods and services .
This country of origin principle already applies for consumer purchases , of course , unless exceptions are made such as for mail order purchases and new cars .
It also now seems likely that the country of destination principle will continue to apply for telecom services and purchases via the Internet , which is clearly an enormous growth sector .
In the face of this growing list of exceptions we might begin to wonder whether the original idea of switching to the country of origin principle should not be reviewed , particularly as a number of conditions for ensuring that the country of origin system operates without distorting competition seem to be unrealistic and undesirable .
Although different rates can easily continue to apply for goods or services in which there is little cross-border trade , such discrepancies will largely have to disappear for products in competitive sectors .
This means that the standard rates in the Member States are going to have to converge very drastically , and the Member States will then effectively no longer be free to change the rate at their own discretion .
In short , VAT will cease to be an economic instrument or a means of increasing tax revenue .
This is a major drawback given that budget expenditure is also restricted by the stability pact and that taxes on labour , which is the easiest factor to tax , are to be reduced rather than increased .
I myself have raised these problems on a number of occasions , and I take it as a sign of weakness that the Commission has failed to come up with any solutions yet .
Perhaps the Commissioner could finally take his head out of the sand this evening , or at least promise to give us a reasoned reply .
Finally , a completely different point .
What sort of progress is being made on reducing VAT on labour-intensive services , a subject we are both interested in ?
Can the Commissioner give us a firm promise that this problem will be on the agenda for the European Council in Vienna , and is there any chance of progress being made or not ?
Both I and my group regard this as a high priority , and we also intend to bring pressure to bear on the Austrian Presidency on the subject .
Mr President , the harmonisation of VAT rates is an ongoing saga .
The introduction of the transitional system was certainly a step forward , but the discrepancies are still too wide .
The Commission communication appears to show that the different rates are not producing distortions of competition or deflections of trade .
It may all be working from a macro-economic point of view , but in micro-economic terms there is a real problem , as businesses in frontier areas are constantly pointing out .
I gathered from discussions in the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs that the Council and the Commission have no plans to change Annex H while the transitional system is in force , and it seems that we can look forward to uniform definitions of the categories listed in this annex .
I would like to hear from the Commissioner what the timetable is for these plans and whether this will be one of the first jobs for the VAT Committee in its new capacity .
The euro is just around the corner and the definitive VAT system based on the country of origin principle is in the pipeline .
All of us here in the House realise that both of these will mean that the price differences resulting from the different VAT rates will affect the competitive position of market operators more directly than is currently the case .
Commissioner , businesses are seriously worried about all this .
They are not afraid of competition , but they want a level playing field .
They accept and understand that the rates cannot be standardised immediately , but they will not accept that we are not pushing for greater harmonisation .
The discrepancies need to be reduced as quickly as possible .
If the rate categories are being considered for the definitive system , we expect the signals we send out in today 's debate and tomorrow 's vote to be clearly understood .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , Mr Castagnède 's report has a few points in common with the observations that I made in my previous speech .
Firstly , because it agrees with the observations and the position expressed by Mrs Thyssen , and also because we are trying to move forward in certain areas which will allow us to improve the current system . We know this system is not ideal , but we have to make do with it for the moment , given the lack of agreement between member states on having a definitive VAT system that is applied at European Union level .
With regard to the Castagnède report , the basic idea , as the rapporteur explained very well , is to try to harmonise reduced VAT rates .
Obviously this implies that there is , in some cases , a serious distortion of the basic principle of the single market , and there is discrimination which we would like to see eliminated .
I would point out that I had the experience of being a rapporteur in the Spanish Parliament when VAT was introduced as a result of Spain joining the European Union , and I know of the enormous pressure that comes from every sector to be included in the reduced tax rate band .
There are always reasons to be in the reduced rate band , but obviously there are some sectors for which it is justified and some for which it is more debatable .
This puts us in an uncomfortable position when we come to debate certain amendments , such as those which propose incorporating some specific points into certain articles .
We in the Liberal Group , despite the fact that it is a rather unhelpful political position to take , will not support this , but we will support all the amendments and the rapporteur 's suggestion that the Commission should draw up a proposal for genuine harmonisation of the reduced rate at European Union level .
Mr President , I would like to voice my disagreement with the first paragraph of Mr Castagnède 's report , which blames the current problems existing in cross-border zones on the lack of VAT harmonisation in different countries .
We believe this is the wrong interpretation of the situation .
As shown in the amendment tabled with my colleague Mr Edouard des Places , our group believes that the lack of VAT neutrality in cross-border transactions is the result of inadequate administrative procedures which cause problems in applying and controlling the rates .
I realise that some people here would like to see VAT rates harmonised and they see this as the next stage in the development of a federal super state as such a step would restrict national governments ' decision-making powers in both financial and fiscal matters .
The question being asked about cross-border zones is : how can economic operators be on an equal footing on opposite sides of the border and yet not commit VAT fraud ?
The solution suggested here - harmonisation of VAT rates - does not solve this problem at all , and is irrelevant .
The real solution to the fraud problem lies in developing better administrative follow-up , in improving control procedures and in developing a harmonised system of sanctions .
The administrative procedure established as part of the single market has serious shortcomings which have already been highlighted by national administrations in different meetings held with the Commission .
And I am sorry to note that the Commission , instead of trying to find a lasting solution to its own operational shortcomings , prefers its tried and tested method of running away and using technical problems as an opportunity to promote a political project which is not mentioned in the Treaties : VAT harmonisation .
The Commission would use its time more wisely if it were to provide a technical answer to a technical problem , to present a report on the problems with existing procedures and to draw up a draft regulation transposing the requested improvements as soon as possible .
Mr President , it is important for Parliament to remind the Commission of its duties .
Mr President , Commissioner , Mr Castagnède 's report brings us back to the ongoing saga of harmonisation .
Apparently , it is only a technical matter , with perhaps some rather more exciting elements such as reduced rates for records and CD-ROMs .
The former mayor of Strasbourg is an expert on all this .
There was also talk of harmonising VAT on catering , depending on whether the sandwich was eaten in a fast food restaurant or in a bar .
And then there are the super reduced rates .
The French government , for example , wants to apply a rate of 2.10 % on refunded medications .
The main point made by the Castagnède report , which is well-observed , is that , six years after the arrival of the single market , VAT rates have still not been harmonised .
The standard rate varies between 15 or 25 % for Denmark and there are ten or even twelve points difference in the reduced rate .
Yet in spite of all this , the single market still functions .
At the end of the 1980s , however , we were told it would be the end of the world .
The Cookfield report advocated a two-band rate and the European Commission wanted a kind of clearing-house .
A single way of thinking prevailed and today we have realised that it was all a lie , and an extremely costly one at that .
Between 1990 and 1993 the Socialist government reduced VAT on caviar , diamonds , Porsches and fur coats by 15 percentage points - in other words on socialist goods .
We lost billions which could have been used to cut taxation on employment .
We were also told that VAT should be charged in the country of origin .
But charging VAT in destination countries also works well .
We were told that the euro would change things .
Yet the single currency of the dollar does not stop New Jersey and the State of New York having different local tax rates .
We were told that electronic trading will lead to distortion but electronic trading represents such a marginal amount , not even 1 % .

The truth is that behind these debates lies a huge amount of waste .
In a European Union with 20 million unemployed , we should have thought more carefully about it .
For example , how big a part does European overtaxation play in unemployment ?
In a large transatlantic market , can the pressure on taxation allow there to be ten points difference in compulsory payments ?
And I would like to end there , with the ultimate question : should we have included a fifth criteria for the transition to the euro - a ceiling for compulsory payments of , for example , 40 % ?
Mr President , each time we talk about VAT we end up having a repetitive debate that would not bear serious analysis .
We say that VAT is regressive , and so the groups argue with each other about the amendments needed to prevent this regressive tax from hitting those taxpayers who are least able to pay .
But VAT , like other indirect taxes , is neither regressive nor progressive .
It is direct taxes that should be progressive .
If we want to increase progressiveness , let us change direct taxation .
Nor should we forget spending policy , which is the element in every budget that tries to compensate for the lack of progressiveness in indirect taxation .
Let us be quite clear about this : we all want to protect the weak and it is not the exclusive domain of any party or of any political stance . Some of the amendments being debated , which I hope will be approved , aim to use VAT - and I stress , VAT rather than many other measures that could be taken - to reduce contributions and social burdens .
The intention is that labour-intensive products should be relieved of some of the tax burden through direct taxation .
This is extremely complicated to implement .
I have been involved in tax administration in Navarra , and I know how difficult it is to decide which products should be included in each of the tax categories .
These are good intentions , but perhaps they might not stand up to technical analysis , and I will be pleased to hear what Professor Monti has to say .

There are some other amendments such as , for example , one from my colleague , Mr Cassidy , which perhaps could be developed , such as making it possible for NGOs that do humanitarian work in the Third World to reclaim VAT .
This could ensure a certain level of social justice , also through VAT , for non-profit-making organisations .
Ladies and gentlemen , this is the fourth time Parliament has produced a report supporting the necessary tax harmonisation .
We have all expressed our opinions already and I do not want to reiterate them .
I would like to encourage you Commissioner .
As my colleague Mr Langen said , you have to break through the steel defences .
Forza , Commissioner .
Mr President , I would like to express our support for this report on the harmonisation of VAT in the specific area of reduced rates , and also to commend the Commission 's report on which this present Parliament report is based .
Along with many of my colleagues who have spoken this evening , I would like to draw attention to the problems which are always encountered when harmonising tax , even in a sector such as indirect taxation and particularly VAT , where the tradition of tax harmonisation is so lengthy that , as everyone knows , VAT has become known as ' the European tax ' .
However , this European tax has not managed to keep pace with developments in the economic structure of the Union .
The Member States and the European institutions , which have succeeded in completing the single market - as will become even more apparent with the advent of the euro - have not been able to agree on a definitive VAT system which corresponds to the demands and the philosophy of the single market , and so , unfortunately , we still have the transitional system .
With regard to this generally acknowledged problem , I would briefly like to mention the Commission 's strategy , which I think is a good one , led , in this particular case , by Mr Monti .
It is a cautious strategy , taking small steps forward and gradually establishing what we could call the climate of opinion necessary to make the progress that everyone knows is needed , but which tends not to happen when the political decisions are taken .
This report on the conditions for applying reduced rates forms part of this strategy .
I would briefly like to make the following points : firstly , we support the unification or at least the substantial harmonisation of the levels of reduced rates .
Secondly , we support making Annex H non-optional for the application of the reduced rate . Finally , we strongly support a point which has already been raised , that when deciding on reduced-rate operations , special consideration should be given to those which relate to labour-intensive products or services .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , allow me first of all to compliment Mr Castagnède on his excellent report , on which the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs based its work .
I find it extremely useful that the House has taken the initiative of producing this report , which gives the Commission a full understanding of the European Parliament 's opinion on the need for further harmonisation of VAT rates .
In the Commission 's view , the resolution before Parliament today shows an understanding of the position outlined in its report of 13 November 1997 on reduced rates of VAT .
Clearly the subject of VAT rates cannot be dissociated from the general issue of the new common system of VAT , and I believe that this House has fully understood this link .
The Commission takes on board your message concerning the need to push ahead with the harmonisation of VAT rates .
The Commission has begun drawing up a legislative proposal relating to VAT rates , and will present it as soon as possible .
Buoyed by the active cooperation of this House , which is so well reflected in Mr Castagnède 's report and in the draft resolution , the Commission has high hopes that Parliament will be equally supportive when the time comes to examine our proposal .
I should like now to turn to two matters that have been raised during the debate : first of all , the possibility of a reduced rate of VAT on highly labour-intensive services .
I can confirm that the Commission , which last year aired this hypothesis in its communication to the Luxembourg European Council on Employment , hopes that the idea will not remain a dead letter .
The Member States have not yet managed to agree on the scope of this measure .
I have been pondering of late on a question which is relevant to this evening 's topic .
On the one hand , we would like more harmonisation of VAT rates ; on the other , we are tempted by the idea of allowing the Member States to experiment with reduced VAT rates for highly labour-intensive services , even though this would admittedly establish a basis for less , not more , harmonisation of VAT rates , should some Member States but not others avail themselves of this opportunity .
So , I wonder , is there a contradiction between these two approaches to taxation policy ?
I think not , given the nature of the idea floated by the Commission regarding reduced VAT rates on highly labour-intensive services : this concession to Member States would by definition affect services with very little or no cross-border content , and so would not distort competition between Member States .
I therefore believe that , in a limited field such as this , a reduced rate of VAT could be granted on an experimental basis in support - we hope - of employment , without it conflicting with the general approach of seeking greater harmonisation in VAT rates .
My final comment relates to Mrs Lienemann 's observations concerning the taxation of capital .
Mrs Lienemann raised two points : the Commission is against one of them ; on the other , which the honourable Member deems desirable for the future , I can say that the Commission has already acted .
The hypothesis which you mention , Mrs Lienemann , and which the Commission is against , relates to a tax on the buying and selling of foreign currency , the so-called ' Tobin tax ' .
We consider that this would be very difficult to apply ; indeed , it would infringe the fundamental principle of free movement for capital .
As to the other point , namely your call for a proposal for a directive on the taxation of savings - in other words taxation not on capital movements but on income from capital - I can tell you that such a proposal was adopted within the Commission on 20 May of this year and forwarded to the Ecofin Council on 5 June .
Moreover , this House has already appointed a rapporteur on this proposal for a directive .
We are therefore moving , at least in part , in the direction you desire .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Late payment in commercial transactions -CEECs / programme for SMEs - European capital market -European Observatory for SMEs
The next item is the joint debate on the following reports :
A4-0303 / 98 by Mr Harrison , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy , on the proposal for a European Parliament and Council Directive combating late payment in commercial transactions ( COM ( 98 ) 0126 - C4-0251 / 98-98 / 0099 ( COD ) ) ; -A4-0309 / 98 by Mr Rübig , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy , on the proposals for Council Decisions concerning the Community position within the Association Council on the participation of Bulgaria , the Czech Republic , Estonia , Hungary , Poland , Romania and the Slovak Republic in the Community programme in the field of small and medium-sized enterprises ( COM ( 98 ) 0113 - C4-0203 / 98 to C4-0209 / 98-98 / 0078 ( CNS ) to 98 / 0084 ( CNS ) ) ; -A4-0202 / 98 by Mr Hendrick , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy , on the Commission Communication on a European capital market for Small and Medium-sized Enterprises : prospects and potential obstacles to progress ( COM ( 97 ) 0187 - C4-0433 / 97 ) ; -A4-0255 / 98 by Mr Scarbonchi , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy , on the fifth annual report of the European Observatory for SMEs ( 1997 ) ( C4-0115 / 98 ) .
Mr President , ' cheat early by paying late ' has been the by-word of big businesses and public authorities for too long in their dealings with Europe 's small businesses .
It is time to outlaw these cheating practices and give SMEs the confidence to boldly go into the single European market knowing that they will be paid on time in full and without fuss for their goods and services .
That is why Parliament supports the Commission 's directive entitled ' Late Payment on Commercial Debt ' , for which the legal basis is Article 100a , on the single market .
Unless we do something , more and more small businesses will be killed off by late payment .
We know that one in four insolvencies are attributable to late payment ; one in five businesses would export more if this problem were solved .
SMEs ' cash flows are disrupted and the problem is worse when trading across borders in the single market .
In the United Kingdom SMEs are owed £ 20 000 million in late payments at any one time .
The situation in the UK is one of the worst in the European Union .
The average EU delay is 13 days , but in the UK it is 23 days after the due date .
In the European Union one in three cases of late payment is deliberate , in the UK it is one in two .
But across borders the deliberate delays rise to two out of five for the European Union as a whole and three out of five for the UK .
Incidentally , the New Labour Government has introduced new legislation which outlaws late payment by introducing a statutory right to interest .
The main purpose of this directive is to introduce a statutory right of interest on late payment , calculated at 8 % above the European Central Bank repo rate of say , 3 % , ie 11 % , plus the recovery of all reasonable costs - administrative , legal and financial - associated with pursuing the debt .
The total could be 20 % .
The total penalty must be higher than the debtor borrowing money from banks or other financial institutions .
We must make sure that SMEs are not being used as sources of cheap money .
But there are other flanking measures which the Commissioner brought forward : accelerated recovery procedures for undisputed debts ( nine out of ten of the debts are not disputed by the debtor ) , simplified legal procedures for the small number of disputed debts , new quick procedures for debts below ECU 20 000 .
We are also introducing payment periods into public procurement contracts .
Why ?
Public institutions , e.g. local and national governments , and the European institutions themselves are amongst the worst late and slow payers .
They can lead by example by getting government departments to pay on time .
But a warning is in order - late pay and slow pay are not the same thing .
Late pay is paying late after the agreed payment and slow pay is widening the payment period between the invoice or delivery date and the agreed payment date .
Slow pay is a terrible problem afflicting SMEs especially in the southern Union states like Spain .
Examples of 300 days payment periods are demonstrated , for example , in supermarkets in Spain and they are amongst the biggest culprits .
But the late pay directive does not tackle slow payers as opposed to late payers except in respect of public procurement and public authorities , although it does introduce a 21-day payment period in the absence of contracts or where contracts are silent on the point for ordinary contracts .
Will it work ?
Sweden and other Nordic countries have had a statutory right of interest since the 1970s .
What is the view of the European Parliament ? - broadly supportive !
We also believe in adding the licensing of debt collecting companies who are an important and cheaper alternative to lawyers as a means of recovering debt .
We need to license these companies .
Some of them are cowboys .
Here is an example of one of these debt-collecting agencies who put this note through my office door in Chester in the United Kingdom : ' Do you owe money ?
Do you feel robbed ?
Are you angry enough to send my team of collectors around to the debtor 's premises ?
Don 't worry , we don 't break the law but we get results and we can prove it .
We operate world-wide . ' These are the cowboys that we need to train and get into line by registering them .
In conclusion , this directive , if implemented , could be the Viagra of the single European market , allowing SMEs to grow and expand to the satisfaction of all .
Mr President , the night sitting makes me feel very positive and confident .
Positive , because the debate to come will focus mainly on SME policy and its implementation in Europe .
The situation of SMEs does indeed deserve this emphasis .
They are quite rightly described as the backbone of the European economy , and more specifically as the driving force for creating extra jobs .
And I feel confident , because the individual reports take stock of the current situation in practice and describe the main trends for Europe 's SMEs .
Firstly , my own report , which deals with the ambitious goal of enlargement of the EU .
Speaking recently in Vienna , the Pope called for the process of Europeanisation to be driven forward with even more energy .
I can only agree with him on that .
But we all know that this process cannot occur overnight in the applicant countries .
We also , and indeed above all , need preaccession strategies for the SME sector , with particular emphasis on personal contact between people .
That is why it is sensible to enable these countries to participate in the Third Multiannual Programme for SMEs and thus to familiarize them with the working methods and policies of the Union .
That is also true for each of the priority objectives that the Commission has defined .
The environment for companies , be it administrative or financial , should be simplified or improved .
Their activities abroad should be supported and their competitiveness in general enhanced .
Along with that goes easier access to research , innovation and training .
The applicant countries are , in large part , financing their own participation , and this is being topped up by PHARE funding .
In implementing these objectives , I am particularly concerned - and this is an idea that we have incorporated in the report - that successful participation is guaranteed , calling for competent management and a well-prepared administration on both sides .
I would also mention the new public management instrument , which can be used during the required evaluation .
The project is not reserved only for the seven countries currently included : other applicant countries could also be brought into the programme very soon , once the administrative and financial requirements have been fulfilled .
I am , however , also convinced that participation in the Multiannual Programme will be mainly political .
In view of the anticipated expense , it is better for us to adopt a specific rather than a general approach .
In the light of the recently renewed debate on subsidiarity , we should finally consider how far a pre-accession strategy of this kind can be transferred to the national level .
I should now like to move on to this evening 's other topics .
The planned enlargement of the EU , and the pre-accession strategies that go with it , are not ends in themselves .
Rather , we will be endeavouring to produce a win-win situation from which both sides should benefit .
We can see just how important this is for the SME sector from the problems it faces today , such as the situation of SMEs on the capital markets or the effects of late payment on SMEs .
New ways of capital procurement are currently a top priority for the SME sector .
The figures for Austria alone , which I believe are similar to the European average , confirm the need for action .
If we look for instance at the proportion of equity capital in small-scale trades and businesses - in SMEs in other words - we find figures of only around 10 % .
What particularly stands out here is that the smaller the size of the company , the worse the figures are .
Sufficient equity capital , however , is essential for the long-term success of a company .
The lack of it is an important if not decisive reason for insolvency .
That is why the attitude to shares has to change and share-ownership must be encouraged as an additional source of equity capital .
Accounting rules need to be standardised where exchanges of experience are being hindered .
Finally I am grateful for the speed with which the Directive on late payment has been handled .
I particularly welcome the fact that it is not only large companies , but also governments and therefore also the EU that are to lead the way .
That is why I would also agree with Mr Harrison - if we introduce this directive quickly , we will be giving priority to providing greater equity capital for SMEs .
Mr President , employment is top of Europe 's agenda and SMEs form a crucial part of this job-creation strategy .
We have seen today how various regions in the EU Member States are approaching the issue of SME capital markets as a catalyst for SME growth .
As the author of the European parliamentary report on the issue of capital market SMEs , I wish to outline what European institutions and , in particular , the European Parliament are doing to improve the environment for growing small firms .
In 1994 the visionary Delors White Paper on growth , competitiveness and employment placed SMEs at the heart of the Community 's policy for generating employment .
This has been reasserted almost continuously since then , in particular at the Luxembourg Summit .
SMEs are equally valuable in pushing forward cutting-edge research .
This is an area where Europe is most competitive in creating high-quality , high-tech jobs .
Software , telecommunications , biotechnology and microelectronics are all areas led by innovative technology-based small firms .
The United States has proved itself far more effective than Europe in backing new ideas with ready cash .
Perhaps the clearest example of this is in the computer business which , since 1980 , has seen the fastest accumulation of wealth in history .
Investors are earning returns of over 50 % a year for the average firm and more than 100 % for the most successful .
Many believe that the Internet market will be three times as big .
Why has Europe been unable to match this ?
To get some answers to this and other questions I visited the New York Stock Exchange and the Nasdaq at the end of last year .
It is recognized here that the US has a more entrepreneurial culture but I believe there are three more concrete reasons .
Part of the reason for America 's success is the size of its domestic market .
If a company is successful in a home market of 250 million customers , who speak the same language and use the same currency , this can finance several years of expansion .
More importantly though , Americans are much more prepared to accept risk , for example by investing in small companies .
Europe 's big institutional investors are more wary of involvement in SMEs than their American counterparts .
Finally , stemming from this , the US has Nasdaq , a stock market for SMEs that makes it easy to invest in small firms to fund their expansion and development .
We have a great deal more to do in that area .
But the EU is fighting back !
The European single market now allows companies the run of the whole European marketplace .
This offers a marketplace and internal market of 380 million people , the largest economic integration project ever undertaken .
Moreover , final preparations are now being made for the launch of the euro , a logical conclusion to the single market .
The single currency will , at a stroke , let Europe benefit from the same advantages as the US , with one market and one currency .
On top of this there is some evidence that attitudes to investment in Europe are changing .
We have seen massive demands for shares during the privatisation of state utilities , such as telecom companies , but now we must extend this demand to the high-gain but higher risk stocks on SME capital markets .
A long term perspective needs to be encouraged amongst investors .
Indeed , I am floating the idea of running campaigns to show that shares in small firms are a worthwhile investment .
Another obstacle to the expansion of SME markets is restrictions on pension funds .
The liquidity that comes with institutional trading is essential to small capital markets .
Pension reform is under way in most Member States and with the publication of the Green Paper from the Commission this will put funds under greater pressure to invest in equities .
Above all I believe that Europe must take note of the lead that the US enjoys in these matters .
The simplicity with which American private investors can buy shares and the new opportunities offered by electronic commerce are trends that Europe has to follow .
The individual is important : private investors rather than institutions make up nearly half the transactions of the Nasdaq .
Employee share ownership in the US is exploring new forms of worker participation in firms and is opening up share ownership to a new public .
Again , information campaigns should be considered in order to raise awareness of the opportunities which exist .
Europe should take those opportunities and Europe will take those opportunities .
Mr President , Commissioner , I would first like to thank the European Observatory for SMEs for the consistently high quality of its work which makes it such an important reference point in both economic and scientific circles .
The considerable work it does regularly produces a wealth of information , essential for everyone ; political , economic and financial decision-makers alike .
It allows us to analyse issues relevant to 19 million active businesses in Europe in very different sectors and conditions .
These SMEs , which employed nearly 78 million people in 1997 , face the same challenges as larger businesses : globalization and its effects on competitiveness and fair competition , adapting to rapid technological development - an essential element in competitiveness - and practical preparation for the new size and conditions of the European market following the transition to the euro and the enlargement of the Union .
Faced with these new challenges , SMEs must be able to mobilise the necessary human and financial resources rapidly .
They therefore need a long-term strategic vision , but must not sacrifice the key to their dynamism , namely their rapid reaction .
In fact , the apparent vulnerability of SMEs is often a considerable bonus in terms of ability to adapt rapidly , internal communication and mobility .
It is Europe 's responsibility to develop a plan of action which will help SMEs make the most of these qualities .
Firstly , Europe must monitor the markets in order to prevent unfair practices , in particular international dumping . The Union has a clear responsibility within the WTO on this matter .
The EU must also contribute to the development of these markets .
It is therefore indisputable that the euro , and more generally , economic and monetary union , can act as a powerful stimulant for the dynamism of SMEs , as long as they are fully informed and prepared for the new reality of EMU .
We must also adapt the administrative rules to the specific constraints faced by SMEs .
Starting up a business should no longer be such a long and painful process , and it is now vital that we establish a new harmonised classification of SMEs at European level .
Viewing very small enterprises with one or two workers in the same way as an enterprise which employs five hundred people is an unacceptable way of thinking .
I therefore call on the Commission to submit proposals on these matters .
We are also in favour of implementing voluntary policies which enhance SMEs ' human resources , especially by providing help with training .
We also paid particular attention to the chapter in the Observatory 's report on SMEs and the environment .
This highlights the fact that there is potential for creating jobs and a possible chance of improving competitiveness .
It is true that deciding to invest in environmental technologies may sometimes seem a luxury for SMEs .
Nonetheless , in several cases such investments have reduced costs through putting resources and raw materials to better use , and they have allowed SMEs to anticipate the general trend towards stronger environmental legislation .
The majority of these observations are equally valid for tourism - another sector rich in potential for SMEs .
The quality of the analyses underlying this report and the relevance of its remarks has led us to ask the Observatory to extend its work and we would like to suggest some concrete proposals for further analysis .
Firstly , a new harmonised classification for SMEs needs to be established in the EU , as we have already mentioned .
Secondly , the situation of social security systems and the impact of their welcome forthcoming harmonisation with regard to SMEs must be examined in order to draw conclusions at an operational level .
Finally , the possible impact of home working and teleworking and the possibilities that these can offer must also be considered .
It is important that we combat isolation among people who have opted for teleworking .
Detailed consideration should be given to facilitating the integration of SMEs in areas which are difficult to access , such as run-down districts , difficult rural areas and peripheral regions .
The development of SMEs in these areas can often lead to important joint local initiatives .
Eight amendments have been tabled , seven of which have my full support .
The eighth is a repetition which seems rather pointless .
Ladies and gentlemen , SMEs are difficult economic subjects for legislators to address in Europe due to their diversity and large numbers .
The Observatory 's report allows us to fully grasp the complexity of this issue and should help to improve the necessary Community instruments to make them more flexible and more accessible .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to begin by thanking Mr Harrison very warmly for his report on which I congratulate him .
I would also like to thank the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs for having asked the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights to give an opinion on this proposal for a directive , and also for ultimately accepting the majority of the amendments that we proposed .
Nevertheless , I would like to express my regret that because this proposal was rushed through its first reading so quickly it did not receive the discussion time it deserved .
It is the first time that the Union has delved so deeply into the institutions and procedures of civil law , the codes of civil procedure and the judicial and legal systems of our Member States .
In my opinion it does not have an adequate legal basis to do so , and judging by the Commission proposal it has demonstrated a legal superficiality which does not show due appreciation for the subtle differences of civil law and the need for a European legal system of high standing and quality .
Both of the committees dealing with this genuinely tried to iron out at least the worst inconsistencies in the Commission 's proposal , but even if our proposed amendments are approved tomorrow , it will still be impossible for us to be truly proud of this item of European legislation .
Too many inconsistencies remain and others will emerge in the course of transposition and application .
The Committee fully supports the aim of the Directive , but we cannot agree with all aspects of the proposed measures .
There are two points in particular on which we take a different view from that of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs .
The Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights does not agree that Member States should in future be obliged to have three different types of debt-recovery procedures .
It is going to be complicated and expensive and it will also bring about less legal certainty .
We therefore suggest that of one of these , the one in Article 5 , be omitted .
We are equally opposed to debt-collection agencies being granted additional rights in future , and being in a better position than lawyers when it comes to cross-border services .
We also have to take account of a judgment by the European Court of Justice which ruled that the requirement to employ a lawyer was solely a matter for the Member States .
As the representative of the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights , and of my party within that Committee , I would therefore recommend voting against Amendments Nos 8 , 12 and 25 and in favour of the rest , especially No 25 .
Mr President , first of all I have a point of order , which I consider to be important .
In the list of MEPs who took part in the vote on the Harrison report , neither Mr García Margallo or I are included , despite the fact that we took part in the vote and tabled amendments .
Secondly , I would like to congratulate Mr Linkohr and the Commission on this initiative .
It is an important proposal for SMEs , which are so vulnerable to delayed payments from their customers , whether they are supplying public authorities or large companies , or subcontracting for them .
SMEs , as has been said , are faced with the high financial costs of short term bank loans , high interest on overdrafts and administrative costs due to late payments .
They often find themselves with their hands tied , specially in public sector contracts , by large companies who impose disproportionate payment periods on them in their contracts - which they can ' take or leave ' - despite the fact that the authorities are generally already obliged to pay the large companies within a certain period .
If this occurs on a national level , we can imagine the reluctance and fear that many SMEs must feel about venturing into cross-border operations in the single market .
We therefore welcome the fact that the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy has approved three specific amendments which propose improvements to the Council and the Commission such as banning the main companies in a public contract from asking or demanding that their subcontractors waive their legal rights , and requiring that the obligation of transparency demanded from public authorities should also apply to the relationship between the main contractor and the subcontractor in public procurement contracts .
Finally , I think it is important to highlight the amendment which proposes that subcontracting or supplying companies should be given conditions which are at least as favourable as those granted to the main company by the public authority , by guaranteeing that all the fees due are paid within a determined period .
In our opinion , more specifically in the opinion of the Spanish socialists , these three proposals from the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy deserve the support of the Commission and the Council if we really want to guarantee the survival of these companies in the public contracts sector .
Mr President , all of the subjects covered in this debate on SMEs are important , but I shall confine myself to talking on behalf of the PPE group about the proposal to combat late payments .
Excessive payment periods and late payments have become a nightmare for businesses .
The statistics beggar belief .
Add to that the fact that the time and money involved in taking cases to court puts SMEs off trying to seek legal redress , and that the situation is ten times worse in cross-border trade , and we can see that it is high time for us to flex our muscles and take action .
The PPE finds the Commission proposal quite good , but we think it could be better .
At this point I would just like to thank the rapporteur , Lyndon Harrison , for his extremely knowledgeable and responsible approach .
I enjoyed working with him and it is a pity that he is not here to hear me say so .
I shall focus on the points which my group feels should be given particular attention at the vote or by the Commission .
First of all , there are three amendments on debt collection agencies , which are still encountering obstacles despite the single market .
A majority of the Committee on Economic Affairs obviously want this problem to be dealt with in this directive , and the PPE group agrees that Europe should take a close interest in the organisation of this work and ensuring the free provision of services .
We can also see that there is common ground with the proposal before us , but we do not think that rules on the free provision of services by debt collection agencies can simply be introduced just like that by amending this directive .
Better solutions , both politically and legally , can be found , and Mrs Berger is dealing with your concerns .
I would like to hear from the Commissioner what the Commission thinks about this and whether it is prepared or is planning to come up with separate proposals on debt collection agencies .
There is another problem with paragraphs D and E in Amendment No 14 , which propose that a contractual due date of more than 45 days should be accepted only where payment on the due date is guaranteed by a bill of exchange .
We are quite happy to consider the question of additional guarantees with excessively long payment periods , but 45 days is really not all that long and a bill of exchange is not an appropriate instrument .
Either some arrangement should be reached with the groups now so that we can discuss the matter again at second reading , or else my group will be forced to vote against paragraphs D and E of Amendment No 14 .
My group would also like to do something to improve payment periods for public contracts .
The shorter the better , that is our motto , but distinguishing according to price is for various reasons neither as useful nor as relevant as distinguishing according to the nature of the contract .
This would bring immediate benefits with goods and services contracts .
Fourth , we regret that subcontractors have been ignored in the proposal .
We have rectified this and we hope that the Commission will agree with our amendments .
Fifth , there is unfortunately a comitology problem , and after yesterday evening 's debate this is not something we can afford to ignore .
The PPE Group can accept the procedure provided for in Article 9 for charging interest for late payment and it can accept the level of interest , but not the change to the ceiling that determines the scope of the simplified procedures for taking legal action for the settlement of debts , a figure which is vital for the way in which the Member States organise these special procedures .
Sixth and last , my group wishes to stress the following .
We are convinced that the credibility of the European Institutions will be undermined if they do everything they can to encourage others to pay up on time while shirking their own responsibilities .
The European Institutions are hardly the promptest payers themselves and , like other public authorities , need a little encouragement .
So for goodness ' sake let us include ourselves in the scope of this directive .
This is all I wanted to say .
I hope that the Commission will support our views , and for my colleagues in the House and the vote tomorrow I should like to hear what the Commissioner thinks about the debt collection agencies , the bill of exchange , Amendment No 33 on the payment period for public contracts , and sub-contractors .
I would also like to know why the European Institutions are not included .
Mr President , Commissioner , I should like to begin by congratulating the four rapporteurs on their excellent work .
I should like to talk today about the subject of capital markets for SMEs .
It is difficult to overestimate the importance of these capital markets .
SMEs are the hardest hit by the administrative burden and find it most difficult to gain access to capital , yet they account for the majority of all jobs created .
This was why the EASDAQ was so urgently needed when it came into operation at the end of 1996 .
Since then , according to the rapporteur , there has been a total of over ECU 170 million in capital investment which has helped to create more than 10 000 jobs .
The completion of the single market and the arrival of the euro are certain to increase the liquidity of the pan-European stock exchange , which in turn will benefit employment .
So we are on the right path .
But that is not the end of the matter .
We also need to encourage venture capital .
Some of the enormous potential which the pension funds have at their disposal , estimated at ECU 10 000 billion by the year 2020 , must be directed towards venture capital funds , which in turn will help rapid growth businesses with funding and know-how .
As the rapporteur , Mr Hendrick , has already said , the requirement which some Member States impose on pension funds to invest part of their capital solely in government bonds is discriminatory and is thus contrary to the spirit of the principle of free movement of capital enshrined in the Treaty .
Individuals also need to be encouraged to invest capital in small , rapidly expanding businesses , and such venture capital should be subject to favourable tax conditions throughout the Union .
Some Member States already have special tax arrangements , but these should be extended to investments in other European capital markets .
We think that these measures could bring about substantial improvements in the undercapitalisation of SMEs .
Finally , I should like to ask the Commissioner whether the Commission has already investigated other innovative financial instruments which it mentions in the multi-annual programme and the on the final page of its communication ?
I would be interested to know what creative ideas the Commission can come up with here .
Mr President , our group will be voting in favour of the Hendrick and Scarbonchi reports on smalland medium-sized companies .
A comprehensive policy must be put in place for SMEs , which are increasingly the backbone of our economies .
SMEs are the main creators of employment in Europe because they are situated locally .
They inject life into a country and into the Union as a whole .
The red-tape environment in which SMEs operate must be simplified .
The setting up of new firms must be encouraged .
They must be helped to modernise where necessary .
We need to see that new initiatives can be put forward to lighten that burden .
They must be prepared for the euro .
Their small size must not discriminate against them in the euro area .
It must be made possible for SMEs to compete for public contracts across the Union .
There must be positive discrimination in favour of SMEs .
Everything possible must be done to encourage the emergence of new entrepreneurs , new sources of financing and access for SMEs to the new technologies and innovation .
Ireland is a nation of small businesses .
Up to 98 % of our non-farm businesses employ under 50 employees .
Some 90 % of small businesses employ fewer than 10 .
The importance of creating an environment in which existing small businesses can flourish and new ones can be created is therefore self-evident .
In Ireland 35 county enterprise boards have been set up with the objective of promoting the development of micro-businesses at local level .
Under the development programme a target of 4 600 enterprises was established .
By the end of 1997 about 7 000 people had set up their own business with partnership help .
Overloading the employer and employee with heavy taxes and heavy social insurance contributions is anti-jobs .
My country is competitive in European terms in relation to indirect labour cost .
There is a clear lesson : an over-burdened tax wedge spells disaster for job creation and job maintenance .
Small is beautiful . Governments must not tax SMEs out of existence .
Mr President , I will begin by saying that I have been eagerly awaiting a report which would promote discussion on giving SMEs access to capital .
However , the Hendrick report is not that report .
Instead , it approaches the capital market for SMEs from the point of view of potential savings as part of the financial and monetary speculation manipulated by transnationals .
Given the manner in which they operate , capital markets are of no use to SMEs , particularly the small and micro-enterprises which make up some 99 % of European businesses and account for over 50 % of employment , and they therefore do not serve to strengthen the economic fabric of the Member States of which SMEs are the backbone .
In addition , I consider it essential that associations of SMEs should be created at both national and European levels , and I therefore welcome the fact that Mr Hendrick has accepted my proposal to this effect .
Such associations could provide excellent financial services and centralise the credit needs of its members , thereby reducing the cost of obtaining capital .
It is incomprehensible that in the current climate of financial crisis , capital and financial instruments should be permitted and encouraged to move totally freely and unchecked , leading to a casino economy .
Paragraph 13 of the motion for a resolution , which rejects the Tobin tax , appears out of place in a report on SMEs and access to markets .
This was why I supported the proposed amendment to paragraph 13 of the motion .
I would also like to say a few words on the Scarbonchi report , since the Annual Report of the European Observatory for SMEs contains information and analyses of their situation in the European Union from which an assessment can be made of the situation and dynamics in the European Union , and also of the effectiveness of the instruments which it has available .
It is regrettable , however , that the report does not dwell in greater depth on certain basic issues relating to the importance of SMEs in strengthening the economic fabric , and I regard it as excessively conformist at a time when change is needed .
This is reflected in the proposed amendments I supported .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , perhaps it was , as they say , revealing that Viagra was wrongly categorised here as having something to do with a satisfied sexuality .
But if you believe that , you may also think that the broad distribution of shares and pension funds through the whole of the SME sector could in any way be a step towards democratising the economy or decentralising economic power .
We have to face up to the fact that support for SMEs is an unequal race , one between Achilles and the tortoise , or between the hare and the hedgehog in the German fable , but unfortunately without the help of mistakenly thinking that movement involves small , intermittent steps and without the help of the hedgehog 's loving wife and companion .
In other words , the concentration and centralisation of capital is marching inexorably on , and the new niches created along the way are only of minor importance .
The situation of SMEs is not improving , but worsening .
We cannot therefore think that unleashing market forces while at the same time developing SMEs would work .
That is why , in the reports , there is also what I would call the ' fallacy of misplaced concreteness ' .
Of course we should do something to combat late payment but we should not exaggerate .
The entrenched economic downturn expresses itself in different ways , including late payment .
Of course , what Mrs Thyssen said was true , the EU institutions cannot exempt themselves from rules applicable to public bodies .
As far as raising venture capital is concerned , it is certainly true that this is difficult in Europe . But one should not believe that making it easier to set up a business would also mean improved chances of survival .
Until we reform the bankruptcy law , people will not be very quick to start a business .
Mr Hendrick , simply believing that readiness to take risks has something to do with people 's psychological make-up really does not provide the level of analysis that we require .
And anyone who believes that pension funds are the only way to reform pensions has simply not looked at how social security systems have developed on the European continent .
What we need is not simply deregulation , but better regulation .
People need advice , information and favourable local and regional conditions .
These are the things we should be tackling , but unfortunately , they are missing from these reports .
I could continue at length , but I shall finish now , as my speaking time has run out .
Mr President , in this joint debate on small and medium-sized businesses I should like to talk about the report by Mr Scarbonchi .
As a substitute member of the Committee on Economic Affairs I followed the progress of this report at one remove , which is why I should now like to comment on its contents here in the plenary .
The section I am referring to is recital B in the motion for a resolution .
If you add up the figures it mentions you can see that the number of jobs in Europe is supposed to have increased by almost twelve million in just one year , which would mean that unemployment had fallen by 65 % !
I only wish this were true , but in fact the opposite was the case between 1995 and 1996 , when unemployment actually went up slightly .
This fact is clearly stated on page 14 of the annual report .
I would therefore recommend that Mr Scarbonchi withdraw recital B. The figures he quotes from the 1996 and 1997 annual reports are based on different definitions of the size of SMEs .
The fifth annual report gives a useful overview of SMEs in Europe .
One worrying point is the fact that labour costs are rising too rapidly in SMEs , indicating that greater wage restraint and flexibility are needed on the labour market .
The worst thing we could suggest is to have further reductions in working hours for the same pay ( see Amendment No 3 ) , which in my view would mean the downfall of SMEs in Europe .

I am particularly grateful for the study on SMEs and the environment .
At the informal Environment Council in Amsterdam last year it was concluded that SMEs are a major source of environmental pollution , and the annual report goes into this in more detail .
Fortunately it appears that more and more small firms are taking action to combat pollution .
The growth of the ' eco-industry ' also offers a positive outlook , particularly in terms of employment .
In order to promote this further we shall have to do more to shift labour taxes onto raw materials and energy , thus also fulfilling our Treaty obligation to integrate environment policy into all other aspects of public policy .
What does the Commissioner think of the proposal that environmental legislation should be better tailored to what SMEs want ?
In the five years that it has been produced the annual report seems to have assumed a very clear role not just as an important reference work , but also as a useful source of guidance .
Member States can identify policy differences and similarities and copy good practice from each other .
These benefits could be further improved if the report compared specific legislation and the associated administrative burden .
Perhaps a special study could focus on this in future .
Finally I have a question for the Commissioner .
It is now September 1998 and we are discussing the 1997 annual report which contains figures mostly relating to the situation in 1996 .
When will the report on 1998 be ready ?
I understand that the tendering procedure is not even finished yet .
Does this mean that the report is going to have to be rushed through ?
The quality is bound to suffer .
Would you explain how you think we can make up the delay ?
The last annual report was already out by October 1997 .
Mr President , I would like to focus on one particular aspect which appears to me to be important and which is dealt with for the first time in the report by Mr Scarbonchi , namely the need to concentrate aid on SMEs in tourism .
The lack of a European policy on tourism means that large sums from EU aid coffers are not being deployed in the right way , with huge concentrations of rather dubious tourist accommodation as the result .
Over-capacities are being created that are distorting competition .
But SMEs , which are the typical European tourist business both in terms of quality and quantity , are being left out in the cold .
In future , European aid policy in tourism must set clear priorities geared towards improving the quality , competitiveness and marketing capacity of SMEs .
It is especially the SMEs in tourism that have shown they are in a position to safeguard jobs and to create extra employment .
An extremely significant question about the future is handled in paragraphs 6 and 7 .
Programmes to link up agriculture , tourism and commerce are needed to stop people and companies from leaving rural areas with difficult conditions , such as Alpine areas .
They must prevent whole valleys and regions from becoming deserted and turning into disaster areas .
Mr President , I have asked for the floor in order to speak about the Harrison report on late payments .
There are two basic points to make about this problem of late payments : firstly , that there is definitely a general delay in payments in both public and private contracts , and secondly , that the situation varies considerably from country to country within the EU single market .
Southern countries , among them Spain , are always cited as bad examples of this , and rightly so .
In our country , Spain , it is commonplace to talk about the lengthy period of time that it takes for the authorities to pay companies , particularly those awarded public works contracts .
What is not said so often is that these companies treat their suppliers , small and mediumsized enterprises , in an even more draconian manner .
The figures are as follows : public administrations wait an average of four months in Spain - which is long enough - before paying their creditors , but the companies awarded the contracts wait twice as long - eight months - before paying their suppliers and subcontractors , which must make life very difficult for them .
There are plenty of reasons for tackling this problem at European level and we welcome the fact that this directive has been proposed in addition to the various recommendations that have proved so ineffective in the past .
We strongly support this draft directive and we also support the amendments made to it in the Harrison report .
With regard to the amendments , I would like to focus on two points : firstly , we are strongly in favour of the amendment that introduces a new article on the use of debt-collection agencies or services in the single market . Secondly , we feel it is important to mention the various amendments that take into account the problem of small and medium-sized enterprises .
With regard to the situation of SMEs , the fact that the rules laid down in the directive are binding is very important .
Take the discretion allowed in Article 3 , which states that the maximum payment period will be of three weeks - 21 days - unless otherwise provided for in the contract of the general conditions of sale of the vendor .
Certain limits need to be imposed here , because otherwise small businesses will be unprotected and faced with large companies which practically have a buyer 's monopoly or are in the position to impose their own conditions on small businesses .
Therefore we strongly agree with certain amendments that have been introduced by the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy which try to limit this potential abuse of discretion by large companies .
I am referring , for example , to Amendment No 24 to Article 7 ( d ) , and Amendment No 28 and others which tackle this problem - in my opinion - in the right way , correcting certain defects in this draft directive .
Mr President , when assessing any draft regulations , we first have to establish what objectives we are pursuing and what aspect of life in society we are trying to put in order .
There is no doubt that the draft directive on late payments is responding to the needs felt - suffered , we could say fairly - by small and medium-sized enterprises , and especially by those that are suppliers to powerful economic bodies .
It is an incontestable fact that postponing or delaying payments is being used for purposes far removed from that of financing the commercial cycle .
There are undoubtedly other problems too , for example slowness and disparity in legal proceedings .
For these reasons , we should welcome a European initiative in this field , and particularly this draft directive .
However , I must point out , like other speakers before me , that it contains legal problems that have to be tackled and I trust that these will be resolved in the dialogue between the Commission , the Council and Parliament .
I could begin and end by saying that I completely agree with the excellent speeches by Mrs Berger , Mrs García Arias and Mrs Thyssen .
There are , however , a few points I should like to make .
Firstly , I wanted to stress the need to tackle head on the problem of delays in contract payments in general , not just in public procurement contracts .
It is strange that the person saying this should be a lawyer who always takes the legal point of view , unlike all the economists , because actually , it is in business practice where the distinction between contractual period and lateness or slowness in paying is not always clear .
On many occasions the manager of a small business hears the ' big store ' saying : ' Don 't send me the bill now , send it to me in two months time . '
And what does this amount to ?
Disguised delayed payment , as the ' big store ' is exploiting its capacity and power to force the small supplier to accept its conditions .
We therefore have to take care that regulatory measures do not end up having a very limited effect , because in applying the theoretical principle of contractual freedom , which , as Mr Pérez Royo highlighted very well , can only be a theoretical principle when the two contracting parties are not in equal positions , in practice large companies are allowed to continue to impose their will on small and medium-sized enterprises .
If the proposal came into force as the Commission has proposed it , we could predict that the only limiting effects would be on the public sector and on cases where the creditors are large companies that can defend their interests against SMEs , whether in commercial or other sectors .
I therefore think that it is essential to approve section d ) of Amendment No 14 with the idea that , between the first and second readings , we will have to try to reformulate this amendment in a way which is reasonable and acceptable to the different Member States and their national legislations .
Secondly , I would like to stress that , from a legal point of view , it is essential to overcome the problems posed by the retention of title as established in Article 4 , if only because it confers different rights and powers in the different Member States .
Thirdly , I hope that the amendments tabled by the Committee for Economic Affairs are not approved , as they aim to regulate the setting up of debt collection companies , and this should be the subject of a separate directive as the subject matter involved is substantial enough to warrant one .
Another aspect which requires serious thought is the question of the debt recovery procedures in Article 5 .
They are too rigid and they could paralyse the legal system , but more importantly , we are entering territory which is comes under the competence of the Member States .
The same goes for the issue of lawyers .
Finally , I endorse what Mrs Berger said about the Commission 's powers .
The Commission should tackle other areas , for example publicity and transparency on late payments , or setting up a European register of slow payers .
I will finish by saying that we also need a change of culture , as was apparent yesterday when , debating this directive , a colleague rolled his eyes and said ' Oh dear , I haven 't given my son his pocket money for four weeks . '
We need to change our mentality too .
Mr President , the introduction of the single currency on 1 January is a positive step on the road to European integration .
The elimination of transaction costs and the lowering of interest rates is good news .
Small and mediumsized enterprises must be able to reap the benefits from the new climate created by the single currency in the immediate future and they must be helped to do so by national governments and state agencies .
On a broader front , I cannot emphasise strongly enough the importance of SMEs to both the Irish and the European economies .
I deplore the proposed cutbacks by the European Council in funding for SMEs at a time when this is supposed to be a central plank in the EU 's action to combat unemployment .
The Council 's decision in this matter must be overturned .
We need a positive operational environment for SMEs .
In Ireland we are developing a nationalist strategy to ease administrative burdens and small businesses , relieve burdens on small businesses and improve access to finance , as well as support business start-ups .
Ways of strengthening the entrepreneurial , technical and vocational dimensions of second level curriculum must also receive particular attention in the context of assisting SMEs in the future .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Alleanza Nazionale can endorse the positive opinion of the rapporteur , Mr Scarbonchi , on the fifth annual report of the European Observatory for SMEs .
However , I believe that we should highlight certain matters which have not been adequately covered by the Observatory .
I refer in particular to small businesses operating in disadvantaged zones and rural areas , where they must work under extremely difficult conditions because of the lack of infrastructure , the remoteness from markets , the almost total absence of new technology and computer systems , and a shortage of vocational training .
Added to this is the difficulty of obtaining loans .
In some Italian regions falling under Objective 1 , for example , banks lend money to SMEs at a rate 3 or 4 % above the rate offered in other more economically sound regions of Italy .
Criminal organisations are often the ones to gain from these circumstances : they step in and offer loans at exorbitant rates when the banks refuse to support small businesses whose assets are not a sufficient guarantee .
We therefore appeal to the Commission to strive to eliminate such impediments to the growth of SMEs in some parts of the European Union .
We will enthusiastically support all amendments highlighting these aspects .
Mr President , on a point of order .
There is no point in you talking about Members speaking for a short time or speaking within their limits when you have allowed that last speaker to go 60 % over the time accorded and , indeed , other speakers as well .
You are the President .
You have to make sure that Members speak for the time that is given to them .
Mr President , this evening we are talking about small and medium-sized enterprises .
We all recognize that small and medium-sized enterprises are major job creators .
Unfortunately , we do not treat them as such .
One of the major problems for small and medium-sized enterprises is that they have been forced to bankroll large companies in two ways : through long payment periods in contracts , and through non-payments .
Fortunately , the Commission has put forward a directive which aims to solve the second problem , and I welcome this as a step in the right direction .
I think that Mr Harrison 's magnificent report , with its amendments , also makes a major contribution to solving the problem , and I hope that the comments that have been made here by Mrs Palacio and the representatives of the Committee on Legal Affairs will help to make certain improvements on the legal front .
I think that we are going in the right direction .
However , we need to remind the Commission that we expect something to be done about payment periods , because , as some speakers have already said , contractual freedom is sacred but it also has its limits and , in practice , what are officially free contracts are in fact commitments , like the contract that I sign for electricity from an electricity supplier .
The same , or something similar , is true of the contracts that small and medium-sized enterprises sign with large distribution companies .
There are amendments tabled in Mr Harrison 's report that are worth considering .
Perhaps a certain amount of adjustment and modification is also needed , because the impact on a small or medium-sized enterprise that is not paid after an agreed payment period of 120 days is not the same as after only a 30-day period .
Obviously , this is another matter to be dealt with in this directive .
Mr President , I shall confine myself to a few remarks concerning the Harrison report on late payment .
I believe , in any event , that I have spoken enough about SMEs over the past four years .
First of all I wish to thank the Commissioner , Mr Papoutsis , for his commitment to this sector , which he has again demonstrated by finding legal instruments to regulate late payment .
In other words , at last we have an army that is waging war with the right ammunition .
The problem of late payment does not affect small businesses alone ; it affects SMEs more than any other businesses .
But all economic sectors will naturally reap the same benefits .
Compliance with terms of payment is a condition fundamental to the economy as a whole .
Let us begin with the concept of freedom of contract : those who buy and sell must respect ethical principles , but also practical , operational ones which underpin the economy . Conditions of contract are one of these fundamental principles governing company sales .
The Commission 's proposals are reasonable and acceptable .
In the absence of a written contract , we think that payment should be made at the latest 21 days from the invoice date ; this would apply only when the payment period is not laid down in the contract .
Public institutions are the real problem : here , the proposal is for a maximum payment period of 60 days from the invoice date .
Despite freedom of contract between vendor and purchaser , including in respect of due dates , such relationships needed to be regulated , above all because of excessively late payment by public institutions , and above all in defence of SMEs .
We must therefore endorse what was said by Mrs Palacio and Mrs Thyssen about Mr Harrison 's report - and we thank him for his work , particularly within the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs .
Amendment No 14 needs to be altered , especially in paragraphs d ) and e ) , where reference is made to 45 days , to make it at least 60 , and above all to change the operational instrument .
Allow me just to read out the amendment , to prove how ineffectual it is : ' where the due date specified in the contract or in the seller 's general conditions of sale is longer than 45 calendar days , the buyer shall provide the seller , at the buyer 's cost , with a bill of exchange , specifying explicitly the date for its payment ... ' .
We are talking about commercial freedom ; the contractual condition of freedom underpins the economy .
Here we are seeking to regulate forcibly a sector which has never been regulated before and which , perhaps because of this very absence of rigid rules , has found a way of operating flexibly and contributing , as we all know , to the growth of the economy and , hence , to development , investment and increased employment .
I thank the Commissioner and hope that tomorrow , when it comes to the vote , colleagues will bear in mind the points raised by Mr Harrison in his report , but will uphold freedom of contract as a fundamental element in the conduct of business .
Mr President , the EU has quite correctly focused on the role of small and medium-sized companies both generally and more especially as creators of job opportunities .
Today we are discussing four reports which set out to create opportunities and remove obstacles .
Mr Hendrick 's report discusses the key to solving Europe 's employment problem .
It talks of small and medium-sized companies and the biggest problem they have for their development and success , namely being able to acquire the venture capital for the vital investments they have to make .
The United States has managed substantially better than Europe in creating an active venture capital market for SMEs .
This is very clearly visible from the difference in the figures for unemployment in the world 's two largest economic areas .
The European Union and its Member States , however , have , over the last decade , begun moves to get a lead over the USA .
A capital market aimed at European SMEs has been developed .
Obstacles to that development have been removed .
The problem has arisen , however , of this market 's ability to function .
General rules , according to Mr Hendrick , do not solve everything .
It is especially important for the smaller countries that special financial institutions are also created to allow credit to SMEs and to provide substitute capital when it is otherwise unavailable .
The EU should establish a better framework for European investment banks to provide funding for the SME sector on a broad scale and to create various loan security schemes for collective funding arrangements for that sector .
Mr President , the European Observatory for SMEs continues to prove its usefulness in recognising and promoting these businesses which make such a vital contribution to our development .
I do not have time now to go through all the benefits I have listed on previous occasions , so I will confine myself to pointing out that SMEs continue to make an unmatched contribution to job creation , with 7 million new jobs created between 1995 and 1996 , as compared to 4.8 million created by large firms .
In the report before us , whose rapporteur I congratulate , we welcome the inclusion of two specific studies on SMEs and tourism and SMEs and the environment , both of which are of particular importance to Portugal .
Tourism is a prime sector of activity in which small and medium-sized enterprises and a large number of people all over the country are engaged , and which offers the added advantage of serving to promote cultural values and bringing the citizens of different countries together .
The measures proposed therefore deserve our support , particularly those intended to ensure that the most disadvantaged areas are not neglected .
Regarding environmental protection , we welcome the acknowledgement of the fact that public support , particularly within the European Union , must be given to small and medium-sized enterprises , which might otherwise be placed at a disadvantage compared to enterprises which benefit from economies of scale and wealthier countries with established demand patterns .
We also welcome the reference to concrete measures in such different areas as social security , reducing bureaucracy , access to the capital market or adapting to the launch of the euro .
These are all appropriate measures which will not distort competition but will , on the contrary , allow better use to be made of the opportunities offered by the market .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Third Multiannual Programme of the European Union is a cornerstone of our policy for SMEs and that is why Mr Rübig 's report is terribly important .
The fact that now , in the context of EU enlargement , we are opening up this programme to include Bulgaria , the Czech Republic , Estonia , Hungary , Poland , Romania and the Slovak Republic , is more than welcome .
It would also have been nice if Slovenia , Latvia and Lithuania could have been alongside them .
I cannot accept that these countries are being singled out for non-participation for formal reasons .
I hope that this will change in future .
Looking at this massive project , it appears to me important that we see this Community programme as a part of the preaccession strategy , and for that reason we should be looking at the economic structures in these countries at the same time .
But no amount of money is going to produce what we need for SMEs at this point , which is vision .
This SME policy can guide companies towards it , but it can also , and this is especially important to me , strengthen the spirit of SMEs .
It is all about having a certain attitude to certain things at this point .
We need own-initiative , entrepreneurial commitment - i.e. alongside money , we need advice , training and incentives .
Therefore I believe it is important to try to do something about bureaucracy in these countries , to promote legal certainty and to provide support .
We must , in other words , improve the overall package with accompanying measures .
The problem here has something to do with the fact that in these countries too , less government is what is needed and not more . With our programme we should be contributing to increasing own-initiative .

Mr President , I shall speak briefly concerning the report by Mr Harrison , to whom I am grateful for his work and for having raised the profile of such an important issue , the running sore of Europe 's economy , in other words late payments to SMEs .
I would merely stress what has already been made abundantly clear by my colleagues , and in particular by Mrs Thyssen . I too would draw attention to the content of Amendment No 14 , paragraph d ) .
We have said that freedom of contract , where it is explicit , should be left intact ; it is the basis and the life-blood of trade .
It is therefore important to try and eliminate all constraints liable to undermine express contractual freedom in any way .
I hope that tomorrow we shall be able to vote along these lines .
I should also like to emphasise the most important problem raised in the report , namely payments by public institutions .
Amendment No 26 states that in public authority contracts the main contractor has to grant conditions to the subcontractor and suppliers which are at least as favourable as those granted to the main contractor by the public authority .
That is right and proper , but let us not forget that it is all too often the public authorities ' contracts themselves that cause the main contractor to have difficulty in paying the subcontractor and suppliers .
The focus should therefore be placed on the public institutions : contractors should receive guarantees covering onerous contracts with the public authorities , so that they in turn can provide guarantees to subcontractors .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , today the European Parliament is considering four reports concerning SMEs .
Let me deal with each of those reports in turn .
I will begin with Mr Harrison 's report on late payment .
That phenomenon has serious consequences for all European companies .
As was stressed a short while ago , one in four bankruptcies is caused by late payments .
33 % of companies in Europe regard late payment as one of the most serious problems they face and one which , in many cases , threatens their survival .
Late payments impede the correct development of trade within the Community and also impede the smooth operation of the single market .
Though it is a general problem all over the European Union , it is true that there are great differences in the payment practices between the Member States .
21 % of European companies could export more if they could ensure prompt payment from their customers abroad .
The Commission proposal for a directive on late payment comprises a package of measures to combat this problem in trade operations within the European Community .
The measures relate to late payments between all companies and between companies and the public sector .
They also fully respect the principle of the freedom of contract .
The proposal 's general aim is to encourage compliance with contractual payment deadlines , to the benefit of all companies .
It also provides a legal basis for discouraging debtors from delaying payment .
It will entitle creditors to adequate compensation when they are not paid promptly , and will provide or improve procedures for the recovery of the sums due , ensuring that those procedures are effective , cheap and quick .
The proposal also contains special measures to improve the payment practices of public authorities .
On that point , let me assure Mrs Thyssen that the Commission has taken the necessary measures to improve its own compliance with the 60-day payment deadline and , in cases where Commission departments delay payment without good reason , they will have to pay interest for the period of delay .
The Commission believes that this proposal will secure substantial benefits for companies , especially SMEs .
It will also have a positive impact on employment , precisely because there will be fewer bankruptcies in Europe due to late payment .
Mr President , I should like to thank the European Parliament for its continual support here .
I should also particularly like to thank the rapporteur , Mr Lyndon Harrison , for all his hard work , not just on his report on the directive , but for all his efforts in recent years on behalf of SMEs , always sounding the alarm bell and most of all in connection with the late payment issue .
Let me also thank the Legal Affairs Committee and especially its draftsman , Mrs Berger , for her contribution during the process of Parliament 's scrutiny of the directive .
Many of the amendments tabled clarify and supplement the Commission proposal and I can tell you straight away that we accept them .
In particular , the Commission can accept Amendments Nos 1 , 2 , 3 , 4 , 10 , 19 , 20 , 22 and 31 as they stand .
There are also some other amendments which the Commission mostly agrees with in substance , but we would like to reserve the possibility of rewording them to make them compatible with the rest of the directive from the legal standpoint .
I refer to Amendments Nos 7 , 9 , 11 , 13 , 14 , 15 , 16 , 18 , 21 , 24 , 26 , 28 and 32 .
In contrast , the Commission cannot accept Amendments Nos 5 , 6 , 8 , 12 , 17 , 23 , 25 , 27 , 29 , 30 , 33 , 34 and 35 .
Mr President , I should like now to move on to the Rübig report on the participation of a group of seven applicant Central and Eastern European countries in the Third Multiannual Programme for SMEs .
First of all I want to thank the rapporteur for his excellent work .
We can accept the amendments tabled and approved by the relevant parliamentary committee on 3 September .
Indeed , in recent years the number of SMEs has increased in all those countries and today account for over 90 % of all companies .
We know , however , that many efforts will still have to be made in the coming years to improve and simplify the administrative and legal environment within which those companies are active , and of course we would like to see still more of them become active in the future .
In past years the PHARE programme has played an important part in supporting the development of SMEs in those countries and I am sure that this will continue .
Today , in most cases , the policy on promoting the development of SMEs needs to be made more clear and , in my opinion , more specific .
I am particularly pleased that today sees the opening of the Third Multiannual Programme to a first group of seven countries for the period 1998-2000 , namely Bulgaria , the Czech Republic , Estonia , Hungary , Poland , Romania and the Slovak Republic .
Later the programme will be opened to Slovenia , Lithuania and Latvia , when they too are ready , and it is now being opened to the Republic of Cyprus .
Now that those countries are getting ready to join the Union , I sincerely believe that the time has come for them to participate creatively in the Third Multiannual Programme for SMEs .
I would again like to thank you for your support here .
Mr President , I now come to the Hendrick report on European capital markets for SMEs .
First of all , let me thank Mr Hendrick for his excellent report and his positive assessment of the Commission 's 1997 statement .
Developments in that area since then have been particularly positive , though I believe there is still much to be done .
As you know , both the EASDAQ market and the Euro-Nouveau Marché have continued to expand and they now deal in the shares of around 200 companies .
Though EASDAQ 's figures fall far short of those of NASDAQ , the corresponding American market , it remains true that it represents a very important achievement , especially bearing in mind that it is still less than two years since EASDAQ opened , while if we look at the American experience we see that NASDAQ took about five years to become established .
The 200 companies involved today account for capital of ECU 2.7 billion , i.e. on average ECU 14 million each .
That is a sum which could not have been obtained from traditional banking sources .
In parallel , it has enabled the companies to gain access to the bank finance they need , since their balance sheets have been strengthened by share capital .
Those companies are just the kind of active , high-tech enterprises which the European Commission wishes to encourage .
The result of their incorporation in a stock market has been to increase their working capital over these two years by an average of about 30 % .
Moreover , the successful expansion of those two markets has contributed generally towards stimulating increasing cooperation between stock markets and towards encouraging the creation of capital markets for SMEs in other Member States as well .
However , their development needs to be stimulated still further , and I believe that it will certainly be boosted by the arrival of the euro , since they will benefit greatly from the added transparency that will result from the adoption , implementation and use of the single currency .
Now , as for future action , we will focus our efforts on implementing the plan of action which was part of our statement at the Cardiff European Council in June 1998 .
In that context let me mention six specific initiatives which are either under way already , or will begin very soon .
First , the Round Table concerning the fragmentation of venture capital markets , aiming to remove barriers and facilitate the access of SMEs to that type of finance .
Second , the review of all national and cross-border share issuing procedures , aiming to make the initial sale of shares to the public simple , standardised and cost-effective .
Third , the Third Round Table for bankers and SMEs .
Within the scope of this Third Round Table 's work , best practices will be defined for the financing , creation and start-up of enterprises , especially ones with a high development potential which could become candidates for flotation on a European stock market .
Fourth , new measures on seat capital , which will be called CREA .
Fifth , a self-assessment guide to the markets for SMEs , which will help entrepreneurs decide for themselves whether their companies have the potential for stock market flotation .
Sixth , a study on the techniques used to assess both risk and the credit rating of companies , with special reference to SMEs .
Finally , Mr President , I come to the Scarbonchi report on the fifth annual report by the European Observatory for SMEs .
Let me first thank the European Parliament for its continual interest in the Observatory , and sincerely congratulate the rapporteur , Mr Scarbonchi , on his work .
I made a careful note of all your views about the Observatory 's future work .
A call was made for a study of how the various European programmes for SMEs are coordinated , but I imagine that is already largely covered by the publication you all have at your disposal , on action on behalf of SMEs and the small trades sector .
As for the other views expressed , let me assure you that they will be taken into account when preparing future reports on the Observatory , which will need to contain more up-to-date , ready- processed facts and figures . Since the reports have previously been published on an annual basis , perhaps we need to allow more time than just one year , so that new and better processed data can be included .
Finally , I should like to say how glad I am that the Observatory 's importance has been recognised as a point of reference , a centre which prepares a major report giving very important information not only about the European institutions , but mainly about the governments of the Member States and the various agencies working in the SME sector .
I also want to assure you that the Commission intends to continue the Observatory 's work in the future and to contribute by supporting its activities .
The joint debate is closed .
The votes will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
( The sitting was closed at 0.10 a.m. )
Approval of the Minutes
The Minutes of yesterday 's sitting have been distributed .
Are there any comments ?
Your comment concerned a linguistic correction , Mr Pompidou , and we must clearly do all we can to improve the text and make it more accurate .
We shall proceed accordingly .
( The Minutes were approved )
Madam President , I was told that yesterday Mrs Schierhuber 's assistant was attacked and robbed in Brussels , and Mr Schiedermeier 's flat was broken into .
When will the request signed by over 150 Members for improved safety measures in Brussels be acted upon ?
That is a very relevant comment , Mr Rübig , and as you know , we are trying to put a stop to all this , but we cannot do it overnight .
However , I can assure you that a number of measures have been taken of the kind that you and many other Members have repeatedly called for .
Madam President , I would just like to make a brief statement to inform the Parliament and my fellow Members that , although the Portuguese Government subscribes to Christian principles , we have seen the current demonstrations by farmers who have been brought to the verge of bankruptcy following several years of bad harvests met with armoured vehicles , helicopters , storm troops and dogs .
If this really is the humanism of my Government , I must protest .
I have always been involved with agriculture ; I have myself participated in lawful , peaceful demonstrations .
I would like to draw attention to the fact that , even in a democracy , it is difficult to shrug off some of the habits of dictatorship .
As you will appreciate , Mr Rosado Fernandes , I let you speak even though that was not a point of order .
I would ask Members only to raise genuine points of order .
Madam President , my comment possibly has more to do with the world 's agenda rather than Parliament 's , but I would ask you to give me just a minute of the House 's time .
This morning it was announced that the country of Burkina Faso has ratified the Ottawa Treaty on anti-personnel mines .
This brings the number of countries which have ratified the Treaty to 40 , which means that it came into force on 1 March 1998 and the process of ridding the world of landmines can now begin on 1 March 1999 .
Parliament worked very hard to promote this Treaty , so as well as congratulating the government of Canada and the government of Burkina Faso for becoming the 40th ratifying country , I think we also deserve to feel quietly proud of ourselves .
Thank you , Mr Bertens .
While that was not a point of order , everyone will realize the interest and the importance of what you told the House .
Madam President , this may not be a point of order , but I have a question I should like to put to you .
Five months ago , on 7 April this year , I sent a written question to the President of the European Parliament about contracts for the supply of furniture for Parliament 's bar and restaurants .
I have yet to receive a reply , despite making a number of telephone calls to the President 's office .
What I would like to ask you is this : how am I to obtain a reply ?
I cannot give you an immediate answer , Mrs Plooij-van Gorsel , because I was not aware of this letter .
However , I will ask the President to reply to the question which you put to him in April , if - as you say - he has not already done so .
Integrating gender issues in development cooperation
The next item is the recommendation for second reading ( A4-0291 / 98 ) , on behalf of the Committee on Development and Cooperation , on the common position adopted by the Council ( C4-0307 / 98-97 / 0151 ( SYN ) ) with a view to adopting a Council Regulation on integrating gender issues in development cooperation ( Rapporteur : Mrs Junker ) .
Madam President , strengthening the situation of women is a fundamental objective in itself .
Human prosperity generally would increase if women enjoyed the same status as men and had the same opportunities and the same social , economic and legal rights as men , including the right to reproductive health and protection against genderspecific violence .
This creed does not stem from some feminist manifesto , but a fact-filled United Nations publication on the situation of women in the world in 1995 , which was published on the occasion of the fourth World Women 's Conference in Beijing .
The lessons which can be learnt from it correspond with the European Commission 's mainstreaming approach for integrating gender issues in all areas of policy , including development cooperation .
In Beijing the European Union , I am glad to say , having been there myself to witness it , played a positive and constructive role .
Through the Action Platform and the Final Declaration approved in Beijing , all the participants committed themselves , in their respective areas of responsibility , to introducing targeted measures to contribute to the elimination of discrimination and to the genuinely equal treatment of women in all fields of life - upbringing , education , training , work and family , society , politics , the economy , science , justice , culture , the media , etc .
The proposal for a regulation which you have before you is a welcome attempt to increase awareness of the fact that improving women 's rights is the very key to the sustainable development we hear so much about .
The aim of earmarking the funding allocated , which is unfortunately fairly modest , for awareness-raising measures rather than operational projects , certainly deserves our support .
Hitherto , women and their interests have not been adequately integrated into important spheres of development cooperation such as agriculture and livestock farming , the fishing industry , forestry , drinking water supplies , emergency and disaster aid , and also trade , food processing and light industry .
This is due not least to stubborn prejudices and cultural and religious barriers that go hand in glove with ignorance .
I will not go through the whole list of disadvantages that women face in all cultural areas .
The problems are well-known .
We can say that the proposal for a regulation is a step in the right direction .
It is nevertheless a small step that must be followed by others .
I recognise the fact that many amendments from the first reading were accepted , but there is a crucial shortcoming as far as the Council 's common position is concerned - it has limited the period of validity .
I think it is right for us to review how the programme has fared in five years ' time , but the problem will certainly not have been dealt with by then and further efforts will still be required .
In this regard , I would suggest that the time limit be taken out , and I am counting on broad agreement from the House .
This further supports the idea that the integration of gender issues in development cooperation must be regarded as a horizontal task , as something to be practised across the board in development cooperation .
It depends on achieving a substantial multiplier effect , as the programme intends to do .
Coordinated action is needed with the Member States , because awareness must be raised not only in the developing countries but also at home .
All decision-makers , both male and female , must be appropriately trained at Community level , not only as far as the ' hard factors ' are concerned , but also in the new areas of development cooperation which are becoming increasingly important : human rights , democratisation , the rule of law , participation of the civil society , good governance , trade , macroeconomic analyses , satisfying basic human needs , combating poverty , reproductive health .
In all of these areas , the priority is to use existing structures and local capacity in the developing countries .
However , the best of intentions and the finest regulations will come to nothing if there are not enough people to put them into practice , and this is particularly true here .
For a long time the European Parliament and its committees have complained there are not enough staff working on ' women and development ' at the Commission .
Now the low point has been reached .
The Agrade official who was responsible for gender issues in the directorate-general has left the post and there is no sign of a successor .
I hear that the original job vacancy notice has apparently been blocked .
Now , there is just one expert from Sweden holding the fort .
I would very much like to hear what the Commission has to say about this , as it does cast doubt on its credibility .
The Commission has an obligation to Parliament here , but it has even more of an obligation towards women in the developing countries .
Madam President , we also looked very closely at the subject of development cooperation and genderspecific aspects of it in the Committee on Women 's Rights .
I went to Beijing as the rapporteur , and all I can say is that what was decided there was right .
The Action Platform provides us with a framework for action .
If we fail to implement what was undertaken there , then the most vehement statements of continued support will not help in the least .
If we have already recognised that women are the key to development , then the Regulation must come into force as quickly as possible .
We heard from Mrs Junker that the Commission is having a lot of problems with implementation here .
We also have two budget lines that are currently being blocked .
With the regulation , we will obtain the legal basis that we urgently need in order to translate gender concerns into reality .
The good work done in the past by the units in DG Ib and DG VIII was also mentioned .
They not only supervised pilot projects on mainstreaming , but also developed procedures which made it possible to evaluate the gender impact of the individual projects .
The effects of the various projects on girls and women in the countries with which we cooperate were closely examined .
Measures were also taken to raise awareness among staff in the Commission and other services of gender issues in development cooperation .
We cannot stop now , we must keep going .
If the few posts in the Commission are now to remain unfilled , then all our efforts will be frustrated .
That is why I believe that we must continue our attempts to release the appropriations for both the budget lines concerned , B7-611 and B7-631 , as soon as possible .
The utilisation rate of the resources in these two lines was very high at 93 % .
The measures for areas such as crisis prevention , human rights , democratisation and basic education must be implemented as soon as possible in the cooperation countries .
I would emphasise once again that , as Mrs Junker has already said , a time limit does , of course , very much curtail the effects of the regulation .
If we agree - and I am assuming that we will have a majority here in the House - that the time limit should be removed , then that is a very important decision .
Constant evaluation of the effects of this policy would nevertheless still remain necessary .
Removing the time limit is , however , a central issue .
Madam President , with subjects such as these we are used to seeing just the women of the House here .
I especially welcome the fact that a few gentlemen are present , particularly on our side of the House , and indeed more here than on the side which in general appears to be so sensitive to these kinds of issues .
The fact that Lord Plumb has just chosen the wrong moment to leave is another matter !
Ladies and gentlemen , time and time again people complain about the fact that development cooperation does not adequately deal with or take into consideration the cultural conditions in the respective countries .
Even when we try to take account of gender issues in development policy we are still faced with the fact that societies in other countries have a traditional division of responsibilities , and we all know that trying to make radical changes never works .
So our first concern should be to identify the areas which especially affect women and then to step up our support for them .
Projects that are put forward for instance in the field of food provision or health are particularly successful .
For the same reason , in a whole series of countries , projects involving personal loans to women are also working . Their repayment ethic is well documented in all the reports .
In my opinion however , education should still be our top priority , not only because the proportion of illiterate women is especially high , but also because a higher level of education and training brings greater awareness of the issues of demographic development , and educated women would be more open to birth control .
We must , though , remember one thing - whenever broadening the scope for women affects the scope for men , there are two possibilities : the outcome is either conflict or consensus .
The latter is certainly always better for families .
We should also not allow women to be encumbered with the entire responsibility for demographic development , particularly with regard to family planning .
This is an unusual approach , where the gender aspect means that both sides , men and women , have responsibility .
This report , like those on other subjects , calls on the Member States to cooperate .
This is a subject that crops up again and again at every opportunity in the field of development .
I would be very grateful if the Commission could give us feedback on successful examples of cooperation , so that we can at least cross off one area and say that it actually works there .
My thanks to the rapporteur .
Madam President , Mrs Günther will be glad to know that the Greens are so advanced that we have a man speaking on this issue .
In fact , I presented the report by Nel van Dijk in the Women 's Rights Committee when Nel was absent , so it is a subject I know about .
I think it is a very important area .
I have just returned from India , from visiting the Dalai Lama in Dharamsala .
If we look at village life in India and the central role which women play in the community , and the need to target women to act as the motors of development within the village , it should be clear that this is an area the EU needs to highlight more .
I think Mrs Junker 's report is excellent because it stresses the key issue , namely that we should be using our money to train , develop and promote women within the developing countries and not necessarily spending all the money on training women within the Commission in Brussels .
That may be important - the sensitisation and feminisation of policies within the Commission and within the rest of the Union - but the key should be to spend money from these budget lines on women 's projects in the developing countries themselves .
That is an important part of her report and I hope the Commission will respond positively .
We talked on the Women 's Rights Committee about how we should feminise the policies more : to have effective standing committees with more women on them , to make sure there is better representation of women from the developing countries on ACP delegations , to make sure that we monitor and evaluate all development projects from the EU in terms of the impact on women within the developing countries , and to make sure the reports are fed back , not only to the Commission but to Parliament too , so that we can see that there is a true feminisation of EU development aid .
If we did this it would be a considerable advance .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I must first thank the rapporteur and all the members of the Committee on Development and Cooperation for their work on integrating gender equality in the European Union 's development cooperation .
In the words of the Jean Ferrat song , women are men 's future .
That is especially true in development issues .
Anyone who has been to Africa , for example , will have seen the major role played by women in the development process .
They make a vital contribution both to the economy - especially its informal or popular sector - and agriculture .
Similarly , their contribution to the rehabilitation and reconstruction process cannot be too highly praised .
Do we even need to mention their role in preventing conflicts or in building peace ?
Yet , although they are the vehicles of development , in developing countries women are the victims of serious inequalities , social , family , economic and political discrimination , and their contribution to development is made despite considerable obstacles to their achieving equal treatment .
The European Union should now go beyond declarations of intent , develop the positive resolutions that it has adopted by subscribing to the platform of measures and the declaration of the 1995 Beijing Conference , and put them into practice , especially in its development aid policy .
We can therefore only welcome the proposal for a Council Regulation , which aims to give women the role they deserve as the vital element in development by ensuring that all development operations and strategies systematically include an analysis of gender issues .
It is , after all , vital that European Union development measures should respond to women 's needs and priorities locally .
They must be able to play a full part in designing and implementing development projects .
I therefore wish to tell you , on behalf of my group , the European Radical Alliance , that I am fully behind the recommendation of the Committee on Development and Cooperation , especially since for us taking gender issues into account in Community development activities is a vital element in their success .
I should add that I do not think it is appropriate to fix a period of validity for this regulation , given the ambitious scale of its programme .
That is why , along with all my committee colleagues , I opposed the time limits suggested by the Council and I hope that it will heed the European Parliament on this point .
The concept of equality between men and women must always be kept in mind .
It must also be taken into account in all European Union development aid measures in the future .
Madam President , as a man and as a Member of Parliament , I cannot but acknowledge that we live in a society , be it in the north or south , in which women find it very difficult to enter decision-making positions in social , political and economic spheres .
This inequality of opportunity between men and women represents a huge waste of potential and ability , which is particularly flagrant in the less developed countries .
I disagree with a regulatory system based on quotas or rules .
I believe we should concentrate on raising awareness of this problem , and the European Parliament has played an exemplary pioneering role here .
We have a saying in Portugal that the softest water will eventually wear away the hardest stone .
I agree with the retabling of the proposed amendments to the regulation since we must ensure that small-scale operational projects are not neglected , that it is made clear that the European Union has only one policy on cooperation , and that we identify priority areas where the participation of women may be increased , such as emergency and crisis-prevention operations , human rights and democratisation , economic analysis , trade and sexual and reproductive health matters .
Special conditions must be removed and normality restored in the award of contracts on the basis of tenders from recipient countries and from developing countries in the same region .
The European Union cannot take away with one hand what it has given with the other .
And lastly , why decree the end of a programme which seeks to strengthen the presence of women in the European Union 's development agencies and policies , writing its death certificate five years in advance ?
We should know better than to expect miracles when we see the slow pace at which the major social changes of the last 15 years have taken place in the developing countries , the slow-but-sure improvement in life expectancy , infant mortality , literacy , birth rate and per capita GNP .
Unfortunately , it would seem from the Council 's position that we will see Mrs Junker clamouring for woman power in the Commission services and bodies for a good many years yet .
Madam President , firstly I should like to welcome Parliament 's recommendation and express the Commission 's appreciation of the support given by Parliament both for the creation of this budget line in 1990 and also for the Community 's policy on mainstream and gender issues in development cooperation since the Beijing Conference on Women in 1995 .
I am very pleased to have the opportunity to thank Parliament for the excellent work done in particular by the rapporteur Mrs Juncker on behalf of the Committee on Development and Cooperation and Mrs Gröner on behalf of the Committee on Women 's Rights .
It is recognized that the high level of experience and commitment is fostering good cooperation between the European Parliament and the Commission in this area .
This proposed recommendation aims to provide a coherent and stable legal basis for measures which are of key importance to the quality and effectiveness of our development cooperation as well as for social justice and equality .
It is absolutely essential that we get the regulation through as quickly as possible so that we can use the money for the intended purpose .
In the past development interventions have often neglected two important considerations .
Firstly , they have often failed to take proper account of the various economic and social roles carried out by women in the project areas .
Consequently projects could be designed on the basis of an incomplete picture and without the participation of those most concerned .
That is exactly the point made by Mr Kerr .
Such an approach of course reduces their chances of success .
Secondly , they have given insufficient weight at policy and programming level to the persistent and severe differentials between women and men in developing countries .
That is the point made very forcefully by Mrs Günther .
These differentials reduce the possibilities for women to make a significant economic and social contribution and they act as a brake on the development of society as a whole .
They also keep women in subordinate roles .
So we are trying to get on with exactly what Mrs Gröner said , namely implementing the platform agreed worldwide at Beijing .
It is for these reasons that a strategic and catalytic approach is so important .
Simply to fund additional projects in favour of women would risk marginalising the importance of the issue .
It would not have sufficient effect and its impact on the quality and long-term effectiveness of mainstream development activities would be minimal .
Instead the proposed regulation provides measures to support the comprehensive inclusion of gender issues within the mainstream of the Community 's development cooperation policies and programmes .
That is the point which was made in Beijing so far as the platform is concerned .
At the same time , it will encourage special interventions to reduce differentials between women and men , financed from existing allocations , and on an appropriately large scale .
We think that is the right approach .
This accords with the mainstreaming approach favoured by the recent Council conclusions and earlier resolution and in particular by the Beijing Conference .
The broad mainstreaming approach is what we are trying to promote .
The task involves a thorough , imaginative and ongoing re-thinking of traditional approaches and working methods .
International experience suggests that this is not an easy or rapid task .
However , the first progress report of integrating gender in development shows that considerable work has already been done and a good start has been made .
Mrs Juncker made a very strong point regarding personnel and we recognize the importance of her observation .
We are trying to maintain existing staffing levels but I have to say that this is not easy .
The present difficult staffing climate leaves us very little room for manoeuvre in this respect .
Specialized expertise is not always readily available and cannot be transferred easily within the directorate .
The point Mrs Juncker and Mr Kerr made is being taken on board .
It is important to develop training both in-house and for those in the developing countries .
The Commission 's position on the 20 amendments submitted for consideration and voting is as follows : We can fully support six amendments , Nos 1 , 7 , 9 , 10 , 14 and 20 , and also parts of Nos 11 , 17 and 18 .
We can also partially embrace Amendments Nos 2 and 4 , although we consider that some rewording is needed to retain a clear focus on the mainstreaming approach of the budget line .
We are talking about one budget line here , which incorporates two previous budget lines .
We are unable to accept the following amendments : Nos 3 , 5 , 6 , 8 , 12 , 13 , 15 , 16 and 19 , together with parts of Nos 11 , 17 and 18 .
Let me outline very briefly the main reasons for the Commission 's position .
Some amendments , for example Nos 12 and 13 and part of 18 , would cause new procedural constraints , particularly related to interinstitutional requirements .
These would jeopardise the proper administration of the budget , given the limited human resources that are available in the Commission .
In the case of Amendment No 8 , although we agree with the intention , the activities proposed are too ambitious for our staffing resources .
Finally , several amendments - Nos 16 , 19 and part of 11 - would be inconsistent with the existing interinstitutional agreements or would involve changing existing committee procedures .
Others - Amendment No 15 and part of No 18 - would affect the Commission 's existing competences .
As you know , there is some urgency about the passing of the regulation .
The budget line for integrating gender and development is currently blocked until the legal base can be established .
So we are grateful for Parliament 's support in our efforts to try to progress this measure as quickly as possible .
Three years after the World Conference on Women at Beijing a lot has been achieved .
That is agreed .
A considerable and growing proportion of Community aid resources are being targeted at the Beijing priority areas .
Important steps are being taken to improve the gender sensitivity of Community aid programmes so the adoption of this regulation on integrating gender issues in development cooperation will provide a stable basis for this work and enable us to intensify our efforts .
Thank you , Commissioner Flynn .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place at 12 noon .
Women : impact of unemployment
The next item is the report ( A4-0272 / 98 ) by Mrs Marinucci , on behalf of the Committee on Women 's Rights , on the impact of unemployment on the situation of women .
Madam President , unemployment is the European Union 's number one problem .
It manifests itself to varying degrees in the different regions of Europe , but it represents a serious threat to family peace and institutional stability everywhere .
There has been a succession of studies , research projects , national and Community measures over the years , plus the Delors White Paper , Councils of Ministers and summits , all of them suggesting more or less feasible remedies - implemented to a greater or lesser extent - but the problem remains and is likely to worsen .
There is just one positive aspect to this picture of gloom : for the first time in history it has not occurred to anyone to suggest the traditional expedient of reducing male unemployment by sending women back home .
This undoubtedly signals a victory for present-day feminism , which has also revolutionised approaches to employment issues .
It signals the victory of all those women in every corner of Europe who are joining the labour market in increasingly large numbers , thus indicating their unshakable desire to play a full part in work outside the home .
But it goes further than that !
Not only has no one seen fit to dust off the old recipe , tried and tested time and again - since the dawn of the industrial revolution - in the post-war periods and at times of crisis , but , what is more , since the Essen Summit the European Union has fully integrated women 's issues into the debate and proposals on employment in Europe , with major repercussions in all the Member States .
Why then , some might ask , was there a need for this own-initiative resolution ?
Because appearances conceal certain ambiguities which could bring back in through the window what has gone out through the door , because many measures are still not being applied , many measures are inadequate , and because there is a need to point up the numerous contradictions pervading the whole issue of female employment and unemployment .
The first contradiction is that there have never before been so many women in paid employment outside of the home ; at the same time , neither have there ever been so many women out of work .
The reason is that the growing supply of female labour is offset by an accelerating decline in the demand for both male and female workers in private firms and public institutions .
The second contradiction is that , whereas female employment is increasing , the increase is primarily in part-time , insecure and fixed-term jobs .
Part-time work is on the increase , but this does not always mean that it becomes easier to reconcile domestic activities with work outside the home , because this work might take place at weekends , on public holidays , in the evenings or at night .
Jobs lasting a few hours and a few days a year boost female employment , but social protection is reduced .
What is more , social protection provided on a non-individual basis prevents women from taking paid employment , and - in some countries - even the transition from passive to so-called active labour market policies deprives women of welfare benefits which are not readily replaced by income from employment , for instance in the case of single mothers .
The third contradiction is that although girls are performing better at school , female employment is not increasing proportionately .
This is undoubtedly because of the segregation of girls in school , which results in women being segregated in traditionally female jobs . What is more , there are female graduates out of work in traditionally male sectors , often with better qualifications than their employed male counterparts .
The same can be said of vocational training , which does not lead to significant levels of female employment when it is targeted at sectors already dominated by women , nor even , sometimes , when targeted at sectors dominated by men , if these sectors are themselves contracting .
All these contradictions - at a time when women are furthermore suffering , as mothers and wives , the effects of the substantial difficulties being encountered by young people trying to enter the world of work , or the tragedy of husbands losing their jobs - convinced us of the need to bring this issue back into the spotlight .
We women are disappointed , firstly , both by the approach of the Employment Guidelines adopted at the Luxembourg Summit - which failed to incorporate the subject of women 's employment into the first three pillars , marginalising and compartmentalising it in the fourth - and by the national action plans , some of which have glaring shortcomings and are devoid of any quantified targets . We are disappointed , secondly , in the outcome of the meeting of EU Ministers for Women in Belfast which ended without any concrete decisions .
Therefore this resolution , the fruit of cooperation and valuable additions in the form of amendments from female and male colleagues from all the groups , urges the Commission , Council and Member States to include in the next Employment Guidelines - and , Mr Flynn , in the guidelines for the Structural Funds - benchmark targets with quantified objectives and clear timetables and budgetary resources for implementation .
These benchmarks should be based on the average of the three most successful Member States .
We call for a more precise definition of unemployment and a clear definition of part-time work , and we call on the social partners to conclude a framework agreement on all forms of atypical work .
We should also like the Commission to issue a framework directive on childcare services - I would be delighted if the Commissioner were to announce it today - and we hope that this House will back our proposals .
Madam President , today , we in the European Parliament have once again shown ourselves to be a genuine lobby for women 's rights with this wide-ranging debate on the subject .
I think that equal rights and opportunities for men and women in education , training and the labour market are one of the cornerstones of the construction of Europe .
Gainful employment is , as we all know , more than just earning one 's living .
The talents , qualifications and creativity of the female sex , in the EU and beyond , are all valuable assets upon which we must build .
Nevertheless , as the Marinucci report clearly shows , to this day , women are remarkably disadvantaged .
Der Spiegel 's survey of the labour market shows that on average women are 30 % more affected by unemployment , not to mention the fact that in some regions of the Union female unemployment is twice as high as the overall rate , more women are being pushed out of the labour market , women are forced into insecure , unprotected jobs ( so-called atypical work ) and , in spite of their qualifications , they are disadvantaged when it comes to career advancement .
We in the Group of the Party of European Socialists see an increasingly dangerous risk that , in the long-term , major disadvantages affecting women are going to become worse , such as differences in income ( women earn one third less ) , serious discrimination in career advancement and the danger of increasing unemployment .
The Marinucci report contains a whole series of very specific suggestions to make it easier for women to reconcile family and work .
Basically , however , a rethink is urgently needed , as is coordinated action between the Member States and the EU institutions .
The Employment Summit has started the ball rolling , but the proposals in the national employment plans for ensuring equal treatment for men and women are completely inadequate .
We must underline the fact that measures to promote employment will have to do much more to include women .
I am very much in favour of adopting benchmarking and laying down guidelines , with time-limits , on how to eliminate discrimination .
In the motion for a resolution , and especially in paragraph 23 , the report makes tangible proposals as to how the disadvantages and the gender gap could be reduced and on how we should take the lead from the three most successful Member States here .
The Marinucci report makes a number of good suggestions .
I should like to thank my colleague for her work , and I think that the Member States do have to be made more aware of this problem .
At the last informal Council of Ministers in Austria , three Member States were not represented at all : Germany , the UK and France .
They had not even sent ministers to the informal meeting .
Member States ' awareness of the problem does have to be increased .
We expect the Council of Social Affairs Ministers in October to implement the reports that are approved here today .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , we have made further progress in the fight against unemployment .
In Essen , in 1994 , under the German Presidency , we laid the foundations for a comprehensive strategy on cooperation between Member States .
In the five spheres that have been identified , there are actions in favour of those groups particularly affected by unemployment , of which a disproportionately high ratio are women .
At the Employment Summit in Luxembourg in 1997 , action plans were decided upon to combat long-term and youth unemployment , and to move from passive to active measures .
These concern women especially .
What is known as atypical work has long since become typical - voluntary work , fixed-term contract work , and help from family members .
Part-time work is sensible if it allows the demands of work and family life to be better reconciled , including through homeworking and teleworking .
It is not sensible if working by the hour is extended so much that it more or less becomes a full-time job , and an underpaid one at that .
Part-time work without social cover , opportunities for further training and career advancement is merely something for companies to fall back on when they have a lot of orders .
Here , as the PPE Group has pointed out in its amendments , the danger of dismissal is ever-present .
The social security section of the 1997 Directive on Part-Time Work needs to be fleshed out .
In order to make it easier for women to enter into their preferred career , skilled child-care is also needed .
It should be affordable , appropriate and with flexible and extended opening hours .
Germany 's Law on nurseries , which lays down the right to a nursery place , is a good beginning which other countries should copy .
We in the PPE Group support Mrs Marinucci when , in her committed report , she calls for it to be made easier for women to return to professional life .
A person who interrupts their career to bring up children , look after elderly dependants , in the service of someone else in other words , should not be held back .
They must be supported , even by taking this into account when it comes to pension entitlements .
I cannot however share one of the assessments made by the rapporteur , of the value of education and training .
Of course it is unacceptable that women , who happily by now make up the majority at universities , should suffer more from unemployment than their male counterparts and should be over-qualified for many jobs .
Nevertheless , higher education qualifications are always worth having , even if they are no guarantee of a job .
They increase the chances of securing a job and increase selfconfidence .
There are still considerable difficulties in climbing up the career ladder .
Companies headed or founded by women are still in an all too obvious minority .
That is why promoting the enterprise culture , or easier access for women to financing and loans , are top priorities for the PPE Group .
At the suggestion of our Committee on Women 's Rights , let us do what we can to ensure that these ideas are adopted by the economy and society .
Madam President , the rapporteur , Mrs Marinucci , has explained very clearly why women still need to be given special consideration on the labour market , yet in the Committee on Women 's Rights I abstained .
Why ?
We in the Liberal Group feel that the general approach adopted in the report is too defensive , too concerned about the need for flexibility on the labour market and , in places , unrealistic .
Take flexibility .
According to the rapporteur this is a terrible headache , yet young men and women are increasingly coming to realise that inflexibility will not help them to find work .
They are not looking for jobs for life , they are happy to diversify , they operate through agencies and work flexible hours .
Of course , Mrs Marinucci , the social partners need to introduce some rules here , preferably at European level , but rigid legislation is the kiss of death .
The same goes for childcare .
We do not need European legislation , we simply need the European recommendation to be implemented . All the Member States signed up to it , so we should keep on at them until they apply it .
But how can childcare be free ?
Someone has to pay for it .
Here is another great idea .
Are you suggesting , as I think you are in paragraph 19 , that European funding should be used to set up centres for the elderly ? I sincerely hope not .
This is surely the responsibility of the Member States .
Next , mainstreaming .
Mrs Marinucci is quite right , this is something we simply have to hold out for .
There is still a long way to go and Parliament must do everything it can to help .
We need quantified targets and timetables , we need experts on gender issues , the National Action Plans must be evaluated and responsibility must be taken for the way in which the money from the Structural Funds is spent .
However , my group feels that it is too soon to break away from mainstreaming by demanding a quota for women in the Structural Funds , and this is why we want to have a number of paragraphs removed from the text and a number of amendments adopted .
We would then be perfectly happy to vote for the resolution .
If not we will be forced to abstain , which would be a pity , because we think the report also contains a number of very good proposals .
The truth is that women still need a helping hand , particularly in the form of active encouragement for women entrepreneurs .
We have to create opportunities so that people can take advantage of them , and I hope that the current trend for women to become increasingly well trained - often better than men - continues , so that by 2005 we find ourselves having to set up a Committee for Men 's Rights .
Madam President , let me begin by congratulating Mrs Marinucci on this report .
As she stresses , official statistics underestimate the problem of women 's unemployment relative to men 's unemployment , since they do not reflect the diversity of economic activity by women , while the definition of unemployment as a concept takes no account of the various categories in which a female presence is particularly important .
She also stresses the contrast between the level of education among women , which is generally superior to that of men , and the proportion of reduced or qualitatively inferior employment , since women are in the majority where informal work is concerned , as everyone has been saying .
The latest Eurostat figures show that unemployment affects women more , with an average throughout the European Union of 12.3 % compared with 8.9 % for men .
There are countries in which that difference is even larger , for example in Spain the corresponding figures are 27.8 % and 15 % , while the 1996 labour force survey showed that women account for 63.5 % of the officially unemployed population .
The rapporteur presents a series of very important proposals designed to facilitate a more accurate evaluation of economic activity by women , and measures to be implemented by the Commission and the Member States in order to give women easier access to the workplace and improve the quality of their jobs .
Part-time or occasional work may allow women to care for their children , but it must be recognised that such jobs are very often an enforced and necessary choice to which women object .
Mrs Marinucci 's proposals provide answers to these very complex issues , since new initiatives must clearly be adopted to reduce the inequality which continues to exist between women and men , even in here .
Madam President , we agree with Mrs Marinucci 's report and the concerns it expresses .
In the short amount of time available , I would like to refer to three or four of the central issues arising from this report .
Firstly , women 's unemployment .
Mr Mann said that education was necessary and that it needed to be continued .
But it is not only a matter of education , given that in countries of the South , such as Greece , Spain and Italy , women that have attained university-level education occupy half as many jobs as men with the same level of education .
Unequal pay must also be highlighted .
These days , in spite of the 1975 directive - with which Mr Flynn is very familiar - on equal pay for men and women , there continues to be a 25 or 30 % gender gap in earnings for the same type of work .
Also , the participation of women in part-time work merits attention .
It is true that some are in favour of part-time work for women as it enables them to reconcile professional and family life .
However , this means that they receive fewer social benefits during unemployment and on retirement .
It would of course be highly desirable if , as well as sharing work outside the home , we were able to share domestic chores equally with men inside the home .
This would be good for women , men and families in general .
There are no statistics available to show how the Structural Funds were previously used to attain equality between men and women , or how this famous mainstreaming was achieved , although I prefer to talk in terms of using all the mechanisms at our disposal through European policies to eradicate inequality .
I think that the proposals put forward by Mrs Marinucci are highly appropriate given that they are aimed at eradicating inequalities in pay , jobs and life in general .
Madam President , I am delighted to hear that the European Commission understands that women are needed on the labour market .
Social development demands it and , of course , women too have the right to be in the job market just as much as men have .
Earlier speeches have given an accurate picture of the obstacles women face in finding employment outside the home .
We are impatiently awaiting solutions to the social security problems that come with atypical work , and we are also impatiently waiting for the Member States to get to grips with the issue of childcare .
It appears that nothing much has happened in this area since the Council , a few years ago , approved the recommendation which called for a guarantee of high-quality childcare services .
I would be interested to hear whether the Commission has good news for us on this matter .
Mrs Marinucci 's report proposes the notion of ' caring years ' .
I support that idea strongly .
It would mean that anyone interrupting their career to bring up their children or look after their parents should be compensated so that they do not have to suffer in terms of work or social security , simply because they have attended to their family obligations .
Mr Flynn , you were at the conference on Structural Funds that was held in Oporto , Portugal , a few days ago .
According to the newspapers you criticised Parliament for not having paid enough attention to equal opportunities in its position on the Structural Funds .
I imagine you have been quoted wrongly .
Perhaps you would like to tell us if you were , once we have finished discussing your proposals on equal opportunities in the Structural Funds .
We will certainly listen with considerable interest .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to congratulate Mrs Marinucci and thank her for her work .
Her report and the other reports being debated here today offer us a further opportunity to look at the situation of women .
But they also lead me to ask certain questions .
Will the fight for equality between men and women one day become obsolete , particularly in the field of employment ?
Since the 1980s , the level of female unemployment has remained stubbornly high and is still on the increase .
Female unemployment is far higher than male unemployment in the 15 Member States of the Union , with the exception of the United Kingdom and Sweden .
Discrimination in the labour market remains very strong and little change has been registered in wage inequality .
In a country like Spain , where the rate of unemployment is very high , women are finding it extremely difficult to find a job .
France and Finland are also experiencing record levels of female unemployment .
To put it clearly , the gap between women and men is still wide .
Yet the action taken by the international community as a whole has had some effect on the fight for equality , not to mention everything that went before it .
It was 20 years ago that the first conference was held , 20 years in which a real and beneficial improvement has been made to the status of women throughout the world .
It has been a laudable effort and the results have been encouraging , if inadequate and disappointing .
Not only are women hardest hit by unemployment but the family constraints by which they are bound still have a negative impact on the level of unemployment benefits that they receive .
They often work part-time or at home , interrupt their careers , and drift into the services sector , doing temporary or poorly paid work .
As our rapporteur points out , since unemployment benefits are calculated on the basis of income in most Member States , it is clear that women are hit harder by unemployment in such cases .
It is also clear that where legal protection exists , such as minimum wages , wage discrimination between men and women tends to be less marked .
Why therefore do we not apply this rule more widely in the 15 Member States ?
The rapporteur proposes a raft of measures likely to offer women a chance to benefit considerably from protection against unemployment .
My group fully supports this report and in particular paragraph 20 of the motion for a resolution , which is a practical expression of the desire to guarantee women a place on the labour market .
The Commission has produced a large number of strategies , recommendations and studies aimed at contributing to the achievement of this aim .
It is now for the Member States to put them into practice .
A good many are endeavouring to do so but others are still at the stage of wishful thinking , although a few have made efforts in certain sectors .
Bringing about sexual equality and guaranteeing a new partnership between the sexes based on equality and shared responsibilities are subjects which have always been at the heart of the European Union 's policies .
These are the points that the rapporteur has underlined ; the rest is up to the Member States .
Mr President , Mrs Marinucci 's report is very thorough .
It takes into account our discussions in committee and I must thank the rapporteur , in particular , for paragraphs 2 , 3 and 4 on page 14 of the explanatory statement .
However , you will not be surprised to hear that my amendments go beyond the recommendations contained in those paragraphs .
Pertinent though it is , the issue of equality does not accommodate those women who want to balance the special time of motherhood , not only pregnancy but also the time when they bring up their children , with their working lives .
That is the difference between women and men .
You cannot therefore speak of equality without taking account of that special aspect .
I think we have to go further .
Your response is that we need very extensive childcare systems which are both affordable and high quality .
However , we should not just consider the socialist option - which may be yours , but which does not necessarily and automatically take care of all children .
If a mother is paid a sum of money to care for her own children for a period of time of her own choice , is she not herself offering a high-quality , low-cost childcare service which benefits children , women and society as a whole ?
I wish to thank Mr Flynn for organising the conference to be held in Rome on the ...
( The President cut the speaker off )
Mr President , I wish to begin by congratulating Mrs Marinucci on a report which sums up clearly and simply all the aspects of female unemployment , emphasising how often this problem is underestimated as compared with male unemployment , owing to a number of cultural prejudices .
We broadly share the views expressed , especially as they are borne out by recent studies and statistical data : eliminating obstacles to employment , promoting the participation of women in vocational training , improving access to social protection for the unemployed and , furthermore , drawing up more detailed legislation on all forms of atypical work , which affects a huge number of women .
I should like to highlight one point in particular : women must be allowed and entitled to choose part-time work , so as to be able to reconcile working life with their domestic and family responsibilities .
I nevertheless share all the rapporteur 's concerns about part-time work , and would add that women must equally have the right , for economic or career reasons , to choose fulltime work : for example single women with dependent children .
Thus there is a need to create proper social structures to assist working women : approved childcare facilities , but also proper services to care for the elderly and handicapped .
All too often , as we well know , women have sole responsibility for looking after the handicapped and elderly as well as children .
All these facilities are of course costly for the Member States , especially at a time of recession , but we must safeguard the right of women to have a job , without this standing in the way of their right to have children , because in a society where the birth-rate is falling children benefit us all .
Finally , let me stress that it is absolutely scandalous that , on the threshold of the millennium , despite national regulations and laws , and despite clear provisions in the Treaty , there still exists an enormous pay differential in women 's disfavour .
Special efforts are required to monitor and eliminate this unacceptable form of discrimination : removing it is part and parcel of true democracy in Europe .
Mr President , Mrs Marinucci 's report is an excellent synthesis of Parliament 's demands .
I wish to draw your attention to one point , namely part-time work , which has played a vital part in the development of the female workforce in the 1990s .
Women now occupy the majority of part-time jobs : 83 % .
This is an extraordinary figure .
Part-time work is often presented , traditionally at least , as a positive element enabling women to reconcile work and family life .
However , Eurostat statistics show that this is not the case and that preference would go to full-time work if possible , mainly because factors such as the working hours , weekend work , the lack of promotion prospects or training for qualifications all give the lie to the idyllic picture painted of part-time work .
Contrary to what tends to be claimed , part-time work is not chosen by women but , in most cases , by employers ; in any case , it is a real problem inherent to our way of life .
It is seldom found in industry or in jobs with responsibility ; it is often limited to low-skilled jobs or particular sectors .
The rapporteur feels that , whereas part-time working should be encouraged in the current labour market , it should be extended to skilled work , men should be encouraged to practise it , and all part-time workers should be guaranteed training and promotion opportunities .
These ideas may well remain a dead letter , since there is no evidence of any political will to turn them into reality .
It seems to me that the most radical proposal is that of promoting female employment by drastically cutting back on part-time work and changing everyone 's working hours , women and men alike .
Since this will never be achieved without a fight and without carrying out gradual reforms over time , the European Union must begin by examining all the discriminatory effects that any employment policy is likely to entail .
Mr President , during the economic crisis in the 1930s , certain countries , including mine , passed legislation or regulations forbidding access by women to the civil service , for example .
After the Second World War , when I began work - for a trade union , I would point out - I was warned that I would be sacked if I got married .
In the 1950s , it was still common practice in my country to sack women when they married .
Even today , some men and women think , and even dare to say , that with unemployment as it is , women should stay at home , look after the family and not compete with men on the labour market .
It is obvious that our laws and , in particular , European directives on equal treatment and equal opportunities for men and women prohibit the direct forms of discrimination that I have just described .
But , alas , although the laws have changed , you still find people who tend to blame women for wanting to take advantage of their right to work and they continue to influence certain policy-makers . The Committee on Women 's Rights was therefore right to draft an own-initiative report on the special impact of unemployment on women .
I think it was Talleyrand who said that all that is exaggerated is insignificant .
Some passages in this report contain exaggerations or over-generalisations , and unrealistic claims are made .
This runs the risk not of being insignificant but nonetheless of harming women . If we try to overprotect them or treat them as a special case , we could turn them into a workforce that is too costly or too difficult to manage , and therefore too difficult to be successfully integrated into firms .
That is why we have tabled a certain number of amendments to remedy these exaggerations , which Mrs Larive also referred to .
Let us not forget that the greatest service we can offer women , young or old , who are looking for jobs or hoping to play a part in the economy , is if we diversify their job options and offer them sound training ; we can also help them to face competition on the labour market by eliminating all direct and indirect discrimination and by taking positive action , as and when required , in order to guarantee them equal opportunities .
I hope that by November , we shall be able to debate my report on the matter in the House .
We shall help women more , and above all , by guaranteeing them and their partners a free choice between a career and family life .

Since Mr Flynn is here today , I should also like to remind him that we should not forget the invisible workers , women working for their self-employed husbands , who have work but no status .
I should like to ask Mr Flynn what progress has been made on his proposal to amend the 1986 ' decaffeinated ' directive on which Parliament unanimously adopted a report . It has been the subject of round-table discussions but still has not produced anything in practice .
I should like to take this opportunity , Mr Flynn , to ask you to give us further information on this subject .
Mr President , Commissioner , Mrs Marinucci 's report quite rightly stresses the fact that greater unemployment among women calls for special action to be taken .
For me the big question in the future for both men and women is how prepared we will be to share the workload between humans and machines .
Are we going to accept the global model where only 20 % of human beings will be really needed and the other 80 % , the majority of them women , will be a sort of surplus population ?
I believe that we wish to see a more balanced future for Europe .
Any improvement in the employment situation , particularly for women , requires a change in attitude to one that is more flexible .
We need a much more holistic approach to life when it comes to making changes in the area of work .
The various stages of a woman 's life call for different solutions in the link between her job and her family .
She should be able to enjoy flexibility in returning from part-time to full-time work , if this is what she wants to do .
Time off work for family reasons and part-time work must also be options for men , those who are highly trained and those who are highly valued .
' Caring years ' must be put on the agenda .
Otherwise this sort of time off can easily become a trap that discriminates against women in matters of work .
Female entrepreneurship is a resource that is still very rarely tapped .
That is why we need special projects to encourage and train women to make use of their many entrepreneurial skills and abilities .
Training , financing and networking lie at the heart of the support needed .
In addition , women in regional development schemes have up till now been the victims of discrimination in spite of all the equality targets , although we underline the importance of these in Structural Fund reform programmes .
I hope that we can make better use of funds than we do now for programmes to promote equal opportunities .
Madam President , if ever there was a topic where shortage of time was worrying , this is it .
The matter of women and employment raises endless theoretical and practical issues .
I will concentrate on two .
The first is that of the new profile given to employment .
Without going into notions and concepts of social class - although this certainly does not mean that these have not changed - we are witnessing an expansion of the services sector which , for historical and other reasons , has resulted in an increase in the number of women in employment . In objective terms this promotes and speeds women 's access to the ' world of work ' , although this may be reversed at certain times , and it highlights the problem of organising time and the use of the labour force , what I would call the ' organisation of living time ' .
The second point relates to the matter of training .
The quality of the labour force is becoming increasingly important , reflecting the fact that work is becoming more human and social .
More training and qualifications are particularly essential for women who , as a social group , are still the victims of the sexist , discriminatory social division of labour .
In a recent report on the competitiveness of the textile industry I took the opportunity to propose this approach , which was accepted .
I mention this simply to support the considerations raised in the report by Mrs Marinucci , whom I congratulate on her work .
For that reason alone , it would have proved extremely useful .
Mr President , Mrs Marinucci 's report is a good one , since it makes a very eloquent point : the unemployment rate among women is higher than that among men .
Of course , like her , I am in favour of equality between women and men at work , in favour of equal pay for the same work , in favour of equal opportunities for men and women seeking employment , and for reducing the gap between men and women in terms of unemployment .
All of these inequalities are quite shameful since our laws are very clear in each of our countries on this subject .
Like you , Mrs Marinucci , I think that we should be more flexible with women 's working hours and mothers should be offered appropriate childcare and crèche facilities .
In fact I agree with you on a number of points .
Only , it has to be said , your report may be paved with good intentions but many of them are utopian and impossible to achieve .
For example , one of my colleagues earlier spoke of crèches . It is true that in a recession it would be difficult to make them free of charge .
On the other hand , while we agree on the principle of integrating women in the world of work , we do not agree with you on certain ways of bringing that about .
We are resolutely against the system of quotas that you propose , for example in paragraph 17 of your motion for a resolution , since being a woman should not be regarded as a disability .
This policy will not help to create new jobs but , on the contrary , will be another step backwards for women and the effect will be to reduce the role of women to that of an assisted person and saddle them with an inferior status .
We are also against compulsorily penalising countries for failing to respect equal opportunities between men and women as you see them .
Offering women opportunities to succeed in the world of work while , in certain cases , tending to their children and family life , does not mean that they should be forced to do this at all costs .
It is also a shame not to propose a parental income in order to facilitate free choice for everyone .
For these reasons and depending on the votes on the amendments , we shall take our final decision when the time comes .
Mr President , may I congratulate Mrs Marinucci on the excellent report now before us .
This report , for the Committee on Women 's Rights , clearly reflects the interest that these subjects deserve and we hope that they will soon be further developed by the Commission and incorporated into national employment plans .
Commissioner Flynn , in his inspiring address last Tuesday during the seminar organised in Portugal by the Commission entitled ' The Integration of Equality between Women and Men in the Structural Funds ' , which I also attended , he not only refrained from criticizing the European Parliament but he actively supported it , showing himself to be entirely open and committed to advancing along the road that we are discussing here today .
I would like to draw attention to four points that I consider to be of the utmost importance .
Firstly , female employment is essential both for economic growth and for maintaining the European social model that we wish to preserve .
Indeed , in the light of expected demographic trends , were it not for female employment and the corresponding social security contributions , the system would not be able to meet its responsibilities in ensuring a decent living for pensioners .
Men are now discovering that , if women do not work , revenues will not be sufficient to meet social security obligations .
I hope that the appropriate conclusions will be drawn in terms of education policy , vocational training , regulation of nonstandard employment , support for new working time systems and new forms of work and , in particular , the social economy .
But do not think , gentlemen , that we are prepared yet again to serve merely as a labour pool , to be set aside when our services are no longer required .
This time women are on the labour market to stay .
Secondly , far-reaching changes are required within the family , to allow both men and women to reconcile their private and working lives .
Funding from the Structural Funds should be allocated to companies which offer facilities to care for children , dependents and the elderly , and support should be offered to companies created by women to enable them to resolve such problems .
It is also essential that the good practices identified within the European Union in this sphere should become more widely publicised and imitated .
These might include , for instance , the decision by the Finnish Prime Minister to take a week 's parental leave in order to devote himself exclusively to being a father .
This example deserved to be much more widely publicised , particularly on the Internet , instead of reports which are inappropriate and are swallowed wholesale by the world media .
Thirdly , the recognition of women and men as individuals with their own rights within the family . In many countries , existing policies in the areas of taxation or benefits to couples serve as a disincentive and exacerbate the difficulties faced by women who wish to work .
Lastly , I would suggest that the definition of ' unemployment ' should be refined and that , once and for all , the shameful statistical classification of ' non-active ' for women who work tirelessly in the home , in the family or on the land and receive no remuneration whatsoever for that work should be reviewed .
Commissioner Flynn , who has promised us more accurate statistics broken down by gender , could do much to end this indignity .
Mr President , first of all I wish to compliment Mrs Marinucci on her excellent work , and to thank her for giving such careful consideration to the amendments tabled by the political groups .
Thank you , Mrs Marinucci , for your commitment and your excellent work .
Disparities between men and women have of course always existed , although some societies have demonstrated greater civility than others .
The latest official Eurostat data , based on the International Labour Organisation 's definition of unemployment , do not properly reflect the current social situation .
This analysis indicates that female rates of unemployment are higher than male ones , but does not probe the real reasons or explain the true significance of part-time work .
If it were governed by legislation and extended to the professions , part-time work could solve the problem of unemployment as long as it was offered on a voluntary basis .
Given the current state of the labour market and the income differentials between men and women , the latter receive less unemployment benefit on average .
This is in spite of the policy of equal opportunities , providing for equal pay for male and female workers , as sanctioned by Article 119 of the Maastricht Treaty , an article with which we are very familiar and have discussed several times in this House .
The Commissioner , Mr Flynn , is also well aware of it .
Furthermore , women are often left in the dark as to the few opportunities offered by the labour market , nearly always finding out belatedly and only after an initial selection has been made .
Well-qualified job-seekers and early , precise information are therefore crucial elements in a fair share-out between men and women of part-time and other work , as well as in eliminating pay discrimination between the two sexes .
It is true that we have discussed equality between men and women many times in this House .
The steps to be taken are tangible ones , but until a true culture of equality has been established , beginning in schools , it will be very difficult to implement anything decided here , however thoroughly we discuss it .
Therefore it is necessary above all else to start working with young children so that they are imbued with this culture of equality .
Mr President , I should like to start by making a fairly basic comment . In this debate , the term women 's lobby was mentioned , or lobby for women 's issues .
This gives the impression that what we are discussing here is the concern of one section of society , which I very much doubt .
We will have immense problems in our society if we do not resolve the difficult issue of the unequal treatment of men and women on the labour market , which is only going to get worse as problems on the work front become more pressing .
It is therefore a problem for society as a whole .
One point in the report particularly interested and even alarmed me .
Although women have more than caught up with men when it comes to education , and even partly overtaken them , their problems in the world of work remain .
Women with a higher qualifications are especially affected .
The main problem for women lies in working and having children .
This must be our central starting point in future - we have to set up approved , all-day child care in our countries .
It is not only women , but also fathers raising children alone who face the problem that work and bringing up children are incompatible , which can only be resolved if there are competent institutions for looking after and educating children .
Society , the public authorities and private initiatives should tackle this . That is the central point .
Mr President , it really is a great pity that , I suspect for ideological reasons , this excellent report by Mrs Marinucci , which makes a number of very interesting points , takes no account of the fact that in many families one of the couple - usually the woman - leaves the regular labour market entirely voluntarily in order to stay at home and look after the children .
I personally think that this is not just a perfectly legitimate choice to make , but that the work that these women do at home deserves to be fundamentally re-evaluated both financially and morally after decades of feminist indoctrination .
Do not misunderstand me , I have nothing against this report , which is very good for the most part , and I have no objection to most of the recommendations it makes , which are ultimately designed to give men and women greater equality of opportunity .
But I find it completely incomprehensible that this report on unemployment does not call first and foremost for a full parental wage for the homeworking parent .
It would offer an alternative which hundreds of thousands of people in Europe would certainly be delighted to take advantage of , and it would for the first time offer people a genuine choice between working at or outside the home .
I have the impression that this freedom of choice is being boycotted for purely ideological , feminist reasons which do not serve women 's best interests .
Moreover , the report , which deals with a great many different subjects , could easily devote a paragraph to the issue of tax discrimination against married couples .
In my country at least married couples pay far more tax than couples who are living together , with all that this implies .
Finally , I must point out to Mrs Marinucci that ideas such as , and I quote , having ' to provide a place in schools where young people can discuss equal opportunities ' is the sort of ridiculous nonsense that has no place in a parliamentary report , and that even the European Parliament needs to have some sort of minimum standards .
Mr President , how can we use the EU to bring more women into work , and how can the EU play a part in ensuring that help is given to women working in casual and precarious forms of employment , under the constant threat of becoming unemployed ?
Through the Amsterdam Treaty - thanks to an initiative by the Danish Social Democrats - we ensured that employment was put on the agenda .
And at the special summit on employment in Luxembourg , the heads of government committed themselves to taking coordinated action to combat unemployment .
One of the aims was to improve equal treatment on the labour market .
In the new objectives , we must therefore insist on setting more ambitious goals for equal treatment of this kind .
We need clear goals and clear timetables , and the financial resources for achieving them must be made available .
The new objectives must include the following : a drastic reduction in the gender gap in unemployment ; the labour market has to be made less gender-oriented , with affordable childcare schemes ; the training opportunities for women must be improved , and leave arrangements need to be framed in such a way that they also appeal to men ; the differences in pay between men and women must be eliminated .
However , it is not the EU alone which must ensure equal treatment on the labour market in the Member States .
The bulk of the work is needed in the Member States themselves , but the common objectives should ensure that the Member States have to live up to their promises .
When the Member States have to present their action plans to one another and to their citizens , it will be possible to expose those countries which are failing to meet the common objectives - a kind of EU competition in equal treatment on the labour market .
In other words , we should be thinking about equal treatment in relation to all political initiatives at both national and European level .
I am therefore extremely pleased that we in Denmark have introduced the requirement for an assessment of the implications of all proposed legislation for both men and women , and that through the Amsterdam Treaty we have succeeded in establishing the principle that equal treatment cannot be seen as an isolated policy , but must be included as part of all the EU 's initiatives .
Mr President , this report from Mrs Marinucci touches on the sore points that women still have .
Firstly , they still do not receive the same pay for the same work .
Secondly , women are still more affected by unemployment than men .
This does not only have something to do with education , but most importantly with the fact that women who have children are disadvantaged on the labour market .
That is bad for women and bad for children , who very often also suffer as a result of the misconception that people have of equal opportunities for women .
So what needs to happen ?
An environment has to be created as quickly as possible which makes it easier to reconcile work and family .
That means greater flexibility in organising working time , and also of course better childcare facilities .
But these should not become children 's homes , which simply lead to children being isolated .
We need both : childcare facilities and greater freedom of choice .
Our Ministry for Families has come up with one idea here , for example , that parental paid leave should be introduced for all mothers and fathers , regardless of whether or not they have worked or still are working , in order to make the choice easier for both men and women .
I believe that this idea should be considered at a European level too .
There has to be more choice , not just an alternative between work or child .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , if you only have three minutes to change the world it is a pretty hopeless task .
I shall therefore confine myself to just three comments on the excellent and interesting report by my colleague Mrs Marinucci .
First , if you look back over the last forty years there is no doubt that the European Union and European integration have been very important for women , indeed the creation of the Union went hand in hand with the declaration of the principle of equality .
This has since been developed in a number of directives , we have had various action programmes and the Amsterdam Treaty has given us ways to fight discrimination and to use positive action where possible .
Interestingly enough , the Union actually means something to women : survey results indicate that women generally have a more positive view of the Union than men , and that they feel more in sympathy with it , particularly when they expect to get more out of it .

Italian women , as I hardly need to point out to the rapporteur , are particularly in favour : 43 % of them expect to benefit from the Union .

In Sweden the figure is 11 % , which is only natural since Swedish women are already in a better position .
We now need to take advantage of this pragmatic , logical approach by women .
There are three steps we need to take .
First , as people have already said today and as the report points out , we should practise what we preach .
Nowhere in the Union do women receive the same pay for the same work .
Even in my country , the Netherlands , the difference is about 30 % .
We must put a stop to this .
We cannot preach equality for 40 years without putting it into practice .
Secondly , ' mainstreaming ' is an empty expression which needs to be firmed up .
We should insist that all the employment programmes clearly state , not in a separate paragraph but as a standard part of the text , just what mainstreaming means for women .
Third and last , and this is a question for the Commissioner , should we not carry out a major ' State of the Union ' survey as we did in 1980 , focusing on the situation of women , in order to draw attention to a problem on which a great deal of progress has been made , I admit , but to which we are still unfortunately a long way from finding an ideal solution .
Mr President , many of the long-term unemployed and those in part-time work in almost all EU countries are women .
The increase in fixed-term employment contracts has created an air of insecurity in the lives of women .
Differences in pay for men and women compound the problems women have regarding unemployment protection and pension allowances , which are far greater than those men experience .
It seems incredible that in the late 1990s we should still be having to think about how to solve problems such as these .
It should be patently obvious that people should be paid the same for doing the same work , regardless of gender .
This should also apply , by the way , to the salaries of the Members of the European Parliament .
There should be more investment in retraining , and particularly vocational training , for the unemployed .
Campaigns are under way in Finland to increase women 's interest in the natural sciences and technical subjects .
We nevertheless have not been able to draw women to these traditionally male sectors to the extent we hoped we would .
What is the reason for this ?
Are the old attitudes learnt at home still firmly rooted in us ?
There is still room for improvement in our own attitudes .
We are still terribly wary .
We do not dare to take on demanding jobs or try something new .
I do not understand why we are trying to patch up the problem by means of quotas .
We need other kinds of measures .
I believe the Commission should carry out more detailed research into the cause of the problem and prevailing attitudes throughout the EU .
Automation has developed many of the so-called male sectors in such a way that physical strength is no longer a prerequisite for being able to do the work .
However , it is not a question of women being less well trained than men .
On the contrary , girls outperform boys at school , and there are more women than men at college or university .
This again causes all sorts of problems .
Nevertheless , women miss out , to some extent , in those countries that have a military reserve system or N.C.O. training courses , which provide training in leadership .
There is no equivalent for women .
As I said , there is room for improvement in the attitudes of women .
We must believe in our own abilities and have confidence in ourselves .
I certainly welcome the Marinucci report .
It focuses on the specific characteristics of women 's unemployment in the European Union .
I thank all those who have contributed to the constructive debate this morning .
In its first part the report highlights the gender gap in unemployment since , in almost all the Member States , women 's unemployment is higher than men 's .
It also focuses on the obstacles women are facing if they want to work .
The report has rightly stated that care facilities are not sufficiently developed in all the Member States .
I was quite taken by the number of people who referred to that , exactly in accordance with my thinking on the matter .
It also makes the important point that parental leave and extended career breaks can , paradoxically , hamper women for the rest of their working lives in terms of career advancement , social protection and access to the labour market , if such leave is taken almost solely by women .
The report is even more interesting as it goes much beyond the unemployment situation of women as such .
It also discusses the position of women on the labour market generally , the efficiency of education and training , and the European employment strategy from Essen to Luxembourg and Cardiff .
It stresses the need to mainstream equality in the employment guidelines alongside the promotion of positive action in favour of women .
That is the two-track approach which was stressed during the joint conference which was organised in January this year by Parliament and the Commission on the employment guidelines .
I fully support what happened there .
Can mainstreaming be realised without gender-segregated statistics ?
The Commission will , in cooperation with Eurostat , continue to work to improve the provision of statistics on the labour market situation for women .
The annual report on equal opportunities for women and men in the Union contains a lot of gender-segregated statistics on several issues related to equality .
It is our intention to continue this publication with its great wealth of statistical data .
You cannot evaluate without the basic statistics for comparative purposes .
I accept that fully .
On the issue of mainstreaming , progress was achieved during the British Council presidency .
The conclusions of the Cardiff European Council in June 1998 call on all the Member States to ensure that equality between women and men will be mainstreamed in all aspects of their employment policies .
That is an important step forward .
We are going to hear a lot more about that in our 1999 guidelines , which will be discussed here before too long .
The issue of care , which was highlighted in the political agenda , during the British Council presidency , is also discussed in your report .
This issue looms large in the 1998 employment guidelines .
I am very pleased at the number of people who made remarks concerning care services , the great need there is for them and also the need for high standards ; the need for nonselective availability insofar as care and its provision are concerned ; and , particularly , the need for training .
That is going to be highlighted .
It is not well done in the Member States .
I am going to pay particular attention to that insofar as the 1999 guidelines are concerned .
The fourth pillar of the employment guidelines on strengthening equal opportunities policies states that the Member States should strive to raise levels of access to care services where needs are not met .
Our concept of caring has been enlarged and now refers not only to child care but also to the care of all dependent persons , including the disabled and the elderly .
Progress has been made on this important issue .
Mrs Seillier makes that point .
This was confirmed at the Belfast meeting of the ministers for women and equality in May .
There was a very clear agreement that affordable , accessible and high-quality child care , parental leave and other schemes in family-friendly working policies are essential to enable women and men to combine work and family responsibilities .
I believe that unless you get the care thing right you are never going to effectively increase the level of participation of women in the labour market .
There is a huge amount of work still to be done if we are to meet the objectives for care provision .
We will be looking closely at how the Member States address this issue , the policies they develop , and the resources they apply in their employment action plans for 1999 and subsequent years .
The European employment strategy has already shown its value in the way it has placed equal opportunities firmly at the heart of all the national employment plans .
From now on we will be looking at strong action to give effect to the commitments set out in the guidelines .
Member States are clear about what they must do .
The challenge for 1998 was to get the process up and running .
That has been achieved .
For 1999 it will be to develop the actions to match the objectives and to show action on the ground as against all of the guidelines .
That is the point as regards equal opportunities .
Mrs Lulling makes the point about the 1986 directive of helping spouses .
We have had two round table discussions with experts on this , resulting in no consensus , even amongst the experts , about amending that directive .
The report is quite detailed and has been published , Mrs Lulling , and I shall take the opportunity to send you a copy of it - you might find it interesting .
Mr Delcroix , Mrs Angelilli , Mr Schäfer and other Members made a very good point about part-time work and the part-time directive .
The vision there was that women and men can move from part-time to full-time and vice versa without any discrimination and without losing their employability .
That was one of the key issues in the part-time directive , which , as you know , was the response to a collective agreement between the social partners .
I am grateful to Mrs Hautala for raising the point about the speech in Portugal .
I am better pleased that Mrs Torres Marques said I did not criticise Parliament and she is quite right .
She was very gracious in her remarks about the speech on Tuesday in Portugal .
I did not criticise Parliament , but what I said - and I very much want to say it again here - was that I wanted to encourage Parliament to do exactly what it is doing today : to focus on the very broad picture in relation to the employment strategy and equal opportunities and to the reform of the structural funds .
Finally , in that speech I went out of my way to encourage Parliament to press the Member States to adapt their policies to make it easier to combine family and working life and for women to retrain when they re-enter the labour market after an absence spent caring for children or other dependents .
We must also focus on the artificial barriers in all parts of the labour market that cause segregation and discrimination .
These have to be dismantled .
That was the message I was giving in Portugal , and I should like to have Parliament 's support in pursuing that policy .
Thank you very much for raising the issue .
The debate is closed .
The vote will be taken today at 12 noon .
Role of cooperatives in women 's employment
The next item is the report ( A4-0270 / 98 ) by Mrs Colombo Svevo , on behalf of the Committee on Women 's Rights , on the role of cooperatives in the growth of women 's employment .
Mr President , allow me to begin with a word of thanks to Mrs Marinucci . Her report identifies the structural problems of the market and their links with female unemployment , paving the way for me to examine in detail one aspect of the context outlined in that report .
My own report investigates one specific aspect of employment , namely the linkage between cooperatives and women 's employment .
It does so because we realised that experiments are under way throughout the cooperative sector - or , rather , throughout the social economy of the ' third system ' . We have sought to highlight these , and the Committee on Women 's Rights saw for itself what is being done in Italy when it visited some cooperatives .
Mrs Ghilardotti has moreover recently lent strong support to this phenomenon within the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs .
I myself believe that the European Union is duty-bound to spread these new ideas , and that the conference to be held next week in Brussels is a significant move , certain to raise the profile of what is going on in this sector .
What have we learnt from this investigation ?
Firstly , that cooperatives have generated employment , just like SMEs , and that small cooperatives in particular have played a positive role in women 's employment .
Secondly , cooperatives have the potential to generate employment , as has often been identified by the European Union , both in traditional sectors such as personal services and in innovative sectors .
On this point I would say that even cooperatives working in traditional sectors , such as social welfare , have been innovative , in that they have been firmly rooted in the local community and have responded to local needs .
Thirdly , cooperatives have helped to insert into the world of work not only people who have been out of work for some time , like so many women , but also persons who may just have left the labour market for a certain period ; at the same time , I would stress , they provide on-the-job training .
Indeed , many women are now chairing cooperatives and even consortia of cooperatives .
Thus the development of entrepreneurship among women is an additional benefit .
Furthermore , cooperatives have been flexible in their work organisation , in respect of both working hours and personal time : such flexibility , importantly , is not a factor of marginalisation because , generally speaking , cooperatives are organised with full involvement of their members .
In hearing me list the elements brought to light in our investigation , you will realise that many of these characteristics - adaptability , reconciliation of duties , reinsertion - are fundamental to women 's aspirations to enter the labour market .
Indeed , recent studies conducted in Italy have demonstrated women 's interest in this particular type of firm .
I therefore believe - and here I am addressing the Commissioner , Mr Flynn , as I know that he is sensitive to these issues - that the European Union should play a truly active role in the social economy as a whole .
Research is needed into the scale and nature of the cooperative sector and , in particular , its development in the various countries .
A communication has been drawn up on voluntary organisations and foundations ; we should like to see a White Paper on cooperatives , so as to highlight the changes under way and make it possible to compare different experiences .
A legislative framework is required , not to set in stone the present state of affairs - that cannot be done , because by their very nature these organisations evolve in response to needs - but to clarify the legal situation so as to avoid the very spirit and purpose of the cooperative movement being undermined .
Also needed are specific rules , for instance on contract work , the introduction of reduced rates of VAT and , finally , economic support for the social economy , including through the measures designed to benefit SMEs .
As far as training is concerned , the Social Fund should consider providing appropriate training in this field , geared to the acquisition not only of technical skills but also project management skill and team spirit .
We have kindled a hope with this report , Mr President : we sincerely hope that we have brought home the need for further consideration of this issue .
Mr President , I should like first of all to compliment the rapporteur , Mrs Colombo Svevo , on her comprehensive report , to which there is really nothing to add . It touches on all the relevant points and draws attention to the potential of this sector , underscoring the need for regulation and intervention , and highlighting the role that the European Union and Member States can play in boosting a sector which is without doubt important for women 's employment .
I do nevertheless have a few general remarks to make .
As Mrs Colombo Svevo said , her report cannot be discussed in isolation from the excellent one by Mrs Marinucci and the debate relating to it .
I think it can readily be said that - at least over the past twenty years - the European Union 's equal opportunities policy has been one of its very few successful policies in the social field .
The many current problems have moreover already been raised in the debate and are well known to the Commission and Parliament , to women ( those directly concerned ) and also to the Council .
Some progress is being made - the Treaty of Amsterdam has opened the door .
The directives issued , despite a very flimsy legal basis - Article 119 - have enabled progress to be made in this direction .
I nevertheless believe that more courage and more consistency are needed , and I say so especially in relation to the points emphasised by Mrs Colombo Svevo .
The social economy cannot solve all employment problems ; it is one solution among others , such as the policy of mainstreaming , investment , and the consideration of employment as a priority issue , in funding terms among others .
Among the forms taken by the social economy , the cooperative movement is an important one .
It already is so today - as shown by Mrs Colombo Svevo - and it still has further potential .
More courage and more consistency are needed because , although we recognise this fact - and the Council and Commission have done so too , at the Luxembourg and Cardiff Summits - we are failing to act accordingly .
I would refer , for example , to a specific problem which we shall be discussing in a few weeks ' time : the budget .
The budget line for the social economy , B5-321 - not a line falling under Mr Flynn 's responsibility - has no legal basis .
As we all know , in the light of the Court of Justice ruling and the interinstitutional agreement , resources can be earmarked from within the budget only where legal bases exist .
That can be done if the Commission has a firm intention to set up programmes which can define legal bases .
One successful legislative initiative , proposed by the Commission and on which Parliament expressed its opinion , provided for a programme for the social economy sector .
I think that , following today 's report and debate , it is now time for the Commission to take up that programme once more . Then , next year , it will provide real support , disseminating good practice and ensuring that this sector contributes demonstrably - in quantitative and qualitative fashion - to tackling the problem of women 's unemployment .
This debate now stands adjourned until 6 p.m.
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , thank you for giving me the floor to make a personal statement .
Last night the organisation ETA announced an indefinite and unconditional truce .
I would like to say that I cautiously welcome this announcement in the hope that it is sincere , but above all I welcome it with satisfaction because it gives hope to the Basque Country that peace will finally be secured there .
If only we could all be united in the cause of achieving this much-desired peace .
Mr President , I would also like to talk about this issue .
Yesterday , as Mrs Dührkop Dührkop said , the terrorist group ETA announced a truce .
This declaration must indeed be welcomed but cautiously so .
It is not the first time the terrorist group has declared a truce and it will evidently remain to be seen if it has anything to do with the forthcoming elections in the Basque Country .
In any case it gives us hope .
We continue to have confidence and hope for a definitive end to the violence and we believe that this step forward comes as a result of the spirit of dialogue and harmony that prevailed and encouraged those who formulated and drew up the Spanish Constitution .
Mr President , you will all have to listen to several speakers from Spain saying that they have confidence in the peace process .
We must be cautious , but at the same time have faith in the democratic values that we have been fostering in Spain since democracy returned .
On many occasions we have come here to condemn terrible crimes , indiscriminate assassinations as well as those directed against the nation 's elected representatives .
This announcement fills us with hope but also with caution .
I think that I am speaking here for myself and on behalf of the Confederal Group of the European United Left - Nordic Green Left .
Mr President , the Basque people and the Basque nation have endured many years of violent conflict that have ravaged our society .
Tonight we received the welcome news that the Basque separatist organization ETA has declared a unilateral , indefinite and unconditional truce .
This is the first time that ETA has declared a truce of this kind .
I hope that all of our political forces - and here I also call on Europe 's political forces and European society for their support - will rise to the occasion and be capable of advancing a negotiated peace process which meets the expectations that the vast majority of Basque people have for peace and hope .
I think we are all ready to share the hopes of our Spanish colleagues .
VOTES
On Paragraph 1d I wish to change the ' 45 calendar days ' to ' 60 calendar days ' .
May I accept the rapporteur 's oral amendment ?
I see that there is no objection , so I will put it to the vote .
Amendment No 33
May I just explain that what I am doing here is accepting Amendment No 33 as a whole , this would replace the paragraph up to ' the maximum payment period ' in my Amendment No 26 .
After that , the rest of Amendment No 26 would remain .
( Parliament adopted the legislative resolution )
Mr President , according to my sitting notes , if Amendment No 14 is adopted , Amendments Nos 4 and 18 lapse .
I should like to say that if Amendment No 14 is adopted , No 4 does not lapse .
It can be voted on as an addition and I would ask you to put it to the vote as such .
You have set me a problem , Mr Weber , because Parliament 's services inform me that the content has been deemed incompatible .
Mr President , I agree with you , since both amendments refer to the same paragraph of the resolution , and if my group 's Amendment No 14 is adopted , Amendment No 4 by the Group of the European Radical Alliance should lapse , unless my group adopts Amendment No 4 as an addition , which we refuse to do .
Mr President , contrary to what Mrs Roth said , our amendment concerns the preservation of biodiversity which her group 's does not .
I therefore insist that our amendment be put to the vote as an addition .
I also agree with you .
All those who tabled amendments - the Group of the European Radical Alliance , the Group of the Party of European Socialists and the Green Group in the European Parliament - must have the opportunity to have their say ; we have to be fair , after all .
I agree with you that they are not identical , as our amendment seeks solely to establish precisely how much emission trading is taking place and to what extent own measures are being taken .
For this reason , I strongly contest that the adoption of Amendment No 14 should cause the other two , including our Amendment No 18 , to lapse .
Amendment No 18
Mr President , we do not need to waste time on unimportant issues .
In the context of the Socialists ' amendment we discussed whether there should be a reduction .
Our Amendment No 18 specifies the form which this reduction should take .
If we had followed the correct voting procedure , our amendment would have come first , and then we would have had the correct sequence .
I insist that our Amendment No 18 be put to the vote , and anyone who can read will see that it is different .
Mrs Breyer , I respect your view , but there are other views and other opinions in the House .
There was no problem about putting your amendment to the vote , but in our opinion that was not the right thing to do .
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
Mr President , thank you for giving me the floor , as I think you were a little quick on the draw over the ARE Group 's proposal .
I am slightly taken aback because at other times you take your time . That is all .
You are right , Mr Sainjon .
I did go quickly , that is true , but we have a very long series of votes .
I should not like to keep Members here until three o 'clock this afternoon .
The result was so clear that there was really no room for any doubt .
( Parliament adopted the resolution ) Joint motion for a resolution on the situation in Russia
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
Mr President , I should like to propose an oral amendment which takes the last part of this amendment - and the spirit of it - and says : ' ... points to the importance of the cease-fire declared by the PKK on 28 August 1998 and calls on the Turkish authorities to seize the opportunity thus created to seek a peaceful and negotiated political solution to the Kurdish question ' .
We would like that oral amendment to be accepted and then added to paragraph 16 , which deals with the Kurdish issue .
I should add that there is a report in the German press that the PKK cease-fire is over .
I am assured that report is wrong .
The cease-fire is still in effect .
So the words : ' point to the importance of the cease-fire declared by the PKK on 28 August 1998 and calls on the Turkish authorities to seize the opportunity thus created to seek a peaceful and negotiated political solution to the Kurdish question ' , are to be placed at the end of paragraph 16 .
I understand that this amendment has Mr McMillan-Scott 's approval .
Ladies and gentlemen , Mr McMillan-Scott informed me this morning that other political commitments would prevent him from being present during the mid-day voting .


He has asked Mr Schwaiger to deputise for him , and I think Mr Schwaiger can speak on Mr McMillan-Scott 's behalf on the amendment Mr Titley is now proposing .
If Parliament has no objection , I will put it to the vote .
Mr President , I would point out that the media have reported that the PKK cease-fire has ended , so it is now very difficult to approve this amendment , the object of which was actually very good .
However , if an oral amendment is possible , I would propose that we emphasise the need for a cease-fire and leave the remaining text unchanged , without mentioning the PKK .
In this case , we could approve the following : ' points to the need for a cease-fire and calls on the Turkish authorities to seek a peaceful negotiated political solution to the Kurdish question . '
Mr Schwaiger , these very sensitive political issues always bring out very fine distinctions , like the one you have just made .
Since you are amending an oral amendment , I fear there may be some confusion .
Mr President , if , on that basis the PPE will vote ' for ' , then I will accept it .
Is there any objection to my putting Mr Titley 's amendment to the vote , as amended ?
Since there is none , I put it to the vote .
Mr President , I have the impression that Mr Titley 's amendment seeks to delete the first part of Amendment No 25 and vote only on the second part , which he drafted and which was changed to my wording , but not on the first part , which has been withdrawn , unless the Green Group wishes to retain this first part .
We would then have to vote on this .
Mr Schwaiger , I think there may be some confusion .
The first part is not covered by the Titley amendment .
Mr President , my amendment , which has now been accepted , was to be added to paragraph 16 .
We still need to vote on paragraph 17 .
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
The Commission 's proposal is rightly aimed at including the gender aspect as an important factor in all areas of development cooperation .
Giving conscious attention to the gender aspect - and we should even be talking here about ' affirmative action ' in favour of women - is a necessary precondition for effective and sustainable development in the developing countries .
The aid will simply be disorganised and not benefit the right people unless women are taken properly into account in development cooperation .
Our strategy should be a consistent one which applies mainstreaming across all measures .
Otherwise , there is a risk that they will be hit-or-miss affairs which do not have the desired effect .
Mrs Junker must be congratulated on her report , which strengthens the common position in a number of areas .
This applies to Amendments Nos 15 and 16 , for example , whereby the developing countries will be given priority in the award of contracts .
However , we are obliged to oppose the amendments which concern the committee procedure and the timescale .
As regards the committee procedure , Mrs Junker and the Commission are in favour of having an advisory committee .
Given a choice between two evils , we would rather see a Type IIB management committee being used , as the Council is proposing .
We are also voting against Amendments Nos 6 and 11 , which concern the timescale .
Although we do not usually support time limits , they are necessary in this case as a means of bringing pressure to bear on the Commission .
We also approve of having a financial reference amount in this situation .
The Commission should not be able to ask for more money to employ consultants and so on .
The gender aspect should be included as a natural part of an effective and rational development policy .
In addition , we should like to highlight and endorse the initiative in the common position which makes it possible for the Commission to hold meetings with representatives of the Member States and the recipient countries with a view to increasing awareness of the gender aspect in new areas of development cooperation .
Harrison report ( A4-0303 / 98 )
Mr President , I should like to congratulate Mr Harrison on his excellent , pragmatic report on late payments .
This is an important subject , which brings practical benefits to small- and medium-sized companies .
Late payments can cripple companies with their cash-flow situation .
One in four bankruptcies are caused by cash-flow problems .
In the UK in particular , British banks have not been particularly sympathetic to small- and medium-sized companies .
I welcome this report as a positive improvement .
I voted in favour of several amendments , and in the final vote I voted for the Harrison report , because I believe that it considerably improves the text proposed by the Commission .
It has not changed my mind , however , and I am therefore rejecting the text proposed by the Commission because it contains provisions which clearly go further than we actually want and which do not fall within the remit of Europe 's legislative powers .
Although my amendment to the legislative resolution did not obtain a majority , I believe that my opinion has been confirmed , not least by what people have written on the subject .
Large-scale intervention in national civil law and civil procedure is not warranted by the measures to combat late payments , although they are , in principle , to be welcomed .
I am glad that we are acting today to put right the costly scandal of late payments facing our entrepreneurs in small- and medium-sized companies .
SMEs are the engines of our economic growth , as well as employers of most of our fellow citizens who work in the private sector .
As such they deserve more respect from big business and the public sector , to which they provide services and goods on which we all rely .
The most important recognition of the work SMEs do would be for them to be paid on time for their hard work .
This goes above all for the larger companies and public sector organisations which can afford to settle their bills but who perhaps like the idea of deferring payment to net more interest on the money in their bank accounts .
No doubt such bad practices have been encouraged by the failure of past rules to demand prompt payment to smaller firms .
Big business has had the clout and the lawyers to force SMEs to wait for their money .
Setting some minimum standards for the time allowed for payments to be made to SMEs and to allow debt collection agencies to do their job across the EU as the author of this report calls for are a sign that we as politicians are prepared to help the ' Davids ' of the business world to get fair treatment from the ' Goliaths ' .
I might add that the European Commission needs to set a good example by making certain that all of its own bills are paid on time to SMEs !
SMEs represent an ever growing percentage of Europe 's fabric of production , particularly in less developed European regions .
Therefore all moves or initiatives in support of small businesses promote Europe 's economic growth in general and are certain to help in achieving regional economic cohesion .
I therefore welcome the Commission 's interest in initiatives to open up European capital markets for small and medium-sized enterprises , and I fully agree with the rapporteur , Mr Hendrick , about the need to carry out information campaigns for individuals and organisations so as to encourage greater investment in SMEs , funding their expansion and development .
I also back Mr Scarbonchi 's view that it is necessary to improve European programmes and initiatives to promote SMEs : those concentrated in rural areas above all owe their survival and future potential to better coordination between industry , agriculture and tourism .
Finally , I can endorse the thrust of the Commission 's proposed directive establishing a fair payment term for the settlement of sales invoices : cash-flow difficulties and liquidity crises are in fact among the main reasons for bankruptcy among SMEs .
Secchi report ( A4-0299 / 98 )
We cannot accept the way in which Amendment No 4 to Article 6 ( 2 ) undermines the fight against tax evasion .
A number of obstacles are still preventing the single market from operating to its full potential .
Direct and indirect taxation can be counted among those obstacles .
Obviously it is neither possible nor would it be healthy to make the 15 tax systems of the Union 's Member States uniform .
On the other hand , any distortions which harm the operation of the single European market ought to be removed .
In March of this year , the European Commission presented a proposal on the payment of interest and fees between associated companies in different Member States .
The aim was to eliminate double taxation of these payments and avoid situations where cross-border companies might be penalised by discriminatory tax regimes .
I welcome both the directive and Mr Secchi 's report , which proposes extending the directive 's provisions to tax on interest and fees between non-associated companies , in the context of the consolidation of the single market .
It seems fair to propose that these payments should be taxed in the Member State where the companies being paid interest or fees are established . On the other hand , the question arises as to whether it is desirable to complicate the system by allowing derogations to this principle , as the directive proposes .
In the long term any derogations should disappear and these payments should only be taxed in the country into which they are being paid .
Langen report ( A4-0084 / 98 )
The Danish Social Democrats in the European Parliament have voted in favour of the report by Mr Langen on a common system of VAT and the report by Mr Miller on products subject to excise duty .
We did so because we wish to see an internal market in which goods can be transported between Member States without barriers to trade .
One such barrier is the difference in the VAT systems between Member States .
The different systems of VAT have nothing to do with VAT rates , but concern the way in which a product is taxed when it crosses a national frontier .
Where different VAT systems exist between two countries , businesses may risk having their products taxed twice , while in other cases they may not be taxed at all .
The Commission 's proposal is designed to produce uniform systems of VAT , but the powers which it is proposed to transfer to the Commission give it almost a free hand to lay down VAT rates in the individual Member States , and that is something we cannot accept .
The Commission is proposing to extend the powers of the advisory VAT Committee and to convert it into a regulatory committee which would take decisions by a qualified majority on the basis of Commission proposals .
The new Committee on Excise Duties makes the ' Plumb-Delors accord ' redundant , and in addition Parliament would no longer have the right to be informed of the committee 's work , which would mean the House losing some of its influence .
Since the harmonisation of such things as VAT rates will have extremely far-reaching consequences for the Member States , this should be carried out by cooperation between the countries .
It is therefore important to insist that areas which involve politically sensitive subjects , such as the harmonisation of VAT rates , are not dealt with by the Commission , but by the Council acting on the basis of Commission proposals .
This will ensure that the principle of subsidiarity is upheld in the area of taxation .
The Danish Social Democrats are therefore strongly opposed to the idea of extending the Commission 's powers in the field of tax and excise duty policy .
Miller report ( A4-0064 / 98 )
When the single market was created , four directives were introduced to enable the application of this specific type of tax to alcohol , tobacco , oil products and gold , as part of the free movement of goods .
These directives concern the rates of excise duties , the structure of the categories of products subject to excise duties and their movement .
In 1992 , a special committee , the Committee on Excise Duties , was created .
It comprises experts from the Member States and has only an advisory role .
On several occasions , it has already been called upon to deal with urgent problems that were impossible to solve given the existing provisions .
The advisory role of the Committee on Excise Duties presents a certain legal problem , particularly since its opinions do not oblige the Commission to propose improvements to its regulations either on the structure of the taxation or on the movement of products .
In other words , even if a Member State abides by the guidelines adopted by this Committee , those same guidelines may be contested in court , including the EU Court of Justice .
Furthermore , new Member States after any future enlargement of the European Union would not be obliged to agree to these guidelines .
We are all aware that products subject to excise duties , especially tobacco , wine and other alcoholic beverages , have always been involved in illegal activities .
Until procedures are harmonised among the Member States , the possibility of fraud and smuggling will remain .
The Commission must introduce new computerised controls on the intra-Community movement of goods subject to excise duties , linked to the computerised system for Community transit .
At the same time , this new procedure will undoubtedly make it possible to limit VAT fraud in transfrontier areas : in order to bring this about , there is no use whatsoever in harmonising VAT rates , regardless of the proposal set out in the Castagnède report .
I must also point out an important flaw in the Commission 's rules on the movement of products subject to excise duties .
Is it right that wine-growers wishing to sell their wine to a private consumer in Germany should be obliged to have their product transported by an ' approved ' operator who will charge them a hefty fee , just so that they can claim back the excise duty , which is zero ?
This is an utterly ludicrous situation and is a genuine obstacle to the single market .
Another example to show how far removed the Commission is from economic reality : a private customer in a Member State can come and buy up to 90 litres of wine on the wine-grower 's property ( with four in the car they could take away 360 litres of wine ) without having to pay any excise duties , while a wine-grower cannot go and deliver a single litre of wine unless it is transported by an ' approved ' operator .
Once again the Commission is applying regulations of benefit to large companies and to the detriment of small operators .
All of us here know that the only companies creating jobs are small and medium-sized undertakings , yet the Commission penalises their development and as a result penalises the creation and development of employment .
To conclude , we call on the Commission to incorporate the recommendations by the Committee on Excise Duties in its proposal to the Council in order to avoid bureaucratic problems in the procedures that it imposes on all European Union operators .
Resolution on climate change ( B4-0802 / 98 )
Mr President , in the year 1000 people were afraid of comets .
Now they are scared of the hole in the ozone layer and the greenhouse effect .
McCarthy basically saw communists everywhere . Our colleagues here see racists and fascists everywhere .
And now the latest neurotic obsession is seeing CO2 and greenhouse gases everywhere .
According to them , methane and carbon dioxide are going to heat up the planet and melt the poles and glaciers .
The sea is going to rise and we are all going to drown except , of course , for our centrist colleagues who know how to swim .
That said , you would have thought that Buenos Aires and Kyoto might have tackled the causes of the problem , such as by banning Pinatubo from emitting gases and banning human beings and the like from breathing so that we do not exhale CO2 .
Another solution would be to illuminate the earth 24 hours a day so that chlorophyll can play its part .
But , of course , that was too difficult so we have found the magic answer : taxation .
After family taxes , investment tax and cinema tax we now have taxes to cool down the climate and purify the atmosphere .
It is even stronger than Viagra .
Instead of taxing taxpayers now we are going to tax gas .
Buenos Aires and Kyoto started out as an obsession and have now turned into a knockabout comedy .
There is only one serious thing in this story : we now know that mad cow disease is transmissible to man .
The proof is that there are Greens and ecologists .
While the EU Commissioner for the Environment , Ritt Bjerregaard , gives yet another pious speech to the European Parliament in Strasbourg about the pioneering role of the European Union in the field of climatic protection , two-thirds of the surface area of Bangladesh lies under water .
The unfortunate consequences of natural disasters have been affecting human beings for a long time , yet neither the Commission nor the Council of Ministers takes the omens of natural disaster as seriously as they should .
And even the European Parliament , in this case its Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection , is failing to come up to the mark with its statements on climate protection .
Far from it .
Its once extremely advanced efforts have now been watered down to the point where we have to say , sadly , that its policy on climate protection has changed .
The USA 's persistent refusal to sign the Kyoto Protocol , with its completely inadequate reduction targets , has obviously set the ball rolling again , but in the wrong direction .
Under the guise of supposedly making political instruments more flexible , we in Europe are also now backing international trade in emission licences , without having the least idea of how they can work and be monitored .
The Commission 's most recent publications do not provide any information on this subject .
Ritt Bjerregaard also has obviously no idea who could organise , monitor and , in the event of abuse , decide on punishment in future wrangles over polluted air .
Her claims that flexible climate protection measures of this kind should only be used in addition to national reduction targets are not convincing .
She refuses to comment on the Commission 's recommendation that national CO2 reductions should be separate from reductions achieved by ' flexible ' methods .
Her silence on this issue before the European Parliament certainly does not bode well for the environment .
She no longer even mentions the proposal put forward in Kyoto that at least 50 % of reduction requirements must be met domestically in the relevant polluting countries themselves .
In the run-up to the Buenos Aires Conference this is a worrying development , but one which unfortunately seems to fit the picture of a European policy which is becoming increasingly dependent on deregulation and in which weak , voluntary undertakings from industrial associations are obviously more important than clear political goals .
Green climate policy has always warned against developments like this because , as well as all the problems concerning controls and sanctions , international trade in pollution licences is not producing any short or medium term improvement in the world 's CO2 levels .
Bartering between those who do not ( yet ) emit particularly high levels of CO2 and those who in recent decades have grown rich at the expense of the environment , only continue to heat our climate .
Global reduction targets cannot be met in this way , not even the ridiculous Kyoto targets and certainly not the reductions of at least 60 % in greenhouse gases which experts consider necessary by the middle of the next century at the latest .
Even the stereotype pioneering role which Ritt Bjerregaard claims the EU has played in the area of climatic protection is not worth much .
The reality is different : emissions are increasing .
More and more cars mean that , despite fuel-saving technologies , CO2 emissions are increasing .
There is a similar situation in Europe 's homes : the success of more efficient technologies is completely cancelled out by the increasing number of single households and micro-families .
Energy prices continue to be too low .
And the only promising programme , that of introducing environmental tax reforms as quickly as possible , continues to be debated again and again in the relevant committees .
Even European energy-saving programmes such as ALTENER II and SAVE II are merely paid lip-service by the Commission and the Council , but are not given adequate funding .
It is pathetic .
To make matters worse , in the wake of the CO2 discussion , nuclear energy is also threatening to make a comeback .
Contrary to all dictates of common sense , its advocates acclaim it as the last hope of preventing climate change ; in so doing , they are simply replacing one evil with another .
After all , promoting this kind of outdated technology takes away urgently needed resources from renewable energies .
If Europe really wants to play a pioneering role in world climate policy , a great deal must first be done in Europe itself .
We did not support the amendment seeking to introduce a tax on aviation fuel , even though we are against the exemption enjoyed by air transport in this respect .
It would have been out of place in this resolution on the current worldwide negotiations on CO2 emissions .
Resolution on the international financial crisis
Mr President , during this debate on the international financial crisis we heard Jacques Santer tell us that the prospect of the euro is protecting us from the threat of widespread financial instability .
First of all , I should like to thank the President of the Commission for remaining relatively modest and not having claimed , like some others and even some members of the Commission , that the euro is protecting us from the Asian crisis as a whole .
That obviously would be a far-fetched claim .
The Asian crisis is the result of the transitional problems facing emerging countries , due to their excessively fast growth .
These problems obviously do not exist in Europe and there is no danger of seeing , here , a crisis similar to that hitting Korea or Indonesia .
Nonetheless , I disagree with the claim made by Mr Santer , albeit a more limited one , that the euro is protecting us from financial instability .
There has been no significant reason up to now for instability to spread in Europe and any coordination , with a little discipline , among the central banks would equally have resulted in relative stability .
The rest is nothing but propaganda .
In particular , the current situation has nothing in common with the situation in 1992-1993 which led to major fluctuations among European currencies .
At that time , the problem was peculiar to Europe - the reunification of Germany obviously involved the realignment of internal monetary parities .
Today the problem lies outside Europe but it is affecting us all , to some extent .
The euro per se is barely protecting us now but it might , on the other hand , become a severe handicap in the months to come .
If the crisis deepens different European countries may need to find different solutions .
Yet the harmonisation of exchange and interest rate policies will prevent that .
There is in other words a risk of a growing conflict between the euro and Europe 's interests .
The text of the motion for a resolution on the international financial crisis is very disappointing .
In its analysis , to begin with , it fails to criticise the foundations on which the world economic and financial system is based ( the discrepancy between the financial bubble and the real economy , speculative and accumulative mechanisms , the absence of political , social and environmental regulation , growing irregularities within and between countries , transnational companies getting richer while the ordinary people are getting poorer ) , and we should not think that recognising the market economy and accepting this financial and transnational form of capitalism are the same thing .
The text is inadequate since it proposes no possible ways of reforming the world monetary system in depth : the need for a new Bretton Woods , the organisation of large regional groups to define coherent monetary areas .
Similarly , the resolution does not suggest any ways of bringing about fiscal regulation such as might be launched with the introduction of a tax on capital movements ( Tobin tax ) .
As far as advisory and decision-making bodies are concerned , the text recommends that we simply fall into line with the position adopted by President Clinton , ie the institutionalisation of the Group of 22 .
It would be better to give the IMF 's Interim Committee ( which at least brings together developed , emerging and developing countries ) genuine political decisionmaking powers .
The text says nothing at all about the risks which this crisis might pose for certain industrial or banking sectors in Europe and therefore fails to consider the necessary support and adjustment measures which could be useful for protecting jobs in different sectors .
More generally speaking , it recommends nothing in particular for the European Union even though the G7 itself has stressed the need for measures to promote recovery and growth .
Unfortunately , it is the workers of the European Union who are likely to pay the price for the current inaction of our institutions .
Resolution on political developments in Russia
The IMF hands out credit .
The gurus of the Anglo-Saxon style liberal economy give lessons in privatisation , market laws , free competition and other liturgical instruments of the religion of the ' invisible hand ' .
After five years of this magic formula , the disastrous results are there for all to see : an economy in ruins , society devastated , life expectancy plummeting to under 60 , poverty , destitution , violence , empty public coffers and a government entrenched behind the walls of the Kremlin .
This is what liberalism has done for Russia .
The current situation was the inevitable result of the sudden removal of economic barriers and the brutal changeover from a protected economy to the fierce competition of speculatory world capitalism .
It should have been tackled progressively , in gentle stages . Instead we have seen nothing but excessive , dogmatic and brutal behaviour .
Russia has turned from the Communist ideology to embrace liberal ideology with no transitional period in between .
Instead of the dictatorship of the Communist nomenklatura , the country is now in the grip of by mafias and oligarchies .
To make matters worse , the institutions that were set up have turned out to be a hindrance , given that the President is able to govern against the will of the majority in the Duma .
The risks for Europe are alarming , with nuclear arms practically being handed over to what remains of the army and the danger of Russia falling apart on the Caucasian-Muslim front and in the far east .
So what can be done ?
Firstly we must learn our lesson from the failure of dogmatic free trade and free Europe from this trap while there is still time .
Then realistic choices must be made in terms of Russia 's institutional needs . In other words , it needs a real government which can cope with the enormous size of this country-continent , and which is in step with its deep-rooted sociological and historical reality .
The motion for a resolution that Parliament has just adopted considerably increases the aid given to the new Russian government .
I regret the fact that it does not , at the same time , mention any of the errors of analysis or the serious failings that the Russian crisis has revealed in the European Union .
It was an error of analysis to have so seriously underestimated the long term effects that seven decades of Soviet rule , seven decades of the welfare state and hardship would have on people . And also to have underestimated the effects of the absence of any liberal traditions that could have taken over once the Communist system had collapsed .
It was a serious error to have given a free hand to the most dogmatic economists , Western liberal experts and those who are least familiar with Russian reality , who mainly came from across the Atlantic .
We have let them transform Russia into a laboratory experiment , encourage blind imitation , prescribe shock therapy that they would never have dared recommend to their own governments , and apply pressure to obtain quick deregulation and uncoordinated privatisation .
The result is that today ' market economy ' for the Russian people has become synonymous with unemployment and destitution .
Let us therefore start by ceasing to act like imperious advisors and dictating the rhythm and nature of Russia 's reforms .
We note that what Russia is most in need of today is clearly a strong , competent and honest government , a State that we have been unable to help build .
We have squandered European taxpayers ' money on programmes and aid which have yet to be evaluated - despite our demands - and which the Emerson affair has shown to be subject to few or no controls and often the source of fraudulent activity , just like those of the European Community Humanitarian Office ( ECHO ) .
Our first duty was to do everything we could to help train this new political , economic and administrative elite that Russia so urgently needed in the European Union .
Only the Communists had a network of trained administrators , but we have been unable to help the new Russia overcome this situation and create its own alternative networks .
Yet our traditions of stateintervention , our post-war experience , our progressive conversion from economies that were largely administered to the common market put us in a better position than others to help to train a new Russian elite capable of handling the progressive changeover from a planned economy to a real economy .
The speed with which Russia embraced the techniques of democracy proves that if we had provided this training early enough and on a large enough scale it would certainly have been successful and would have helped Russia become part of a rediscovered greater Europe .
One might also wonder what purpose the CFSP serves , since it has proved incapable of providing the basis for any joint action to speak of in this area , which is so import for the future of the European Union .
The European Union was unable - failed even - to identify or recognize the new priorities that emerged as a result of the end of the two-superpower world and the collapse of the Soviet system .
Due to their shortsightedness and lack of foresight , Community leaders did not see the Russian crisis coming , neither were they able to predict the scale of it or what the consequences would be . And what is worse , they failed to provide aid which met people 's real needs .
This shameful lack of foresight may indeed have fearful consequences for our own growth .
The European system , as it currently operates , has proved incapable of adequately helping our Russian neighbour to tackle the transition period or the enormous challenges it faced when conditions were favourable , and it has therefore failed to deal with a key issue for the future of our countries .
We would perhaps be better advised to put as much energy into actually achieving far-reaching reforms as into preaching about them .
It is therefore up to the Member States , whose role is pivotal , to once again seize the initiative .
McMillan-Scott report ( A4-0251 / 98 )
Mr President , I shall be brief in view of the time .
Almost three years ago in December 1995 , we were required to deliver our opinion , for a second time , on a Customs Union with Turkey .
I decided not to vote in favour of a Customs Union with Turkey , for four reasons .
Customs Union was presented , and accepted in Turkey , as a simple step towards full accession to the European Union .
Given its geographical location , its culture and religion , I cannot ever imagine this country forming an integral part of the European Community with its Judaeo-Christian tradition .
The second reason I gave was that , although Turkey had made progress in the area of human rights , much remains to be done .
Voting in favour of a Customs Union would have meant accepting a situation that is clearly unacceptable .
My third reason was the situation with Cyprus since 1974 , and my fourth , which is by no means the least important in my opinion , is the fact that Turkey has still not acknowledged the Armenian genocide in 1915 , and even goes so far as to deny it ever happened .
I was not - as I said - unaware of the trade benefits of this agreement .
But in my heart and soul I could not endorse it for the reasons given and my opinion has not changed .
I can see that , several years on , Parliament continues to be guided by the same philosophy of hoping that Turkey will change if we help it .
This is not the answer .
It will only change because of its people and how they vote .
Neither the Customs Union nor economic factors will change the Turkish people or the nature of their leaders .
This is why I was unable to endorse Mr McMillan-Scott 's report .
Three years ago a few MEPs visited Turkey to prepare for a Customs Union and to assess the Kurdish problem and the human rights situation there .
I returned from this rewarding visit feeling optimistic about longterm progress .
Since then , the political situation has become much more complicated , economic growth has been hard to sustain and progress on democracy has not met our expectations .
In spite of all of this , the Customs Union has developed positively .
However , we remain concerned about the future : will the Turkish government be able to sustain growth and control inflation ?
How does it intend to improve respect for the principles of international law , human rights and democracy ?
Will it find a peaceful solution to the Kurdish and Cypriot problems ?
At the present time we do not have answers to these questions , but I am convinced we should not give up .
The report by our colleague Mr McMillan-Scott is absolutely clear : we have to push ahead in the interests of both Turkey and the European Union .
Our relations must become deeper .
Isolating Turkey would do nothing to improve the living conditions of its people or the human rights situation .
Young people in Turkey should have the chance to participate in the Socrates , Leonardo and Youth Exchange schemes and programmes .
The economy needs help to adapt and restructure .
Administrative reform cannot be achieved without cooperation .
I therefore endorse the McMillan-Scott report , but I should like to highlight in particular the progress to be made in the field of human rights , democracy and the intensive cooperation needed to combat the international drugs trade .
The European Union has made considerable efforts here .
Now it is Turkey 's turn .
Little seems to have improved in Turkey 's domestic situation since the Customs Union between Turkey and the EU came into force .
It was Turkey 's internal affairs which led many Members of the EP to vote against its accession during the negotiations with applicant countries .
There is as yet no sign whatsoever of the political reforms demanded as part of the Customs Union , and the army still has far too much influence in Turkish society .

The McMillan Scott report gives a clear picture of the situation , but although it looks in detail all sorts of areas which have not improved , with the poor human rights situation at the top of the list , the general drift of the report is that Turkey should be allowed to join the EU .
Yet Turkey shows no sign of trying to find a peaceful solution to the Kurdish problem or of trying to be sensitive in its dealings with religious minorities and respecting their basic rights .

I agree with most of what the report says , but I voted against it because of its suggestion that if Turkey meets certain criteria it can ' automatically ' join the EU .
I simply cannot go along with this .
As far as we are concerned Turkey is not a European country either geographically or culturally and it therefore cannot become a member of the EU .
Relations between Turkey and the European Union have always been marked by the unsaid , or even hypocrisy .
The most fundamental question has never been addressed : is Turkey a European country ?
Does it really have the right to join the European Union ?
Turkey does indeed have a very small part of its territory in Europe . But is this enough for it to constitute a European nation , in other words one which is akin to European culture and civilization ?
Let us be clear , Turkey 's history has been taken up with the Ottoman Empire 's struggle against the nations of Europe .
Neither its history nor its civilization link this great Asian and Middle Eastern country to Europe .
Would it therefore not be more realistic and honest to put forward ways of cooperating which are consistent , strong , even close , but which do not form part of an accession process , a prospect that we are continually offering , but continually putting off ?
Having said that , Mr McMillan-Scott 's report highlights some of the obstacles to Turkey 's accession over and above the fundamental objection that I mentioned earlier .
Is it acceptable that one of the applicants for accession to the European Union is at the crossroads of the international drugs trade and , in another criminal area , of organised counterfeiting on an industrial scale ?
In the human rights field , we must also remember that , for example in the legal domain , all states need to observe fair procedures that guarantee the right of defence .
The fight against terrorism , which must be unrelenting , can only be strengthened if there are clear laws and penalties .
Can we also accept the fact that , in contempt of UN resolutions , Turkey continues to illegally occupy part of the island of Cyprus ?
Mr McMillan-Scott 's report also stresses the need to make the armed forces answerable to the political authorities .
This point illustrates the difficulties in applying our ways of thinking and our cultural habits to an historic reality that is very different from our own .
Since Kemal Ataturk , the army has always been regarded as the guardian of the Turkish Constitution and the secular nature of the State .
In practice , the army today acts as a buffer against Islam .
So we can clearly see the care needed in addressing the situation in Turkey .
In short , it seems clear that for reasons of history and civilisation and because of the human rights and economic situation , Turkey cannot form part of the European Union .
Therefore , we must endeavour to establish open , clear and close relations between the European Union and Turkey that take account of the specific characteristics of this great Middle Eastern nation .
The Danish Social Democrats have voted in favour of the report on the annual review of the Customs Union between the EU and Turkey .
There should be no doubting our concern that no significant improvements have taken place in terms of the human rights situation and the democratic reforms in Turkey .
We wish to see the Turkish Government actively supporting :
continued democratisation and protection of human rights and consolidation of political control over the armed forces ; -the establishment of good neighbourly relations between Turkey and Greece in particular ; -respect for the principles of international law in resolving the disputes in the Aegean ; -a peaceful settlement of the Cyprus question.In our view , the principle of respect for human rights should be more closely linked to participation in a number of training programmes , and the human rights aspect should be included in the future work of the interinstitutional working party .
Also , the Customs Union must be cost-neutral in terms of the EU 's general budget .
That concludes voting time .
( The sitting was suspended at 1.45 p.m. and resumed at 3 p.m. )

Situation in the Great Lakes region
The next item is the statement by the Commission on the situation in the Great Lakes region .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the crisis in the Great Lakes region , today at the centre of our concerns , broke out more than four years ago and has now once again entered an acute phase , with the civil war in the Democratic Republic of Congo which broke out in August .
Unfortunately , our frequent predictions , our fears that this crisis might spread to neighbouring countries have been confirmed in recent days .
A total of six eastern , central and southern African countries are now militarily involved , and there is also a risk that other countries might be drawn into this conflict in Congo-Kinshasa .
Of special concern at the moment is the possibility of Sudanese forces intervening in the Democratic Republic of Congo , on the government side , which would probably lead to an escalation of the conflict involving Sudan 's own neighbours .
In Congo-Kinshasa , as we all know , the fall of the Mobutu regime and the coming to power of the new regime did not put an end to the structural , political , economic and social crisis which started a long time ago . They turned Congo , the former Zaire , into a focus of constant destabilisation in the heart of central Africa .
The Members of the European Parliament are all aware of the analysis of the current conflict and its link to the situation in the Great Lakes and ethnic problems - not only in Rwanda and Burundi but also in the province of Kivu and Lower Congo - and know that we believe that no solution can be found by military means or , in other words , by armed intervention .
We have said time and time again that it is vital to hold political negotiations in order to find a solution to the far-reaching political , economic and social problems besetting this region of Africa .
Furthermore , we are extremely frustrated not only that it is impossible to pursue a development policy but also that the infrastructures and institutions to which the European Union and its Member States have contributed in the past , not without some difficulty , have now been destroyed .
The European Union has taken a clear stance on this , especially in recent times , and its statement of 27 August is clear as to the conditions to be met in any attempt to solve this crisis .
We have lent our support to Africa 's own attempts at mediation , which have unfortunately not yet been successful , namely the talks begun by President Mandela at Victoria Falls and the Organisation of African Unity meeting in Addis Ababa , as well as the more recent SADCC meeting in Mauritius , all of which have so far met with little success .
An immediate visit by the Special Envoy to the region , where he still is , in order to try and find ways of facilitating dialogue and pinpointing solutions to the conflict , was fully justified .
We think that it might be worthwhile to explore the possibility of an African peacekeeping force , in which the European Union might participate .
One thing is certain .
It will not be possible to create conditions for dialogue as long as foreign troops remain inside Congo and until an end is put to the racist and populist talk which only encourages inter-ethnic violence .
Nor will it be possible to reach peace without solutions based on respect for Congo 's territorial integrity and the security of its neighbours .
The regional conference we have spoken about so much is due to be held under the aegis of the Organisation for African Unity and the United Nations , though this does not , of course , preclude any contribution that the international community , in particular the European Union and its Member States , could make to its success .
Ladies and gentlemen , at the present time the situation between the armed forces suggests two different scenarios .
One would be the consolidation of the current spheres of interest on both sides , albeit with a continuation of the war between the Congolese army ( and its allies ) and the rebel militia ( and their allies ) . This might just , in the medium term , lead to a solution , with a gradual retreat by the other countries in the region and an internalisation of the conflict to involve only Congolese forces .
The other scenario , which is more likely , includes a large-scale counter-offensive by the group close to Kabila , which would result , quite understandably , in a supra-regional conflict on an even wider scale .
Either of these two scenarios would be extremely worrying because , even in the first case , with the internalisation of the problem within Congo , instability in Congo vis-à-vis all of the neighbouring countries and the well-known situations of insecurity in those neighbouring countries would make it impossible ever to bring about stability in that part of the African continent .
It is for this reason that the European Union insists , as it has insisted in the past , on the need to look at the region as a whole rather than just the individual crisis points .
I would also add , ladies and gentlemen , that one of the tasks for our Special Envoy will be to meet the Secretary-General of the United Nations and other senior United Nations officials currently monitoring the situation in the Great Lakes and in Congo .
We hope that our envoy will be able to report back to us in early October , when we shall once again assess the situation and any political proposals that have been made .
I should also like to inform you that we are in close contact with the United Nations Development Programme and with the World Bank , in order to see whether it might be possible to take joint action on the overall rehabilitation of the whole area , which obviously would be an important contribution to any global conference on the region .
As for the humanitarian situation , the military conflict is obviously having a serious impact here .
There have been reports of violations of human rights by both sides in the conflict , and the authorities on both sides are using ethnic confrontation as a means of uniting the population around their political or military platforms .
There is no access to the rural areas of Kivu and the province of Lower Congo , where the greatest human suffering is concentrated .
Information on the humanitarian needs of thousands and thousands of displaced persons is still very scarce and patchy .
Apart from that , the knock-on effect into the neighbouring countries , especially Rwanda and Burundi , could destabilise still further the fragile rebuilding of ethnic cohabitation in those countries .
The cities of Kinshasa and Kisangani are currently facing severe food shortages and water supply problems since all supplies have been cut .
Our main worry - apart from these difficulties in Kinshasa and Kisangani - continues to be focused , however , on the humanitarian situation in the province of Kivu . We might be about to witness a mass exodus of Congolese people either within the Democratic Republic of Congo or into Tanzania , Burundi or other countries , and that could transform the humanitarian situation into a full-blown disaster .
To deal with this new crisis the Commission has earmarked a new budget of ECU 55 million for the Great Lakes region , of which around 10 million are destined for the Democratic Republic of Congo immediately .
However , I should like to say that it is extremely difficult for organisations providing humanitarian aid to gain access since security conditions are virtually nonexistent , and therefore we are trying to negotiate a code of conduct with the authorities on both sides to see whether it is possible for humanitarian action to take place with at least minimum guarantees for those involved .
I would like once again to raise a question which I have already raised before the Commission and the Council and which calls for discussion in this Parliament : it is the question of whether we can justify continuing sending aid on the same terms - ' business as usual ' - to countries involved in armed conflicts which waste up to 30 % of their budgets on arms and military equipment , and whether we should not take a thorough look and ask ourselves whether the aid we are paying to their social and other budgets might not actually be being used , indirectly , to finance their wars .
This is not an easy question , but I think that the European institutions - since Europe is Africa 's biggest donor - might have trouble with our taxpayers and with our own consciences if we do not look into this issue more closely .
I hope that we can come back to this question in a few weeks ' time and that we will have had further thoughts on the matter . All the Community institutions should consider jointly what measures need to be taken and what guidelines adopted .
That is all for now , Mr President .
Mr President , Commissioner , my group broadly agrees with your analysis and thanks you for it .
For decades , Zaire has experienced political dictatorship , corruption , poor economic management and human rights violations .
Although the Mobutu regime was clearly condemned and progressively isolated by the international community from 1982 onwards , the wealth of the country offset the economic isolation that should have resulted .
The triumphant arrival of the Alliance troops under Laurent Kabila appeared to have put an end to dictatorship once and for all .
The military situation appeared to be under the control of the Alliance leadership and we were convinced that Congo now had the chance to start rebuilding itself , with all of these active democratic and progressive forces working together .
We have to admit that the situation did not develop as originally hoped .
The new leaders withdrew into themselves , proving intransigent and so depriving themselves of the support of a large part of the population that did not accept the authoritarian procedures of the Alliance .
One of the few points in its favour is that it has given towns more security .
Recovery here is probably impossible without international aid , which has not been forthcoming , mainly due to a lack of confidence .
It is a vicious circle .
A lack of confidence on the part of Western governments in the political will of the Alliance to democratise the country , and a lack of confidence on the part of potential investors and private companies in security , particularly legal security , and fear that their investments will not be profitable .
Congo has once again plunged into a war which is involving armies from several countries in the region . The tragic pictures that we receive daily show massacres and the suffering of the people .
Statements made by some of the country 's most senior officials inciting ethnic hatred are completely unacceptable and do not bode well for the future .
The rebellion is made up of a group of heterogeneous forces who are all pursuing diverse interests , but are united in their opposition to the present regime . It is being politically and financially supported by former leaders of the previous regime .
The threat of a fresh outbreak of violence in Congo is very real and , as always , would be very damaging for the poorest regions of this country , affecting the most vulnerable members of the population .
What is more , it is setting a very dangerous precedent for other countries in Africa .
In this context , we hope that the European Union will call for an immediate ceasefire and support African initiatives , in particular those of Nelson Mandela , to try to prevent unrest in the region and find a negotiated settlement to the Congo crisis .
The European Union and the Member States must speak with one voice , carry out an active diplomatic effort and coordinate their action in order to guarantee peace and security in this part of the world .
This is the reason why my group supports the European Parliament 's joint resolution , since it is a joint resolution , .
Let the European Parliament speak with one voice because we , like the other democratic groups in this House , want to guarantee peace in this part of the world .
Mr President , Commissioner , I was particularly interested to hear what the Commissioner had to say about what is happening at the moment in the Great Lakes area of Africa .
I can summarise it in a few sentences .
The Commissioner is undoubtedly an expert on Africa , he listed a number of problems , quite rightly pointed to the need to find solutions to them and described a number of possibilities .
But , as the previous speaker said , what Parliament wants to know is what the international community and Europe are doing to bring about peace in Africa and to stop the killing ?
This region has seen some appalling events in its recent history .
The conflict between the Hutus and the Tutsis has been going on for years and the actions of the FDR in Rwanda led to civil war .
Attempts were made to reach agreement at Arusha , but for some unknown reason the talks were held without first demanding a ceasefire .
The Rwandan president 's plane was shot down , but it is still not yet officially clear who was responsible .
The genocide which ensued was horrific .
The country fell into the hands of the rebels and became a virtual dictatorship .
In Burundi too a colonel seized power .
Does anyone here in the House believe that lasting peace between the ethnic groups in countries like Rwanda and Burundi can be achieved without international intervention ?
There were one-and-a-half million refugees , most of them women and children , on the border between Rwanda and Congo-Zaire , but no solution was found to the problem , nor did anyone even try to find one .
When the refugees were forced on the move again only Emma Bonino was brave enough to point out that more than 300 000 of them had slipped away .
They have all now disappeared .
The dead cannot talk .
Have we forgotten that the Security Council decided that there should be military intervention , but a week later President Clinton announced that he would not be involved in the operation ?
Meanwhile it had emerged that there had been massacres in eastern Congo-Zaire and the UN decided to try to locate the mass graves in order to find out exactly what had happened in the area .
The new authorities would not agree to this and there was a stand-off with the United Nations .
Then Laurent Désiré Kabila , heading an army of mainly Ugandans and Rwandans , took control of the whole of Congo-Zaire .
Ministers in the West made encouraging statements about having confidence in the new regime , and the conquerors set about expanding their empire .
After a while it became clear that the expected new , more democratic policies respecting human rights on the basis of a constitutional state were unlikely to materialise .
The attitude towards the organised opposition was even less conciliatory than it had been under the Mobutu regime , in fact it was actually banned .
There was growing unrest again among the population and now what do we see ?
The forces from Uganda and Rwanda that supported Kabila have resurfaced to fight him .
At the same time troops from Angola are trying to take control of Lower Congo .
There are also rumours that the Katangan police are planning an operation from Angola to expel Kabila , who now symbolises the state of Congo , from Katanga .
More and more foreign troops from Zimbabwe and other countries are becoming involved in the fighting , supplying aircraft and mercenaries .
There are probably eight countries involved in the troubles .
If it was happening in Europe people would be talking about the risk of a world war .
Even the media are avoiding talking about what is behind all this : economic powers interested mainly in diamonds , oil , cobalt and copper .
Some commentators have written that it is all reminiscent of the precolonial days when western companies set up trading posts in order to gain control of supplies of raw materials .
It seems that the killing in Central Africa cannot be stopped and that the recent hopes of finally rooting out one-party systems and dictatorships have been dashed for many years to come .
Stability at any price seems to have become the new political ideal .
How many tens of thousands of people have been killed ?
How many more will there be ?
No-one is coming forward to help Africa .
The international community is invisible , the United Nations refuses to act .
No-one even mentions the Western European Union any more , and the European Union , it has now become very clear , sadly has no policy on Africa .
The Member States of the EU are divided : not only is there no common policy , there is no policy at all .
Humanitarian aid helps both the aggressors and their victims but does not concern itself with solutions to political problems .
I cannot make this point strongly enough : we have no policy .
We should ban the expression ' common foreign policy ' for Europe from our vocabulary .
Mr President , I agree with my friend Mr Tindemans that there is indeed no European policy on Africa .
But , as today , this has never stopped us from talking about it .
The people of the Democratic Republic of Congo are having to watch themselves becoming the victims of yet more violence in this endless conflict .
Thirty years of dictatorship and Kabila 's military takeover have not been enough .
Civil war is raging again , and Kabila has only himself to blame .
The country is still drifting out of control .
The people are still facing deepening poverty , death , destruction and suffering .
Human rights are still regularly being violated on an enormous scale and democracy is , of course , nothing more than a pretence .
Yes , the rebel attack was on a legitimate and recognised authority , and yes , action must be taken against it .
But Kabila has yet to prove that he deserves support in the longer term .
Up to now he has certainly not deserved it .
He will also have to accept international mediation which has to involve the rebels , otherwise there can be no mediation .
I appreciate the efforts that South Africa has made here , and as Mr Tindemans said , finding an African solution to a problem in an African country by means of African intervention using African weapons is a return to how Africa used to be before colonial times .
It may be a hopeful sign that the African countries want , and perhaps are able , to help to resolve conflicts in their own continent themselves , since Europe has no policy on the subject .
The Union could perhaps act as a facilitator , creating the right conditions to enable the Africans themselves to resolve their own conflicts .

Mr President , Mr Tindemans was quite right : Europe is fiddling while the heart of Africa burns .
The genocide of the Tutsis and the fall of Mobutu have opened Pandora 's box and war is now raging from Brazzaville to Addis Ababa .
Traditional labels such as colonialism and ideological differences between East and West are no longer relevant .
The individual African rulers are only concerned with protecting their own positions of power .
Political opposition groups are not given any opportunity to function democratically , and this often leads them to seek support from related tribes over the borders , which in turn gives the dictators an excuse to take cross-border military action .
This tangled web results in terrible suffering for the people and the squandering of money and humanitarian aid .
I think the Commissioner uses UN agreements as a convenient shield to hide behind , but I would like a clear answer .
Do the Commission and the Commissioner not feel that it is now high time that we started raising our voices in protest , for example to the government in Luanda which simply sacked seventy opposition MPs , replacing them with unelected members and threatening them in their homes ?
Is this not likely to exacerbate the conflict in the region ?
Will you tell me , Commissioner , why we as democrats have not already sent the signal that we as Members of Parliament must now give ?
Members belong in Parliament and must not be threatened .
If you fail to do so , Commissioner , the Angolan government will think that it can get away with its current practice of using profits from oil and diamonds to buy weapons , and humanitarian aid , no matter how well-intentioned , will be pointless .
If we feel for Africa , we should be critical of all those involved in the fighting .
Mr President , a number of specific issues have emerged from the crisis that we have been witnessing over the past few weeks , such as the fact that President Kabila has not kept his main electoral promises and the fact that the opposition parties are still unable to carry out their normal activities .
What is more , opponents are being imprisoned and , it appears , summarily executed .
The Congo is therefore clearly not a democratic country and appears a long way from holding free elections .

It can also be said that other neighbouring countries are involved in this conflict , such as the barely disguised presence of Uganda and Rwanda , which possibly still harbour plans to divide up the Congo and de facto seize control of some parts of the country .
But although these issues are important , I believe that they are not the most important .
There are more general issues to be addressed , given that we are faced with the first regional war in Africa in recent times .
There are many questions we should be asking .
For example , why is it that organizations such as the Organization for African Unity are not capable of crisis management or conflict prevention ?
Why have the United Nations also been unable to intervene in this situation ?
And why have even relatively powerless movements like the Non-Aligned not tried to intervene in this crisis ?
As a consequence there are no opportunities for mediation , nor are there any conflict prevention or crisis management mechanisms , making political solutions difficult to achieve .
We could insist that a regional conference is needed to put an end to what is happening .
We could also strongly urge that a neutral African military force be set up .
But who would organise it and what would be its policies and objectives ?
What is more , who would support it given that EU support alone would not suffice ?

We would also have to find out where , for example , the United States stands on this conflict , because the United States has always claimed to have one position and then adopted a different one on Africa .
There is a clear lack of regional management structures , of structures that facilitate genuine cooperation in Africa between African countries themselves and which go beyond the existing structures between these countries and other regions such as the European Union .
We have in fact reached a point where a crisis of this nature could erupt again if Europe , as well as taking specific measures now , does not look further ahead and try to establish a policy on Africa that provides for the creation of these kinds of structures .
Of course , if I had to answer the Commissioner 's question as to whether it is possible to continue to cooperate with countries at war or that arm themselves for war , I think the answer would be no .
We have no right to favour this type of policy , and still less to misuse the resources of European citizens .
Mr President , I have to say that I am torn between anger and despair when I read that the EU should play an active role in promoting peace , security and stability in the Great Lakes region .
In view of the absence of the UN in recent weeks , in view of the passive attitude of the European Union and the withdrawal of humanitarian aid , all talk of responsibility or even the claim , Mrs van Bladel , that it is now the Africans who are to blame for everything , is enough to make me sick .
We cannot so quickly rid ourselves of the responsibility for the monsters we created as colonial powers in Africa .
Of course , it is a positive development that the Africans have begun to recognise that they have to find joint solutions for their major regional problems .
Despite its failure , the Victoria Falls meeting was a useful start .
They have joint responsibility for ensuring respect for human and civil rights , which at least means that borders become less important .
Mr Bertens is absolutely right : the European Union has the opportunity to begin a new chapter and to help the Africans to find their own solutions .
In addition , we should not behave as if friendly relations with Bill Clinton give us the right to take unilateral military action .
Of course , Uganda and Rwanda do not have the right to introduce a unilateral military solution as they see fit , and we cannot now push Angola into the background because it has resisted this .
Nor can we simply declare Unita to be a political opposition party after 30 years of civil war and the sabotage of the peace process .
Unita must at last fit in with the constitution of the second Angolan Republic and assume a constructive role as an opposition party .
This is what almost all Angolans want .
The forces of democracy in Congo have made a series of demands which we should actively support : defence of unity and self-determination , opening up the government for democratic forces , precise arrangements for future elections , clear dissociation from xenophobic tendencies , mobilisation of the interministerial commission for the protection of Tutsis and expansion of this to the whole territory , establishment of a ceasefire , withdrawal of all foreign troops and return of Congolese refugees to their home territory , the need to establish clearly who attacked whom , use of the media to promote peace propaganda rather than the propaganda of war and hatred , and , not least , provision of a peace-keeping force to ensure peace between the Democratic Republic of Congo and its neighbours in the Great Lakes region .
This is a programme that we can really do something about , and if the Union would commit itself to achieving it with all the diplomatic measures at its disposal , we could really give the people of this region fresh hope .
Mr President , the European Union is finding it extremely difficult to define and implement a policy in the Great Lakes Region in line with its fundamental principles .
What is more , is it a matter of European Union foreign policy or that of one or two of its Member States ?
In fact , judging by the list of signatories to the various motions for resolutions , one has the strange impression - strange but by no means new - that the Great Lakes situation is only of interest to Belgium and France , two countries that are dictating Europe 's position because of the interests they have inherited from colonial history .
But let us come back to the fundamental principles that are so dear to Europeans .
First , as has so often been said , we must ensure the territorial integrity of our former colonies , which is almost all the OAU is concerned about .
In fact , one and a half years ago , the French Minister for Foreign Affairs said that he believed Mobutu was the only one who could guarantee Zaire 's territorial integrity .
We have since seen what his opinion was worth , and today , in fact , nobody any longer believes that territorial integrity is possible in a country whose government authorities long ago lost control over it .
However , there are many who were in favour of Katanga seceding but at the same time continued to affirm the inviolability of the frontiers , whereas eastern Congo has been placed under the sovereignty of Uganda and Rwanda , both of which are anxious to guarantee their own security by legitimate methods .
Another more important fundamental principle is the passion we demonstrate for the democratisation of Africa .
Just a few months ago , in our own resolutions , Mr Kabila was described as the self-proclaimed president , his government as provisional , and his political practice as cracking down on freedom .
Has Mr Kabila become a democrat ?
Is he ever likely to hold elections or do away with corruption ?
Not at all .
The only change that has taken place is easy to identify : Mr Kabila has broken off relations with his former Rwandan and Ugandan allies and because of this alone the European Union can establish relations with him .
Are we concerned about the principle of humanitarian solidarity and the fate of the refugees ?
We have been deeply and rightly moved by the fate of the Rwandan refugees over the past few years .
But no-one has ever seen , and I have certainly never seen , Parliament show concern for the millions of Rwandans that were condemned to live outside the borders of their countries until 1994 .
It does indeed appear that the genocide , which Mr Tindemans so modestly referred to as a wave of violence , perpetrated in Rwanda in 1994 has failed to stir the consciences of European politicians .
Those who , yesterday , helped Habyarimana or Mobutu are , today , the first to recognise Mr Kabila as the legitimate president , unlikely as this seems .
The fact is that Europe needs to concentrate its efforts on three objectives : security in eastern Zaire must be achieved , wherever the national border may be ; we must help the real refugees to return to their countries , particularly Rwanda ; and the would-be refugees who have been living in Congo and Europe for four years must be brought to trial for their part in the genocide in 1994 .
Mr President , Mr Hory , it is by no means only Members from Belgium and France who are interested in this conflict , as can be seen from my speech .
But there are always only a few who can support these resolutions .
One should not conclude from this , however , that others are not interested .
Quite the contrary .
We all wish for peace in Africa , a peace that leads to prosperity and stability .
However , the situation in reality does not make this easy .
But despair should not lead to resignation , Mr Wolf .
I know that you do not want that either .
Of course , it is sometimes depressing when we try again and again to make progress , to provide support and assistance , and yet things do not turn out as well as we would have wished .
But we must persist in our efforts to find ways to settle the conflict , and particularly to strengthen and include all political forces in Africa which can , and above all wish to , contribute to bringing about stability and a solution to the conflict .
The ACP-EU Joint Assembly is meeting in Brussels next week and we hope that all the parties involved will sit round one table with us there .
We have been dealing with the conflict in the Great Lakes region for years , and now it is on the agenda once again .
It has become a constant history of suffering .
However , I think that these meetings help us - and there are positive signs here - to talk to each other and to sound out possible ways of solving the conflict .
Firstly , we must , together with all the African representatives who will sit at the table with us , put all our energies into overcoming ethnic hatred , one of the main causes of this conflict .
I will not list all the atrocities , human rights violations and acts of violence here .
A great deal has already been said about this .
However , it is particularly sad that those who have themselves been victims of discrimination and hatred in the past , today show the same hatred and discrimination towards each other .
This is something which we cannot tolerate .
Yet neither can we approve of military intervention - regardless of which side it comes from - rather than efforts to choose the path of peace and to urge neighbouring countries to seek a peaceful solution to the conflict , while upholding the principles of democracy .
Conflict prevention is often on the agenda .
We have used up a great deal of paper on this issue .
I think that , in practice , we must attach even greater importance to preventive methods of conflict avoidance than we have up to now .
We must give particular emphasis to the fact that peace talks can only be successful if all parties to the conflict sit at the same table .
This is what we must try to achieve .
Mr President , the water of the Great Lakes of Africa is troubled and bloody , sullied with death and suffering caused by human blindness , madness and ambition .
Scarcely had the guns fallen silent in Guinea-Bissau than a new focus of instability had flared up in the Democratic Republic of Congo , spreading its conflict into a series of neighbouring countries , from Angola to Zimbabwe , from Namibia to Rwanda , from Uganda to Burundi and Tanzania .
Through the smokescreen of the many interests at stake it is difficult to see any rationality behind what is happening in Congo at the present time .
We are witnessing the clashes of age-old ethnic hatred , stoking never-ending wars of extermination and retaliation , the reasons for which are lost in the mists of time .
We are also witnessing the consequences of ill-defined borders , some of which were drawn on colonial maps in the last century .
International economic interests are far from innocent parties , hovering like vultures ready to share out the vast natural wealth hidden in that part of Africa .
Added to that is an uncontrolled profusion of armies from several countries , mercenaries of all kinds , on the payrolls of many bosses , bandits roaming at large or just ruthlessly bloodthirsty fighters .
If they were only wallowing in desert sand and dust , we would not be here discussing a conflict that is threatening to turn into a massive regional tragedy .
President Laurent Kabila did not take the opportunity to install a genuine democracy in his country and dashed the hopes both of his own people and of the international community .
He is now the bogus ruler of an enormous area where nobody respects anybody , where the law is based on summary execution and rifle butt justice , where the civilian population makes the biggest sacrifices , with more than two million refugees and countless dead .
Every attempt at bringing about a cease-fire has failed , from the Victoria Falls meeting to the recent meeting in Addis Ababa of the defence ministers of the countries involved .
Since they cannot come to an understanding , I think we should question the Council about its political inaction and whether it might not be time for the European Union to make a fresh analysis , as Commissioner Joäo de Deus Pinheiro said , of the entire framework for cooperation with the countries involved in the civil and international conflicts in the Great Lakes region .
Although the Commission - rightly so - has just stepped up its humanitarian aid to Congo , other European cooperation measures cannot be allowed to continue to feed other leaders ' warmongering instead of benefiting the ordinary people involved .
All of this needs to be re-examined , and we should look into the possibility of taking measures to suspend certain cooperation budgets unless the warring countries show that they have come to their senses .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Congo crisis , the crisis in the Great Lakes region , faces us with a new political and geo-political problem in some respects .
Until now , in fact , two principles had been virtually sacrosanct when discussing Africa 's problems .
One was that local conflicts and wars were in a sense proxy wars , behind which lay the Western powers ; the other was that Africa 's borders were set in stone .
The Great Lakes crisis now teaches us , first of all , that the Western powers with traditional interests in the region - Belgium , France and latterly the United States - have largely abdicated their responsibilities , and , secondly , that a regional conflict seems to be casting doubt on the status quo of borders which , in many cases , were drawn not by Africans but by the European nations at the time of decolonisation .
Political judgements must therefore be made prior to any intervention on our part .
Are these borders really inviolable ?
And , while reflecting on this matter , should the European Union not cast aside platitudes such as the maintenance of peace or respect for human rights ?
Not because they are unimportant , but because we should begin by setting ourselves a political goal : namely to help re-establish the balance and find what positive elements exist amidst so much human tragedy , by encouraging the African countries to become more self-aware and more autonomous .
The European Union must ensure that this process is a peaceful one , that reason prevails and not force , as happens in the total absence of a strong foreign policy .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Commissioner , we know that the recent conflicts in Africa , initially triggered by local ethnic issues , are now rapidly turning into all-out regional conflicts , affecting several countries and leading to thousands of deaths , millions of refugees , a progressive domino effect .
It is against that background that I wish to remind you of the situation in Angola .
Although the presence of Angolan troops in the Democratic Republic of Congo is significant in itself , even more worrying is the decision of the Angolan Government unilaterally to suspend members of UNITA from their government functions and also to suspend members of that party from the Angolan National Assembly , even though they were democratically elected .
Those members of parliament are now being held in Luanda , unable to leave the city , subjected to all kinds of pressure and in many cases deprived of food and drink .
This is a clear violation of the Lusaka Agreements , and now it looks and sounds as though the country is preparing for war .
I think that the Council and the Commission should have something to say about the situation since it is a clear violation of democratic principles .
We also feel that systematically denigrating and isolating UNITA , which is currently prevented from gaining access to Angolan or international communications , is doing nothing to help the Angolan peace process .
We still think it is possible , with the new mediator and support from the European Union , to avoid a new war whose scale , effects and duration cannot be predicted , apart from the fact that it could also result in a further escalation of existing regional conflicts .
That is why we maintain that the European Union must do all it can to support the initiative of a regional conference , under the aegis of the United Nations , to bring about a final and lasting peace in the region .
Mr President , I had intended to participate in this debate by forgetting my personal opinions and telling myself that perhaps I would hear something new that would enable the problems in Africa to be solved .
I decided to put all my convictions temporarily on hold .
I have therefore been listening very closely to all of the speakers .
I heard them admit to having been taken in by Kabila , in the same way that tomorrow we shall be forced to admit to having been taken in by Mandela , though we know his good intentions are genuine ; but all the news that we are receiving from South Africa speaks only of the ever worsening situation there .

I listened to Mr Tindemans go through the usual arguments laying the blame on colonisation . But decolonisation took place a long time ago now .
It is true that colonisation did have its darker side , but the fact remains that , even if we contest the borders which the colonial powers established , we still have to admit that they often brought an end to wars that pitted African nations one against the other .
Colonisation was by no means perfect , but when I visit the countries of the former French Union , I am not ashamed of what my country did there .
They were not banana republics .
There were ports , airports , roads , schools , health centres .
Today , the reality is that barbarism has engulfed many of these countries . However , when I hear people here saying that we need to help the Africans - although what does that really mean , if not advising them and arming them , which is tantamount to neocolonialism ? - I am afraid that what people really want , in a very hypocritical fashion , is to impose a new colonialism that will cause more deaths than the old .
Giscard d 'Estaing used to talk about Africa for the Africans ; he perhaps was not wrong , but I think we now should leave them alone .
We cannot do anything more for them .
I would inform the House that I have received eight motions for resolutions tabled pursuant to Rule 37 ( 2 ) .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 9 a.m.
Mr President , the by now multiple and widespread crises and conflicts in the Great Lakes region , in the Democratic Republic of Congo and also in other nearby regions , are probably the most striking and far-reaching shake-up in the national and regional status quo since the era of decolonisation .
Crises are no longer occurring within states , as in the past , but between states , calling into question a regional order which prevailed for almost forty years , albeit with many problems and severe injustices .
This seems to me to be what is new about the current situation .
I believe that it is vital to try and prevent the status quo from disintegrating completely in this fashion .
Not because the situation to date was inherently the most equitable , but because there is now a very real risk that new powers will gain control - powers based on ethnic oppression , in some cases genocide , on trafficking in arms , in some cases in drugs and in many cases in important natural resources .
Therefore , respect for national integrity and a refusal of any drastic changes to national borders would prevent the situation deteriorating further and an even more unfair balance of power replacing the previous one .
My second point is this , Mr President .
Until three or four months ago , it appeared - especially across central Africa , from Eritrea to Angola - that a new African order had taken shape , with new leaders , based on the geo-political premise of strong relations with the United States .
That order has crumbled very rapidly : it was probably false and illusory , and in fact has probably now disappeared for good .
This shows that it is not enough merely to seek out certain faithful or powerful - sometimes violent - allies in Africa ; rather , it is necessary to construct and consolidate genuine processes for transforming and repositioning international alliances and relations .
Europe 's role , in my opinion , is to intervene in such processes and launch new forms of cooperation to motivate , strengthen and render more useful our commitment to cooperation .
Negotiations on the future of the Lomé Convention are to begin - with some difficulty , I believe - in a few weeks ' time . Our commitment at these , Commissioner , must be to help design a new order , the protagonists in which must be the Africans themselves and their countries ' democratic representatives .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the remarks that we have just heard from Commissioner Pinheiro showed a great deal of prudence , which to me seems absolutely essential when faced with a problem on such a scale and of such complexity .
But such prudence must be accompanied by a great sense of humility on the part of the European Union , two things which , to my mind , go hand in hand .
Last April Mr Ajello , the European Union 's special envoy in the Great Lakes region , when speaking about events that were taking place there , said that there was no military solution to be found .
But neither , as everyone is well aware , is there a political solution that could be imposed on the states of the region .
It is firstly up to them to find a solution to the problem through dialogue and negotiations .
Our role is to support initiatives aimed at establishing such dialogue and not to change potential participants or try and impose our point of view .
We must show humility , as I said .
Even though we want to secure peace as quickly as possible , we must remember that , in other regions at other times , the dialogue established to resolve such conflicts was long and drawn out .
We should tirelessly encourage the heads of state concerned , but we cannot blame them for not finding an immediate solution , neither do we wish to impose one on them .
I would like to make two more remarks , ladies and gentlemen .
We should not , unfortunately , expect too much - and I am the first person to regret this - from the Arusha Tribunal .
We should , of course , give it our support , as the Port-Louis ACP-EU Joint Assembly resolution reminded us in April , but let us not forget the very accurate , if sceptical remarks made by the Union 's special envoy in the region .
One only has to visit Arusha and listen to a few comments to understand that , locally , they do not expect much except - and this is the heart of the matter - the assurance that such tragedies will never happen again .
My second remark : the Commission must , as called for in the Port-Louis resolution , maintain the supply of humanitarian aid and this issue alone requires as much attention and more resources than all the others .
This was also reflected in the decisions you referred to earlier , Commissioner .
You told us you were going to study this matter in greater detail before offering us any answers .
I shall be very interested to hear what you have to say to us . Until then I am still in favour of continuing this aid .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , everyone will have understood that , whilst my group supports the joint text , I personally do not think that the Union can guarantee peace , security or stability in this part of the world .
As one of the recitals in this texts says , I believe we need to help secure peace and not simply to ensure peace .
Mr President , Commissioner , as I wrote to you , I visited Kinshasa at the beginning of August , at the time of the first curfew .
I walked about the streets alone with no problems whatsoever .
At no time did I feel threatened .
I had the opportunity to talk to young and elderly citizens alike , all of whom told me of their sympathy and support for Mr Kabila .
They also told me how they did not understand why Europe had abandoned a Congo that had finally been liberated from the dictator Mobutu .
They especially did not understand why European and American embassy officials had , as they saw it , fled .
We need to intervene on a large scale in order to help the people of Congo out of this poverty and suffering by means of emergency medical and food supplies .
We also must control the arms build-up in certain regions and ask ourselves who is selling these arms and who is profiting from the sales .
Belgium and other European states owe a large part of their current wealth to the exploitation of former colonies in the Great Lakes region .
We therefore have a moral duty to these people , whatever their ethnic background or religion .
Africa is a natural complement to Europe ; they have the resources we lack ; we have the technology they need .
Let us use this complementarity to benefit these stricken people .
I will end , Commissioner , by asking you why we are not taking the political initiative to confiscate , on behalf of Congo , the personal fortunes in property and liquid assets that Mobutu and his henchmen have amassed in Europe , including Switzerland ?
Mr President , I shall be very brief and make just three comments .
The first refers to a matter raised by two speakers here about the UNITA members of parliament who have been unilaterally suspended from the Angolan parliament .
This is a question of principle : under no circumstances can the European Union allow members of parliament , freely elected in elections regarded as free by the local population , to be unilaterally prevented from exercising their function .
This is a matter of principle on which I believe the European Union has already directly or , at least , bilaterally made its opinion known to the Angolan Government .
The second question concerns humanitarian aid : under no circumstances have we proposed or do we propose suspending humanitarian aid .
This is a matter which supersedes ideology because it concerns human beings .
As far as humanitarian aid is concerned , I must tell you that the men and women working for non-governmental organisations who dare to go inside the Democratic Republic of Congo are genuine heroes , I repeat genuine heroes . They are going to places where some countries did not even want to send their armed forces because they were considered too dangerous .
Finally I should like to say , with regard to the Democratic Republic of Congo , that a number of promises were made after Mr Kabila came to power , in particular by our partners on the other side of the Atlantic .
I should like the European Parliament to know that what was promised - and I do not even know whether this has been paid yet - was up to 20 million dollars , in addition to the 90 million dollars which the European Union donated through the Commission just for rebuilding the roads leading to Kinshasa and for health measures ( separate from other humanitarian aspects ) .
You will , therefore , understand that when people call for consultation and concerted action with other partners who are not even willing to make funds available , I am very reluctant because it seems that sometimes other people want to spend our money for us .
They will not be able to count on my support for that .
That concludes the debate .
TOPICAL AND URGENT DEBATE
The next item is the debate on topical and urgent subjects of major importance .
The first item is the joint debate on the following three motions for resolutions on Albania :
B4-0831 / 98 by the ELDR Group-B4-0836 / 98 by the PSE Group-B4-0843 / 98 by the PPE Group
Mr President , I believe it is very important that the European Parliament deals with the issue of Albania .
I agree fully with the content of the resolution and would like to add only one point : it is absolutely clear that in a country such as Albania , where events are influenced so strongly by nationalism and violence , an opposition which takes advantage of the situation will inevitably bring the country to its knees .
In this situation , it is important that we make it very clear that the European Union will not under any circumstances recognise border changes which are brought about by means of violence , regardless of which side this comes from , as this is obviously one of the fundamental causes of the dispute between the opposition and the government in Albania .
We should make it very clear to all sides that the European Union will never recognise border changes brought about by violence .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Commissioner , I would like to point out that I was present at the elections in Albania as an election observer .
On the day before the vote , President Berisha received both myself and a fellow Member of this House as guests and pleaded with us to urge the socialists to recognise the election result .
The election result , which many representatives of this House considered to be absolutely just and fair , despite all the problems which arose , gave the socialists an absolute majority .
However , the situation which then arose was one in which President Berisha and his Democratic Party did not recognise the elections in Albania .
This is one of the main causes .
Mr Karl Habsburg yesterday accused me of disregarding the law .
I reject this accusation .
I am not excusing anyone for the current situation in Albania .
The assassination , like any assassination , is to be condemned completely .
Parliament did so at the time , and we have also condemned it .
Yet the fact is that today the former president and some of his party do not wish to recognise the results of the last election .
Therefore , I fully agree with Mr Frischenschlager that the European Union must not recognise any border changes brought about by violence , and not in Kosovo either , given all the problems that I dealt with yesterday .
To begin to do so would be to trigger a conflagration in the Balkans on a scale bigger than any we have seen in recent years .
Similarly , however , this House must recognise election results which have been achieved democratically .
I would therefore ask our conservative colleagues to suggest to President Berisha and his supporters that they put an end to violence , recognise the election results and work in the Albanian parliament in a peaceful and cooperative way towards a better future for their country !
Mr President , I must say quite honestly that the resolution that we hope to adopt today , and that we drafted in a joint initiative , makes me sad as my group has tried constantly in the course of the last few months to implement a resolution on Albania and on the crisis in Albania , but unfortunately this failed in Parliament because of certain other groups .
It is alarming that it required the assassination of Mr Azem Hajdari , a charismatic opposition leader , before a resolution on the actual crisis situation was drafted , particularly if we consider that this was the third attempt on Mr Hajdari 's life .
One assassination attempt took place in the Albanian parliament and another in his own home , where an attempted shooting took place .
Many people try to place the full blame on the opposition alone .
The fact that the resolution was tabled here only after the assassination of an opposition leader shows that this is not quite true .
I would also like to discuss the fact that we only ever mention the Democratic Party in Albania .
It is not the only opposition party .
There are seven opposition parties in total , who usually speak with one voice and who have confirmed unanimously that the situation is not as clean and as legal as the government would often have us believe .
Of course , Mr Swoboda , we in the House recognised the elections by a majority vote , despite the difficulties which you mentioned .
However , we must also acknowledge that these opposition parties are all of the view that , where the law is concerned , there is a considerable state of confusion , not only in the opposition but also in the government , and that the most unfortunate methods are being used by all concerned , which undoubtedly aggravates the situation .
We must clearly do everything we can , particularly considering Albania 's circumstances , to bring about stability .
Mr President , as Mr Swoboda said , the European Union helped Albania to acquire a democratically elected government in order to create and establish democratic institutions after the crisis a year earlier .
Today we have a new crisis , and we are again called upon to play a role which I think must be decisive .
It is right to condemn violence , whatever its source , but we cannot pursue a policy of keeping our distance equally from both sides , because we are then doing nothing to help the development of the democratic institutions , and the problem in Albania is that one party - Mr Berisha 's party - does not accept the election results , a thing which we would consider totally undemocratic if it happened in one of our countries .

I believe that today we should support democratic constitutional normality in Albania , because as Mr Swoboda correctly said , and I too would like to stress the same thing because I come from a country which borders Albania , any crisis there affects us all and any change of the political scenario brought about by an escalation of political violence will increase the political uncertainty in Albania , and not only increase it but create dramatic developments all over the area .
Mr President , when I hear certain people going on about democracy , I would like to remind them that Fatos Nano himself came from a totalitarian party , that he was a long-time dictator and that he was removed from power and convicted of criminal activities .
I mention this because this no one else has !
Similarly , much too little has been made of the fact that events are happening very quickly due to the assassination of one of the opposition leaders , following two attempts on his life .
It is simply wrong and hypocritical to place all the blame on one side , as certain people are trying to do here .
We must work towards finally restoring law and order in Albania .
The government has broken the law just as much as the opposition .
It is obvious that this will , of course , be a very difficult task , as Albania is currently in a very dangerous situation .
We must be very clear that there is a danger that the situation will assume epidemic proportions , but this is likely to begin in Kosovo rather than in Albania .
We have not yet done anything decisive about Kosovo .
We only threaten again and again to take action , one example being the various air manoeuvres which in any case came to nothing .
Our credibility has suffered greatly , and we should at long last present a more resolute front to the dictator , Milosevic , and commit ourselves more strongly to finding a solution in Kosovo .
We hope that the situation in Albania will then soon ease .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the murder of any politician , whichever side he belongs to , is repugnant to every true democrat . In this particular case it throws into sharp focus Albania 's pressing need for political , institutional , cultural and economic - but above all ethical and moral - reconstruction .
Those who , like myself , have had the opportunity to speak with Albanian refugees in Italy know that what they need more than anything else is a government , that government which it is so difficult to rebuild in such tormented circumstances .
But the main reason for EU intervention is that , otherwise , the welcome being given to the Albanians by certain countries including Italy could turn to indifference , to general paternalism , the source of further problems and not a solution to the existing ones .
Mr President , after the events of last year there were high hopes when at last democratic solutions were found and elections and parliamentary alliances finally produced a new government under Fatos Nano , who had been illegitimately imprisoned .
That government has achieved some important steps .
It imposed relative calm in the country , restored a number of basic functions in the fields of public economy and administration , and pursued a moderate and realistic foreign policy , mainly thanks to the assistance and encouragement of the international community and the European Union .
It has not completed certain basic constitutional and administrative reforms , and has recently been facing a complex crisis in Kosovo .
Some people in Albania have grasped that opportunity to try and create unrest and reclaim the power they recently lost , by exploiting the national sentiments of the Albanian people and pushing them into an impasse , in a nationalistic and irredeemable direction , taking advantage of the country 's social and economic conditions and of the government 's dispassionate attitude towards the illegal possession of thousands of hidden weapons .
That is the opportunistic and irresponsible way in which Mr Berisha is behaving , with his inflammatory statements and actions .
Such behaviour is dangerous for Albania and for the whole of south-east Europe .
It destabilizes the fragile political order in Albania and increases the risk of dangerous interventions in the Kosovo crisis - and let us not forget that .
It could lead to new waves of refugees , which we are already seeing in Greece and Italy .
We cannot undermine the legitimacy of the elected Albanian government by keeping equal distance from it and from the armed factions which dispute it , calling for new governments in which the armed groups too participate .
It is a different thing for us to ask the Albanian government to show prudence and moderation in consolidating the democratic regime and legitimacy .
So far it has shown signs of doing so , and it merits our assistance in every way in the economic and political sectors .
Mr President , anyone who knows anything about the situation in Albania knows that it is extremely serious both socially and economically and from a humanitarian point of view , and they know that what is needed from both government and opposition now and in the future is restraint .
Restraint in overcoming political differences , and willingness to talk .
What this means now , in my view , is that the Fatos Nano government must do everything it can to find out who was responsible for the murder of Azem Hajdari , and also , first and foremost , that Mr Berisha and the democratic party must stop the provocation of the last week and their polarisation strategy of recent months .
What happened last week was just the latest in a long line of incidents triggered by Mr Berisha over the last few months and we need to put a stop to them .
I would therefore - and I hope the resolution will be adopted - urge everyone in the House who has supported Mr Berisha in the past to pass on the message that restraint and dialogue are the only solution to the situation in Albania .
Mr President , in the opinion of Alleanza Nazionale , the terrible crisis afflicting Albania - amply demonstrated by the events of the past few days - not only derives from institutional , economic and social shortcomings , but finds its roots and apparently inexhaustible succour in the loss of civic and moral values by most of the Albanian population .
A few pathetic , incorrigible hard-liners , nostalgic for five-year plans and massed crowds marching towards bright futures , venture to blame evil capitalists and the market economy , but clearly this disaster is the consequence of decades of Communist collectivism , where no initiative could be taken unless it was authorised by the party nomenklatura , and where individual enterprise was crushed by the worst of the East European Communist dictatorships .
So , present-day events are showing us that the only defence left to the Albanian population has been to resort to pre-industrial , pre-democratic values based on clans and tribes . Meanwhile the flight of illegal immigrants to Italy seems unstoppable .
Vast areas of the countryside have been transformed into drug plantations , and prostitution and trafficking in stolen cars flourish under the direction of various Albanian bosses .
The first political judgement we can make is that the international mission led by Italy has been a failure , and the reasons are probably the self-imposed limits to its intervention and the lack of coordination between its different components .
In conclusion , the European Union cannot but take a joint approach both to crises occurring on its borders and to those in the Mediterranean basin .
Mr President , obviously the Commission is also extremely concerned at the recent events in Albania .
The assassination of Mr Hajdari , a leading politician in the Democratic Party , and the unrest which followed , if it was indeed a result of that , reveal the considerable instability within the country .
Increased violence obviously makes national reconciliation more difficult , even more difficult than it has been until recently .
It is therefore fundamental , we agree , to establish calm and public order , and to carry out an investigation into the assassination and the mayhem which followed it .
At the same time , all interested parties should try to contain the situation , both in their statements and actions .
We welcome the fact that Mr Berisha has already called for moderation although the calls for Prime Minister Nano to resign will not help to resolve the situation .
We also think that it is inappropriate and disproportionate to request the waiving of Mr Berisha 's parliamentary immunity and that of other members of parliament belonging to the Democratic Party with the aim of arresting them .
That obviously would suggest that the aim of the unrest was a coup d 'état , which is not what we think .
It is important to restore a climate for political dialogue and , from this point of view , we should support all mediation efforts , both those by the President , Mr Meidani , and by Ambassador Everts on behalf of the OSCE .
Obviously we hope that the Democratic Party will take an active part in these talks .
The main aim of the European Union 's strategy must be to continue to help Albania work towards political stability , recovery and democratisation .
Obviously , issues of public order and security are some of the most vital political priorities .
We are waiting for the WEU to propose a document containing options on strengthening public order and security , so that we can decide which actions we could support apart from those that we are already supporting .
One thing is for sure : Albania is part of Europe and insecurity in Albania does not help to stabilise the Balkans .
What is currently happening in the former Yugoslavia and in Kosovo is more than enough for us to deal with .
The joint debate is closed .
The vote will be taken at 5.30 p.m.
Mr President , this is the third time this year that we have had to have an urgent debate on the deteriorating situation in Burma , and the third time that we have had to ask the Council and the Commission to take stronger measures against one of the most malignant regimes in the world .
Let me give you some examples of what they do .
Members of the opposition are systematically arrested , imprisoned , disappear , are tortured and killed .
In the last two weeks alone 187 members of the NLD , Aung San Suu Kyi 's party , were arrested and imprisoned .
This brings the total number of MPs and party leaders imprisoned since the beginning of the year to 783 , 196 of them elected members of parliament .
Aung San Suu Kyi herself is under permanent restraint .
This summer we have seen her twice detained on a bridge outside Rangoon , and prevented from talking to her supporters .
Just yesterday she was again threatened by the military authorities , who warned her that if she continues to speak out against the government she will be imprisoned .
What is the European Union doing about all this ?
Burma 's minorities are still suffering repression .
They are used as forced labour on a huge scale and treated so badly that 130 000 have fled across the border and are now in refugee camps in Thailand , Malaysia and Bangladesh .
I spent two weeks visiting those camps and I was shocked at the terrible stories I heard .
What is the European Union doing about the refugees who are sent back from Bangladesh simply to be used for forced labour again ?
What is the European Union doing about this ?
Then there are the enormous quantities of drugs that Burmese farmers produce , often under duress , making Burma the largest exporter of drugs in the world , bigger even than Columbia , for example .
What is the European Union doing about this ?
We have taken certain steps , but I have to say that they have done nothing to change the situation .
What we urgently want to see , and I am speaking here for the whole House , are measures such as those backed by the United States , in other words a ban on investment and a total economic boycott .
That seems to be the only thing likely to make this terrible regime think again .
Commissioner , do something , put proposals to the Council and make it take action .
Mr President , Commissioner , for ten years now Aung San Suu Kyi has been calling for democracy in Burma .
We have become used to it .
For ten years now life has been made impossible for her party and for her herself .
Fortunately their activities have drawn the attention of the world press , but she is occasionally forced to take the rare step of appearing or going into hiding in unusual places in order to keep that attention focused .
Fortunately the students have now taken up the gauntlet and thousands of them demonstrated to commemorate the violent clampdown of August 1988 .
It was the biggest demonstration since 1996 .
The international community must not forget Burma , which is rightly one of only five countries which does not have relations with the Union .
But , as Mrs Maij-Weggen said , we need to go further .
The fact that democracy and human rights are being repressed justifies an economic boycott .
It is quite simple .
Foreign investors are the lifeline of this military regime , and half of the profit that the Burmese junta makes from investment goes to the army .
We must go through with the boycott , otherwise the pressure on the regime will achieve nothing .
Mr President , Commissioner , I shall not look in detail at our motion for a resolution which , of course , condemns the Burmese military junta and calls for political prisoners to be freed , including the many members of parliament elected in 1990 and arrested a few days ago , and which refuses to accept Burma 's participation in the EU-ASEAN and ASEM meetings and , through Amendment No 7 bis , calls on the European Union not to contribute to the controversial UNDCP project in Burma .
I would like to take this opportunity to say that , within the framework of the Committee on Development and Cooperation , and on behalf of the Group of the European Radical Alliance , on 2 September I put forward a proposal - which was accepted by the Committee - that we should launch the operation ' One thousand Members of Parliament for Burma ' .
One thousand members of parliament , as Michel Rocard proposed , including MEPs and MPs from the 15 European Union countries represented in this House - and I call on all my colleagues to sign up for this operation that we intend to launch - and from the Interparliamentary Union , so that this junta , which is both deaf and blind and only survives thanks to the drugs it trafficks , finally understands that it is faced with a large majority of elected representatives from the world 's democratic systems . What is more , this is the best support we can give to this wonderful woman Mrs Aung San Suu Kyi .
Mr President , the three things we have to have an impact on in Burma to make the regime change are drugs , oil and tourism .
All three were highlighted in a recent film by John Pilger on British television when he took secret cameras into Burma and filmed the slave labour from the prison camps under armed guard being used to build new tourist projects - a re-enactment of the building of the bridge under the Japanese terror in the Second World War .
We must put a stop and try to boycott - and encourage everybody else to boycott - any tourist developments within Burma .
The European Union has a special responsibility because the major investors are in Europe .
Premier Oil from the UK and Total from France are the major investors in oil .
If the US Government was rather more active in stopping the drugs trade emanating from Burma than it is compared to South America , that would also be more effective .
So if we deal with these three things , we might convince the SLORC that it is time to change and to restore democracy to Burma .
Mr President , I would merely like , on behalf of my group , to draw attention to the fact that in paragraph 2 they have criticised the Commission on one point , which is something that we have never done before in this House .
Until now , we have always supported the Council and the Commission , of course , when they have made a statement against extra-territorial actions .
You will surely remember the lively Helms-Burton and d 'Amato debates which we had here in the House .
We have held many debates , and the Commission and the Council have always had our full support .
I would like to ask you to change ' criticises ' in paragraph 2 to ' notes ' .
This is a neutral observation .
It would be in line with our overall policy .
If you cannot approve this , we will be in danger of no longer being able to explain our policy in future to the United States , which has always taken the same line on this ( it is also the only one the State of Massachusetts follows ) .
It will make our policy illogical , which will lead to a situation where the Americans laugh at us and we make ourselves look ridiculous .
I would ask you to amend this point .
I would be very pleased if the Greens and also the conservatives in this House could support this .
I believe that this was probably simply a small mistake .
I do not believe that the House has suddenly changed its political beliefs from those it had in all the other resolutions and decisions that we have drafted thus far .
Afghanistan
Mr President , the tragic death of Colonel Calò , a United Nations officer , is the ninth in Afghanistan since the beginning of the year .
The treatment meted out to women and , more generally , the lack of respect for human rights are there for everyone to see .
The West , and the European Union in particular , could find themselves caught unawares by the Afghan question , out of a misguided sense of respect for cultures different from our own .
Human rights are fundamental , the rule of law is fundamental , and both transcend cultures .
We must have the courage to assert this with determination , so that the Taliban regime , recognised by only a very few States , soon has to either change course or step aside .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I do not think we need to dwell too much on descriptions of the regime installed by the Taliban .
We are well aware of what it means in terms of fundamental human rights violations .
I would particularly like to draw the attention of the Commissioner and the Council , which is notable by its absence , to a problem that concerns not only Afghanistan , but also - as Mrs Maij-Weggen mentioned earlier in relation to Burma - the huge programmes aimed at wiping out drug cultivation .
Mrs Maij-Weggen said that in Burma drug cultivation was on the increase .
The same is true of Afghanistan .
And this occurs in spite of our very costly programmes which have been implemented by a special kind of taliban , by Mr Harlaki , of the UNDCP .
Consequently , our motion for a resolution calls on the Council and the Commission to intervene so that , at least in countries where there is a dictatorial regime such as Afghanistan and Burma , these inefficient and very costly programmes are withdrawn at the earliest possible moment .
Mr President , here we are talking about Afghanistan again , and there is no end in sight !
If the Taliban in Afghanistan did not already have a reputation for disregarding all rights , we would have to remind one another of it daily .
Who , apart from those in power - that is , those in possession of weapons - still has rights in this country once known as the land of the free ?
Contempt for human beings , in particular contempt for the rights of women and for political rights , is bad enough , but terrorism and massacres for ethnic reasons and murder are even worse .
However , refusing one 's own people humanitarian aid is among the worst .
Drugs cultivation has also been mentioned .
We fully support this resolution 's request to the European Union , the UN and the UNDP to revise their programmes and introduce new measures to ensure that the money which we really urgently need in other areas does not fall into the wrong hands .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the violence of the Taliban regime , the widespread suppression , the violation of fundamental human rights , the international impact and the danger of an escalation of the conflict beyond Afghanistan , are all increasing daily .
The European Parliament must , therefore , call upon the international community finally to take coherent action .
Priority must be given to affording the international aid organisations the necessary diplomatic protection to allow them to continue their work to help the impoverished Afghan population .
This requires decisive and coherent action from the international community .
It means that an attempt must be made to put an end to any form of support for the Taliban regime .
The EU must bring pressure to bear on those states which , on the grounds of cynical political calculation , will still not stop at using the Taliban to further their own interests .
Death penalty
Mr President , we have here three resolutions on the death penalty in the Philippines , in Gaza and in El Salvador .
Three death penalties in three different continents .
The death penalty cannot be changed once it has been carried out , but the reasons for which it is imposed are varied and some of these certainly can be changed .
From the point of view of human rights , therefore , the death penalty should not exist
We in the House have opposed the death penalty for a long time , and for this reason we call upon all three countries not only to refrain from executing the death sentences imposed , but also to amend their laws so as to abolish the death penalty or prevent its introduction .
The death penalty has not been applied in the Philippines since 1976 .
In Gaza , human rights organisations have criticised both the procedure and its enforcement .
In El Salvador , circumstances are somewhat different .
It is planned to introduce it there , but a three-quarters majority is required to do so , which is why it is not even being put to the vote .
So we should not really even be voting on this issue , but if a vote is taken we would like to ask the other groups to adopt our amendment , in the interests of cooperation and equal treatment .
However , our main demand is still that the death penalty should be abolished or not introduced .
Mr President , human dignity is inviolable , and the motives for the death penalty are contrary to human dignity .
I believe that the House is in agreement on this .
The right to life , contempt for state murder under the pretext of punishment , the risk of miscarriage of justice , the disproportionate number of victims among the poor , and violations of human rights by the criminal prosecution authorities are , at least in the Philippines , where 600 are currently under sentence of death , arguments for upholding the moratorium and appealing to the newly elected president to exercise his authority and adhere to the aim of abolishing the death penalty .
Leo Echegaray 's repulsive crime must not be used as a pretext for getting round this policy .
I think that we should be in agreement on taking joint action on this .
Mr President , the Liberal Group is vehemently opposed to the death penalty .
There is no crime that can justify murder .
It is also certainly not an effective instrument of criminal justice , either in Europe or anywhere else in the world , and this is why my group is very concerned at the recent developments in the Palestinian territories .
Two people have been executed there recently and President Arafat refused to exercise his prerogative to commute the sentence despite appeals for him to do so .
At a time when the movement against the death penalty is gaining support throughout the world , the Palestinians are going in the opposite direction .
Fortunately a great deal of criticism has been voiced within the Palestinian community , and it is to be hoped that criticism at home and abroad will persuade Mr Arafat and his supporters not to allow any more executions to take place and to make appropriate changes to legislation .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to make particular reference to the motion for a resolution tabled by the Group of the European Liberal Democrat and Reform Party on a matter which concerns us : the possible extension of the death penalty in El Salvador .
On the one hand , El Salvador will be in breach of the American Convention on Human Rights which it ratified on 23 June 1978 and , on the other hand - as my colleagues Mr Bertens and Mrs Lenz have pointed out - it will also go against the position of the European institutions and of this Parliament itself .
I believe it is time to voice our concerns following the introduction of the proposal in the El Salvador Legislative Assembly by President Armando Calderón on 27 July .
We hope that the motion will not be ratified , but think it is necessary to inform the El Salvador Parliament of our opposition to this matter and also to show that we intend to support the amendment tabled by the Group of the European People 's Party .
Mr President , our group has for a long time rejected and fought against the death penalty .
This is because we believe that with such a fundamental right , moderation becomes a vice when compromise is rejected .
This is why we reject the death penalty , not only in El Salvador , but in China and the United States too , because we believe that if there is one thing that should be advocated in relation to human rights , it is their global and universal character .
This is why I believe it is important that this Parliament , in developing its international initiatives , should not apply double standards .
For example , this week we have been discussing transatlantic relations and it has not occurred to anyone to question our relations with the United States , where the death penalty is still used quite frequently . Neither has anyone imposed any conditions for relations with the United States .
This is why we condemn the death penalty with the same vehemence that we condemn the terms used in paragraph two of the motion for a resolution , which makes cooperation with a sovereign country like El Salvador - a positive and active partner of the European Union - subject to certain conditions .
Mr President , I should like to make the following point in reply to what Mrs Lenz , Mr Salafranca and of course Mr Gasóliba said : what is happening in El Salvador is a dangerous development and the president is sending out the wrong signal in seeking to extend the scope of the death penalty .
I do not think that it was really the intention of President Calderon and the El Salvador Assembly to breach the 1978 American Convention on Human Rights , under which capital punishment is banned .
I can reassure our colleagues in the PPE Group that the Liberal Group will of course be voting for the amendment linking European aid and relations with the non-adoption of this law .
In other words we will do as Mrs Lenz asked .
Mr President , in discussing these three motions for resolutions , we are in fact talking about specific situations which are clearly unacceptable , namely , the executions that have taken place on territories under President Arafat 's administration and the proposals that are being debated and discussed in El Salvador and the Philippines .
In this last case , Amnesty International has just condemned the fact that , if the moratorium on executions is lifted , one of the first victims could be a deaf-mute who has not even been able to hear the accusations levelled against him during his trial and of course has not had the opportunity to express his point of view .
Lastly , the key issue here is that on the occasion of the 50th anniversary of the United Nations Universal Declaration of Human Rights we could find ourselves taking a huge step backwards if , out of these three countries , the moratorium is lifted in two of them ; in one the scope of the death penalty is extended ; and in another more capital punishments are carried out .
My outright rejection of the death penalty was reflected in the words used by my colleague Mr Salafranca .
Cambodia
Mr President , our group tabled an urgent motion for a resolution on Cambodia to put forward three main points .
Firstly , if the conditions in which the elections took place on 26 July were not entirely satisfactory - and they were far from it - it seems clear to everyone that we will not be able to build a democratic and peaceful future in Cambodia if this vote is disallowed .
It is necessary therefore for everyone to accept it , even though , I repeat , voting conditions were not satisfactory .
Secondly , no political party , following these elections , is in a position to claim power on its own constitutionally and so a moral , political and constitutional obligation was created for the three main parties to cooperate .
What is more , since we tabled this motion for a resolution - and perhaps this is a sign of the efficiency of this Parliament - these three parties have made unquestionable progress in terms of collaboration .
Thirdly , over the past few weeks , the Khmer government authorities have behaved in a worrying manner and they need to be aware that the European Union will not accept any measures to undermine either the spirit of the Paris agreements or the fundamental right of the opposition to express its views and hold demonstrations .
We will not tolerate the threats opposition leaders have received to their freedom and lives .
To counter this we have an important lever in the form of European and international aid .
This is , to our minds - and this needs to be stressed - inextricably linked to respect for the Paris agreements and to the reestablishment by all the parties involved , and in particular the party that controls the armed forces , of an attitude based on compromise and interpartisan agreement which will help to restore peace .
Mr President , as I am sure you know , I was present in Cambodia as an election observer on behalf of this Parliament .
I must say that the elections were , on the whole , fair and just , and 96 % of the European observers and 93 % of other international observers agreed on this .
What is very unfortunate , as in the case of Albania , is that those who lost are not prepared to recognise the result of this election .
However , there has been a welcome turn of events , in that the second largest party , the royalist FUNCINPEC , has given up its parliamentary boycott and will take part in parliamentary work .
This does not yet mean that they are prepared to take joint parliamentary responsibility , but a considerable force in the country has nevertheless given up its boycott , which may contribute greatly to bringing peace to this country .
This is what the country needs most urgently and what we must support .
I regret that I cannot comment more specifically on this .
We can endorse the resolution , but I would ask for an addition to take account of this latest development , which is , after all , a positive one .
Mr President , I really wonder whether the elections that were held in Cambodia could possibly have been free and above board .
I myself was an observer at the elections organised by the United Nations four years ago , the largest peace operation which the United Nations has ever carried out in the area .
In a country shunned by political leaders for years and where they were not even welcome , you can hardly expect the political climate to be neutral .
The way in which the media were refused access to a number of political parties which were not in power was highly significant .
The results are clear .
Whoever the winner was , one thing is clear : democracy and the people of Cambodia are still the losers .
Political demonstrations are the logical follow-up .
We have already seen this and heard it , and for now all we can do is to call , quite simply but sincerely , for dialogue and for restraint from all parties .
Hun Sen must be made to realise that he can forget about international support if he continues down the path he has chosen of ruling on his own instead of by coalition .
I have to say that I agree with Mrs Junker 's amendment , which was tabled too late .
Equal rights for homosexuals
Mr President , for many years the European Parliament has tried to eliminate criminal legislation discriminating against gay and lesbian relationships , and it has done so successfully , as the Member States of the European Union have gradually abolished all such provisions , with the exception of Austria .
I very much regret this and , therefore , hope that a large majority will vote in favour of the resolution being debated here today .
I would add that the European Union is constantly described as a community of values , and this includes human rights .
Therefore , I consider it to be really reprehensible , particularly in the case of human rights issues , that an objection on the grounds of interference in internal affairs should be raised in a debate of this kind .
That is what has happened in this case , and I think it is important that the European Parliament remains consistent and makes itself heard on human rights issues , even if this is unpleasant for my own country .
Human rights represent a significant part of the European Union and , particularly in view of the forthcoming enlargement of the EU , it is important that the current Members have a clean record in the area of human rights .
That is what this resolution is for .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , while we are here debating in the European Parliament , those who drafted this resolution are in Austria being publicly accused by the Christian Democrats of fouling their own nests .
Regardless of this slander , we believe that human rights are indivisible .
This Parliament is a reliable voice for human rights , but sometimes we have the impression that this voice grows louder with distance and quieter the closer we are to a place where human rights are being violated ; if it happens within our own ranks , this voice often becomes almost inaudible .
Parliament , the European Commission of Human Rights and the Council of Europe have in numerous resolutions and declarations described the difference in the minimum age of consent for heterosexual and homosexual activities as a violation of human rights .
It is not acceptable for countries to distance themselves from these human rights and to continue to practise their traditional antipathy , moralising arrogance and hubris on innocent people and violate people 's privacy in order to indulge their own feelings of resentment .
I believe that it is time to treat these parties here in the European Parliament with the same intolerance as we treat other human rights violators throughout the world .
Mr President , on behalf of my group I would like to welcome the fact that we are today discussing the discrimination that continues to exist on the grounds of sexual orientation , both in our Member States and in applicant countries .
As an Austrian Member of Parliament I , like the previous speaker , regret that our country has not yet succeeded in eliminating from the penal code one of the main forms of discrimination , the different age of consent for heterosexuals and homosexuals .
Mrs Flemming , the protection of girls should be as important a concern for us as the protection of boys .
Repeated attempts in Parliament have failed due to the opposition of the conservative parties .
It is because of this that in Austria alone we have approximately 20 convictions every year under this discriminatory offence .
This does not set a good example to those countries wishing to join the Union and which we expect to maintain the highest of standards in this as in other areas .
In discussion , certain political groups always deny that non-discrimination on grounds of sexual orientation is a human right .
It was only after the decision of the European Commission of Human Rights in the Sutherland case that this issue received a very positive response , and it was made clear that a different age of consent contravened Article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights .
I find it equally difficult to understand the argument that the EU bodies and in particular the European Parliament do not have the power to deal with this issue .
As a Union we were already obliged to respect human rights , and since the Amsterdam Treaty came into force we are even more so .
This will give us the chance - however inadequate - to achieve something .
It is well known that , in future , the Council - even if only by unanimous vote - could take the necessary steps to combat discrimination on grounds of sex , race , ethnic origin , religion , ideology , disability , age or sexual orientation .
The Commission will have the right of initiative for this .
In conclusion , therefore , I would like to ask the Commission whether it has any plans to make use of this right of initiative .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , firstly I would like to clarify what is at issue for us in the PPE and ÖVP Groups in this Parliament .
It is not a question of discriminating against homosexuals .
It is not a question of violating basic rights and human rights .
The question of the age of consent is a national and not a European legal issue , and that is undisputed .
Politicians must fulfil their responsibility towards young people .
This is why , only this summer in the reform of our criminal laws , the Austrian People 's Party voted in the Austrian Parliament to retain the current age of consent as set out in Article 209 .
What is happening here and the reason for which we are rejecting this urgent debate have nothing to do with any desire to discriminate against homosexuals ; rather , we do not wish to depart from our own legal precedents .
However , we also want to take a stand against Austrian domestic policy being brought into the European Parliament by liberals , Greens and social democrats in order to discriminate against Austria , which currently holds the Presidency .
Here , it is not homosexuals but the Austrian Presidency which is the victim of discrimination .
I am also angry to see how my social democrat colleagues have changed their tune , as they abstained from voting when the law was going through the Austrian Parliament and here they are doing the opposite .
For this reason I would ask that this request for an urgent debate be rejected , and I stand by this .
Not because we wish to discriminate against homosexuals but because we insist on maintaining our legal position and are acting no differently here than we would in Austria , although this is an incidental consideration .
We have full support in the PPE Group for this position , although we all know that opinions vary widely in the individual Member States on the sensitive issue of discrimination against homosexuals .
Once again , I would say that the European Parliament is not the appropriate forum for making one 's mark on a national issue for Austria .
I consider it wholly inappropriate to bring this debate into the European Parliament , and I reject this most emphatically .
Mr President , I am not Austrian , but I would at last like to say to Mrs Stenzel that homophobia is not an opinion or a peccadillo , it is a violation of human rights .
Non-discrimination is now enshrined in the Amsterdam Treaty and all the same , I think that it will one day be necessary for us to implement it even if it goes against the grain .
According my group , the Confederal Group of the European Left , nondiscrimination is unfortunately all too often not applied to economic and social issues , and I do not see why Parliament suddenly has to consider subsidiarity in relation to human rights .
I would like to have a number of things explained to me because I agree with practically everything that has been said and I do not wish to repeat it all , but we are not making ourselves credible in the eyes of those countries wishing to join the European Union , which we expect to reach certain standards in relation to human rights and respect for them .
I would like someone to explain to me why a woman and a man have the right to have sexual relations at a certain age , why two women also have this right at the same age , but when it comes to two men , suddenly it is not the same thing .
But what does this mean ?
Are Austrian men totally childish compared to women ?
Are you not confusing - and perhaps this is the heart of the matter - homosexuality with paedophilia ?
If this is the case , you need to have some basic psychological or psychiatric training .
You must understand that girls are also the targets of paedophiles and that women can be paedophiles too .
So I wonder if we should organise a hearing one day , since we go in for that sort of thing , and for example invite the Austrian Presidency , the Czech government and other people who share this same homophobia .
For this refusal , this ' subsidiarity ' excuse boils down to just one thing : homophobia , and homophobia unfortunately hides many other forms of discrimination and human rights violations which in the past and in Europe 's recent history have been widely condemned .
Mr President , let me first make it quite clear , though this is not meant to be an apology in advance for what I am about to say , that I do not make the mistake of lumping all homosexuals in the same category as those that display such bad taste in the ' pink parades ' we sometimes see in my country .
I respect everyone 's right to privacy and no-one can accuse me of homophobia .
But I have to say that I find it completely indefensible that this resolution should be classified as a particularly urgent and important issue and even worse that it should be dealt with under the heading of human rights .
In my opinion this is positively insulting to those facing genuinely serious and urgent problems , and I think we can safely say that the problems confronting people in Tibet , Iran , Cambodia and elsewhere are far more serious than what we are discussing today .
I also think that we tend to be extremely offhand in the way we deal with the protection of minors these days .
I applaud responsible politicians for not systematically lowering the age of consent , and I also think that we must respect the different traditions which the Member States have here , even where the minimum ages for heterosexual and homosexual relations are different .
I think that anyone like myself who has children of 13 or 14 should really consider whether they want to see their children involved in sexual experiments with 17- or 18-year-olds , for example .
As far as I am concerned - and this may sound oldfashioned but I am not ashamed to say so - I cannot approve of it and I believe that the vast majority of those who elected the Members of this Parliament would not approve of it either .
Sudan
Mr President , Sudan is the sort of country that Mr Vanhecke was talking about .
350 000 people are facing death for the umpteenth time and the Sudanese government is refusing to allow humanitarian aid through or to help it to be distributed .
It is an unpardonable crime against humanity , and we have said time and time again that we must do something to stop it .
The international community must be prepared to make sure that its humanitarian aid reaches those hundreds of thousands of people instead of being used as a pawn in a political power game .
We have tabled this motion for a resolution now because the ACP Assembly is due to meet next week in Brussels , and the Sudanese delegation is bound to complain again about the US bombardment and missile attacks and the suffering they caused .
I could tell you now , word for word , exactly what the representative of the Sudanese parliament , if we can call it that , will say .
I do not want to say anything about the American attack , of course , but I would like to point out that Sudan has now found yet another reason to suspend talks with the Inter-Governmental Authority on Development , the countries surrounding Sudan which are trying to broker peace between Sudan and the south .
As you know , there has been civil war there since 1956 but nothing was known about it until CNN began its broadcasts , because nothing exists without CNN .
I hope that if this motion is adopted the European representatives at the ACP Assembly will make the point to the Sudanese that this is not just another resolution , but a resolution supported by the delegation and the whole of Parliament .
Mr President , when I spoke on the threatened war against Iraq in January and February of this year , I called it ' the war of Mr Clinton 's penis ' .
I have to say that the bombing of Khartoum in Sudan - for which we have an amendment from the Greens - could be described as ' the war of Monica Lewinsky 's dress ' .
You will remember it was three days into the hearings and was clearly a device to distract the world 's attention from the Starr report and to reinforce Mr Clinton 's image .
That is why we have put this amendment down .
We do not like the Sudanese regime , but we certainly do not approve of the American bombing of Sudan - or indeed Afghanistan .
It is quite clear that there was no evidence at all that this was a weapons factory .
It was a pharmaceutical plant , as lots of technicians testify , producing drugs to help people in Africa .
So whilst the resolution rightly condemns the Sudanese regime , we also want to condemn the United States Government .
We hope we will get support from all Socialists , including new Labour Members .
I am sure the President himself will be voting for this amendment .
I look forward to his support .
Thank you for warning me .
Mr President , I shall try to be as brief as possible .
As far as the situation in Burma is concerned I should like to tell the European Parliament that in July the Vice-President of the Commission , Mr Manuel Marín , and the President-in-Office of the Council , Mr Wolfgang Schüssel , met the Burmese Minister of Foreign Affairs in order to express the European Union 's condemnation of the country 's treatment of Aung San Sun Kyi and other opposition politicians .
Later , on 9 September , the Presidency of the European Union issued a statement on behalf of the European Union condemning the detention of opposition activists , a statement that obviously deserves the Commission 's full support .
I should also like to say that the Commission is still loath to support the United Nations Programme for the International Control of Drugs , designed to cut opium production in Burma , since under the present regime this project is unlikely to make any progress .
The European Union 's position on Burma will be reassessed in October to decide how the current position might be changed , if at all , as of 19 October .
I should now like to make three brief comments .
As far as sanctions are concerned I should like to stress what was said by Mrs Erika Mann on extra-territoriality .
You will recall that the European Union was and is involved in a battle with the United States in the World Trade Organisation , because we fully reject the idea of the extra-territoriality of laws .
In this particular case , it seems that Massachusetts intended to apply sanctions to companies which entertained any form of economic relations with Burma , be they American or foreign , in particular European .
Under no circumstances , as a matter of principle , can we accept this approach .
That does not mean that we cannot regard the use of sanctions as something positive but those sanctions have to be applied in the context of the international community and according to rules accepted by everyone .
I should also like to say that the ASEAN forum will definitely be used by the European Union once again to raise the question of political rights in Burma .
Finally , we have decided to fund jointly with the Friedrich Ebert Foundation the opening in Brussels of a Euro-Burma Office to publicise the situation and put pressure on the Burmese authorities .
As far as Afghanistan is concerned , I think that everything has been said .
I should like simply to emphasise that , apart from our concern over the massacres in Mazar-I-Sharif and other equally dreadful situations , we are convinced that in no way can Afghanistan be considered as applying the law correctly .
Similarly , we feel that human rights , in particular those of minorities or women , are afforded no protection whatsoever in the country .
We have experienced certain difficulties with the Afghan authorities in conveying the idea that humanitarian aid has to be linked to certain basic principles of human dignity .
We are trying to negotiate with the Afghan authorities ways and means of being able , once again , to support those very minorities which are most vulnerable and least protected .
You already know , and I confirm , that we continue to think that we should not formally recognise the Taliban movement and that we should continue the ban on all forms of trade links with the Taliban regime . We also still think that the problem of Afghanistan cannot be solved by military means or interference by neighbouring countries .
On that score , that I should like to say that my colleague , Emma Bonino , who has had first-hand experience of the Afghan situation , is still extremely active , both as Commissioner and as a woman who defends women 's rights and human rights in general , in her attempts to change the state of affairs there .
I think that we should pay a great tribute to her for her efforts which are so difficult and sometimes so little understood .
As far as the death penalty is concerned I should like once again to emphasise the fact that the Commission can take no other position than to support its general abolition , since from our point of view it does nothing to promote human dignity or develop human rights , nor has it been demonstrated to reduce crime .
We recently made this clear to President Arafat of the Palestinian Authority , we have high hopes regarding El Salvador and , in the case of the Philippines , we hope that the moratorium will continue to be applied .
As far as the situation in Cambodia is concerned , I should like to say that I fully agree with what Mr Bourlanges said .
He very clearly indicated the various factors involved in Cambodia .
I repeat that , regardless of what has been traditional practice , we support this resolution without any reservation .
As far as homosexuals ' rights are concerned , I would draw your attention to the following : all Member States of the European Union are signatories to the European Convention on Human Rights ; the recent Amsterdam Treaty , in particular Article 6A , stipulates that we must fight all forms of discrimination based on sex , race , ethnic origin , religion , conviction , disability , age or sexual orientation .
As a result the Commission can act in any of these areas to combat any discrimination that might take place .
Similarly , in respect of the accession of future Member States , it is obvious that these rules will also be applicable to applicant countries .
I am referring in particular to a provision in the Romanian Criminal Code , Section 200 , which we hope will be amended as quickly as possible .
Finally , concerning Sudan , I must say that the problem of Sudan is an old one , a serious one , and one which led to the suspension of cooperation relations between the European Union and that country . There have been various attempts to bring about constructive talks with the Sudanese government and to support mediation attempts .
We welcome the recently agreed cease-fire , for a period of three months , and we hope that it will be extended , not only in time but also geographically , so that humanitarian aid can reach the people there .
This is something of an encouraging sign .
It is also encouraging that the parties in the conflict , as a result of mediation by IGADD , have also decided to meet once again in Nairobi in six months ' time .
This is positive since the round of talks which took place recently was unfortunately marred by an incident due to a lack of consensus on the solutions found .
The European Union actively supports IGADD mediation and the efforts being made by IGADD 's forum of partners but we repeat that in no way can we consider at present resuming cooperation with Sudan , because sadly the principles that led us to suspend that cooperation still apply .
Mr President , Mr Bertens and I have not quite gathered - our Portuguese is not very good - whether the Commission is now prepared to consider a proposal for a ban on investment in Burma to be submitted to the Council .
We did not hear the Commissioner 's answer on this specific point - could he repeat what he said ?

For the third time this year we have asked the same crucial question in our motion for a resolution on Burma : is the Commission is prepared to follow the United States ' lead by submitting a proposal to the Council for a ban on investment in Burma ?
That is the central issue , and since neither Mr Bertens nor I were able to understand the first part of the Commissioner 's speech in Portuguese , I would ask him to give us a clear reply to our question .
It is the focal point of the motion .
I can answer some of the questions on sanctions .
The Commission is not empowered to impose sanctions .
It is up to the Council , and on the basis of respect for our international commitments .
You cannot impose sanctions that go against some of the things to which we subscribe .
That does not mean that sanctions are altogether excluded but we will have to watch it carefully , in order , for instance , not to put into question the GPA , the agreement made on government procurement , in the WTO .
That is one example .
Sanctions are not excluded , but first we have to have a political decision by the Council , and then we have to study technically how we can introduce them without putting in danger some other signatories to some international agreements .
Have you followed me now ?
The joint debate is closed .
The vote will be taken at 5.30 p.m.
Mr President , the sheer scale of the unprecedented flooding in China has prompted me to put down this motion for resolution expressing sympathy with the people and Government of China .
The entire Yangtze valley and its tributaries have been flooded - a region in which 380 million people live , as many people as live in the European Union .
Thirteen million hectares of crops have been destroyed which would be , I imagine , sufficient food to feed 80 to 100 million people .
Three thousand people have lost their lives .
I suspect that many more lives will be lost .
Five million homes have been swept away and $ 20 billion worth of economic damage has been done to the country , 4-5 % of GNP .
I want to impress on the Commission and the Community the importance of showing sympathy and solidarity with China in this horrific disaster and urgently extending what help they can .
Mr President , I am sympathetic to the people of China , who have made enormous efforts to combat the floods .
But I have to say that one reason for the floods was that the Chinese regime has systematically deforested and destroyed the environment in many areas , not only in China , but in Tibet , which they are still illegally occupying .
They are now suffering the consequences .
That is what I told the Chinese Consul when he came to see me this week .
I think the Chinese have now learned a lesson : they are going to have to reafforest , take care of the hydraulic system which coped with the floods for hundreds of years and try to protect the environment instead of raping it , as the Chinese regime has done over the past 40 years .
Mr President , in my country , the Netherlands , we too have suffered floods on a number of occasions .
There is certainly no comparison in terms of the scale of the disaster , but there are similarities .
In both cases environmental damage was the main cause .
In the Netherlands it was high density development on the river banks and the lack of water storage capacity that caused the floods .
In China it is widespread deforestation and the construction of a dam on the Yangtse river that have been largely responsible for the flooding .
I welcome the fact that the Chinese authorities have now become aware of the ecological problems that have caused this disaster , and I am delighted that the Chinese government has banned tree-felling along the Yangtse river .
But I hope it will not stop there .
I would urge the Chinese government to continue its policy of discouraging deforestation , and I rely on the Commission to support this policy in order to prevent such disasters from happening in the future .
Floods in Bangladesh
Mr President , I am talking about the floods in Bangladesh and China .
The situation is almost unprecedented .
I realise that in both countries a contribution has been made by a lack of attention to the environment , but nevertheless , the major cause is clearly climatic rather than anything else - partly precipitated by changes to the global climate regime .
In China it is the worst floods in 40 years , affecting 240 million people - one-fifth of the population .
In Bangladesh 30 million people are directly affected and 10 million need urgent financial aid .
The Bangladesh Government appealed for $ 576 million of assistance and many people in the European Union - tens of thousands - have been moved by the graphic pictures they have seen of the devastation in both these countries .
Of course we welcome the fact that ECHO has put in ECU 1 million but it seems less than fully adequate .
Last week-end I was at Holy Trinity church in Ashton-under-Lyne in my constituency at a function and it was decided that the traditional collection there , which normally goes to church funds , would be made available to alleviate the suffering caused by the flooding .
The Commission can take note of this and find other ways to give short-term humanitarian aid to both these countries .
At the same time , as it says in the resolution , in Bangladesh and China it will be useful for us to give long-term technical assistance to help them alleviate some of these problems that may be caused by a lack of attention to the environment but it is in everybody 's interest to ensure that both in China and Bangladesh these issues are solved in the longer term and do not reoccur .
Mr President , on Bangladesh - Glyn Ford is quite right - this is a major disaster .
I was watching BBC World this afternoon and they had a major report on the situation in Bangladesh .
These are the worst floods in their history and 25 to 35 million people are currently still relatively homeless and without economic sustenance .
There is a major urgent need for short-term aid , and the Union has not given enough to meet the short-term food needs of the population or its medical needs .
There is a major spread of dysentery and diarrhoea right across Bangladesh because of the impure water .
We must give short-term aid as well as longer-term help - both in terms of trying to cope with the situation of flooding - which may mean major relocation for the population , and assistance and development in that direction as well .
If we combine both those things then we can make a contribution in this area .
Forest fires in Spain
Mr President , the presentation of the resolution on forest fires in southern Europe is not intended as a ritual act : as in every other year , once the summer is over we come back and talk about fires .
Certainly not !
Unfortunately fires have become a veritable scourge for Europe : many lives are lost and irreparable damage is done to flora and fauna .
Sadly , this year 's toll has again been a severe one .
But whereas the environmental , economic and social consequences are serious , the reasons for the fires remain an equally serious cause for concern .
Climatic conditions have undoubtedly played their part , but it has to be noted with regret that criminal action has much to do with the spread of this phenomenon in southern Europe .
The response of the various EU countries ' governments to arson , which could be described as eco-terrorism , has proved inadequate .
The problem must therefore be raised once again at Community level , not merely to ask the Commission for a detailed report on the damaged areas , and not merely to request special aid for the stricken areas , but to pose a broader problem .
We ask that more attention be devoted to forestry under the reform of the common agricultural policy ; further , it is increasingly necessary to relaunch the environmental policies with a view to prevention , including education and training work to improve man 's respect for the environment , but harsher punishment for arsonists is also needed .
To take up one point from my resolution , I believe that governments should institute a ' crime against the environment ' and , above all , create a register of the areas destroyed with a view to establishing an absolute ban on building there .
The fact is , speculation remains central to the interests of criminal organisations .
Mr President , if I could begin with what our colleague Mr Burtone has just said , perhaps it would be better if fires were not categorised as ' natural disasters ' because they are not natural disasters .
They are disasters caused by man , mostly for base economic reasons , and we find them on the agenda again and again .
Farmers ' interests and especially the environment are hardest hit .
This morning we approved a resolution on climate change and one of the sources of CO2 emissions are fires like those that this year occurred not only in Spain and Greece , not only in the south of Europe , but also in Indonesia , Brazil and in many other parts of the world .
I therefore think that measures need to be taken in Europe and in the Member States to improve the Community 's forestry policy , and we also need to work on ways of preventing and punishing those who cause disasters of this kind .
Mr President , to be honest , as a colleague pointed out before , the thought of discussing a resolution every September that simply reiterates that tens of thousands of hectares have been devastated in some Mediterranean countries fills me with sadness and even feelings of collective responsibility .
This is because - as Mrs González Álvarez said - we are not talking about natural disasters but very often the irresponsible acts of individuals .
And , sometimes , of institutions .
We must always ask ourselves if we or our national governments are doing enough to prevent this phenomenon from happening every summer .
There are ' base ' reasons as was said before , but the lack of coordination in government activities is even more depressing , because we are talking about the protection of nature .
Mr President , all I want to say is that it is highly regrettable that this situation occurs year after year .
Mr President , if it were not so sad , it would be laughable .
Every year , in September or October , we have massive forest fires in southern Europe , and we have had a great many fires , more than 5000 this summer in Greece , sometimes more than 200 a day . And this year , of course , we want to debate the issue again .
As is clear from the resolutions , this is partly due to the fact that we do not really discuss the underlying causes .
These are , firstly , controversial development and , secondly , unsustainable forestry .
We need to do more than discuss a few methods of prevention , airborne firefighting teams , insurance issues and claim settlements .
First of all , we need adequate legislation , full implementation , qualified personnel and effective administration , and rather than lifting controls on development , we need to introduce compulsory reforestation .
Secondly , we need a form of forest management which makes proper use of biodiversity , spatial organisation and the separation of cultivated areas and natural vegetation in order to create forests in the Mediterranean region as they were in 500 BC .
I would now like only to mention one crucial point , which is the danger represented by eucalyptus .
This burns extremely quickly and , in addition , destroys water reserves .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , in the context of the joint motion for a resolution supported by our group , the Group of the European Radical Alliance , we have tabled three amendments on the methods of combating these scourges , particularly through the establishment of a European fleet of water bombers .
The study we carried out and the statistics published show that an average of 400 000 hectares every year fall prey to forest fires in Spain , Italy , Portugal , Greece and France .
These fires have many different causes and they play a role in upsetting the ecological balance .
They lead to flooding , landslides , climate change and the destruction of flora and fauna .
To fight them , each country has set up airborne teams , and has a system of operating that is difficult to change during the summer period .
As a result , bringing together national resources and making them available to help other countries is becoming a very appealing proposition .
Bilateral agreements have been concluded for land-based civil defence operations , but these do not apply to the airborne fight against fires inside the countries since they only cover the border areas .
Our motion involves providing the relevant countries with the resources they need to fight the fires .
In order to this , we would have to lease five Hercule C 130 type aircraft ; this is a very effective land-based aeroplane with delayed dropping and a capacity of 12 tonnes .
The base of this fleet would be established at the most central point of those areas at risk .
This would result in more rapid , decisive intervention , since we know that the power of the resources used , along with the speed of their deployment , together represent the most important factor in the effectiveness of the fight against forest fires .
The cost of this operation for one summer period of three months and for five aircraft , with an approximate one-hour flight , would be approximately ECU 6 million , which could be assumed by the Union and by the countries making use of the facilities .
It is not an exaggeration to say that it is financially viable .
Your agreement on these amendments , ladies and gentlemen , could lead to an own-initiative report , which is likely to confirm the viability of the European fleet of water bombers and allow it to become operational as soon as possible .
Forest fires in Portugal
Mr President , rather than speak about Portugal , where measures , including material means , have been coordinated and there has been a political effort , I should like to take this opportunity to emphasise the overall context of the joint resolution on which we are to vote , a context which underlines the importance of adopting a Community forestry policy along the lines suggested in the Thomas report , taking account of the specific requirements of the Mediterranean region .
I should like to emphasise the need to adapt the forestry policy aspects of the common agricultural policy in future , and also to highlight the importance of regional and local planning for forest areas .
These are regional planning issues and questions of protecting environmental wildlife in southern Europe and in the Mediterranean countries because , when it comes down to it , these September resolutions have resulted from the fact that other measures were not adopted in time .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , once again this summer a large number of huge forest fires hit various southern European countries including Portugal .
First of all , of course , we should think of the victims and call for Community aid .
Apart from the call in the resolution for the Commission to earmark the necessary budgetary amounts , the European Parliament ought also to look into the advantages of creating its own budgetary line for assistance in cases of disasters .
We are aware that some of these fires are of criminal origin while others are the result of climatic changes leading to lengthy droughts and heatwaves .
It is therefore vital to pay more attention to prevention , and greater support will be needed from the European institutions to help increase efficiency in fighting forest fires .
For example , the common agricultural policy could help to prevent these disasters , and a European forestry strategy is also something we should look at . It was supported by the European Parliament when it approved the Thomas report .
For all of these reasons , along with other colleagues we back this motion for a resolution and seek the support of the European Parliament as a whole .
Mr President , I will not take all my speaking time but I cannot speak with all the voices I have around me , so please ask Members to be a little quieter .
It is a fair point , you are quite right .
Would Members please take their seats .
Mr President , Commissioner , I should like to say that , contrary to the opinion of all those who have claimed that we must set up a complete ' fire industry ' to combat fires in the summer , I should like to say that when it comes to Mediterranean forests it is a common mistake to think that fires can be fought in the summer or that fleets of planes or hundreds of firemen are needed .
Mediterranean forest fires must be fought in the winter , in the autumn , in the spring , when there is no heat - in other words , by cleaning and preparing forests , by monitoring them , by sending workers into the forests to clean them up , since generally forests are owned by all kinds of different people and bodies and nowadays they are not populated as they were a hundred years ago .
The only way of protecting forests is by cleaning them up , the only way of protecting forests is by building roads and paths which block fires and prevent them from crossing from one side to the other .
We therefore need to pay forestry workers to create fire-breaks or fire-lanes , 50 to 60 metres wide .
There are areas in Portugal where there are no fires .
Why ?
They are huge areas but they are guarded and kept clean and they are protected by fire-breaks and fire-lanes .
Otherwise it is not possible .
Here I am speaking of fire disasters because European policy on Mediterranean forests has been a disaster - mainly because of systematic opposition from countries with well-kept forests but also with more temperate , cooler climates than ours .
We have to counteract the idea that fires are fought with the help of planes in the summer .
Fires are fought in the winter by preparing forests so that they do not catch fire .
Colleague , let me interrupt you .
Mr Willockx , it really is very rude to have a series of conversations round the Chamber when someone is trying to speak .
Would the colleagues around Mrs Mann please take their seats .
The speaker is finding himself disturbed by the noise .
Mr President , let us set them on fire !
Forest fires in Greece
Mr President , the facts and results of the forest fires in Greece are well known , and are mentioned in the resolution we are debating , which I of course support .
The consequences for the future are more dramatic : flooding , micro-climatic changes , and the deterioration of the environment and the ecosystem .
Mr President , even at the risk of becoming monotonous , let me repeat the causes : the absence of a land register , which encourages people who presume they are free to encroach upon the land , complete anarchy in the disposal of waste , which leads to illegal landfills that the local authorities cannot or do not wish to control , and unclear laws and shortsighted draft legislation in Greece concerning the reforestation of the areas devastated by fire .
Let me however say a word about the Commission too .
It is not acting as it should .
Since July , following an urgent question of mine , Mr Fischler should to have informed me of the number and efficiency of plans for fire-prevention in Greece .
He did not do so .
That is not just an irregularity , it is a sign of indifference about what happens in Greece , and that neither reflects credit on the Commission nor helps us .
I would also like to thank all those who , from Italy , Germany , France and Russia , by sending pilots and aircraft , helped us this summer to keep the vast damage due to forest fires in our country down to the minimum possible .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I shall try to be brief .
On the subject of the floods in China , apart from confirming the numbers already quoted during the debate , I should like to say that ECHO is already present in China although , as you can imagine , the scale of the disaster is such that ECHO is having to concentrate on certain more priority areas and in particular food and medical assistance to the least favoured .
In any case , ECHO has sent its expert to China to identify and assess the needs so that ECHO 's actions can also be coordinated on the ground .
I should also add that , as part of the relations between the European Union and China and as suggested in the European Parliament 's draft resolution , we can clearly cooperate on offering assistance and co-financing studies aimed at identifying the environmental and other causes and finding possible solutions to these disasters .
As far as Bangladesh is concerned , this is another catastrophe of huge proportions - after all , it has affected 60 % of the country 's territory and around 30 million people - and there , too , ECHO is involved with humanitarian assistance , in particular in terms of food and public health .
I can also now announce that a task force has been set up by the Commission , involving ECHO , DG I-B and DG VIII , with the task of ensuring the coordination of the European Union 's response or , at least , that of the Commission to the disaster in Bangladesh .
ECU 1 million has already been sent but it is obvious that more will have to be sent since the estimated needs are far greater than that .
As far as the fires are concerned , I should like to say that Community action on forestry , the protection of risk areas and protection measures have always been carried out in close cooperation with the Member States .
I can also say that between 1992 and 1998 around 700 of the fire prevention projects presented by the Member States were approved and received Community co-funding to the order of ECU 84 million .
This cooperation is carried out within the Standing Committee on Forests and , in particular , thanks to the Community system of information on forest fires , a very useful assessment and monitoring instrument which could be more effective had not the budget authority reduced its budget from ECU 23.5 million in 1996 to ECU 16 million in 1998 .
I should also like to say that the current regional development programmes include a number of fire prevention measures such as reforestation but , as you know , the Commission does not have the extra funding to assist affected regions .
Any action will have to be part of a reprogramming of the Community support frameworks or of single programming documents negotiated with the Member States .
In response to one Member , I should also say that , as part of Agenda 2000 , the Commission is still proposing forest protection and reforestation measures .
Last of all , I should like to inform the European Parliament that the Commission is preparing , on the basis of the Thomas report , a proposal for a European forestry strategy which will obviously be presented to the European Parliament and to the Council - at least we hope - by the end of this legislative period .
Thank you , Commissioner Pinheiro .
The debate is closed .
We shall now proceed to the votes .
Mr Fabre-Aubrespy first wishes to raise a point of order .
Madam President , I would like to make a brief reference to Rule 19 of the Rules of Procedure , before we start debating the reports on the agenda .
I have seen a report by Agence France Presse that quotes a source close to the Presidency of Parliament . It states that the new Hemicycle could be provisionally opened by Parliament between the middle and end of November 1998 , and officially opened in December .
But it still has to be equipped , in particular with the electronic voting system . Some people are wondering , in that case , whether it might be better to wait for the next Parliamentary term , that is , July 1999 , before beginning to hold partsessions in the new building .
Also , according to the report , hundreds of workers are still at work on the enormous building site .
Stunned by the beauty of the new building , all in glass , which stands elegantly on the banks of the Ill , it - the source - estimates that the cost of maintaining the building will be enormous .
I would therefore like to know how the President can allow people close to him to speak on behalf of him in this manner - a manner that implies a source close to the President - and to state that Members are wondering whether or not they are going to have to move into the new buildings .
This is not Question Time , Mr Fabre-Aubrespy , and we cannot respond to every report that appears in the press .
I note what you say , and we shall see what comes of this report .
Mrs Oomen-Ruijten has a point of order .
Madam President , I should like to make a personal statement under Rule 108 .
A motion for a resolution has been tabled on capital punishment in the Philippines , and we naturally read through all the texts very carefully .
We in the PPE Group are opposed to capital punishment .
Now , I realise that in the nine years or so that I have been here I have made a few enemies , because I have not always been able to please everyone all of the time .
I also realise , and some of you know more about this than I do , that the Philippines may also have a little score to settle with me , but looking at the text of the motion on the Philippines , the words ' whereas the newly elected President , according to a Reuters report , has said on radio that he would not grant clemency to Oomen-Ruijten , one of those under sentence of death ' really seem to be going a little too far .
I would therefore ask you to change the text .
Thank you , Mrs Oomen-Ruijten .
We shall now proceed to the vote .
VOTES ( continuation )
Madam President , I should like to ask you something .
The person in seat number 85 has taken a number of photographs of this side of the Chamber today .
Mr Seppänen regularly takes photos of this side of the Chamber .
I know that Hans-Gert Poettering is very attractive , but I would really prefer people not to take photos in the Chamber .
I wonder what they are for ?
Taking photographs in the Chamber is not allowed without permission .
I would ask you to stop doing so .
Madam President , I would simply like to know what is going to be done with this film .
I hope you have been reassured and that we can continue with the vote .
No , Madam President , since we have rules in this House I would ask you to ask the gentleman in question , or perhaps he can explain himself , what he is doing with his camera .
Perhaps there is no film in it , in which case I would be perfectly happy .
Taking photographs in the Chamber is not allowed without permission .
We shall look at this incident , since this particular matter is not covered , and it will be considered in the Bureau .
Madam President , we are all quite open with each other here in the House , and I would like to ask Mr Seppänen through you why he is taking photographs and whether he would be prepared to hand over the film , if there is a film in it .
I would prefer not to have a detailed discussion here .
A Member is entitled to be here in the Chamber , but this incident is a rather unusual one and so we shall look at it in the Bureau .
I do not wish us to discuss the matter any further now .
Madam President , I have made a personal statement on behalf of this side of the Chamber .
I gather that Mr Seppänen would like to reply , and I would like to ask him exactly what he is doing . It is not the first time that I have seen him do it .
Do you wish to make a statement on this now , Mr Seppänen ?
Madam President , I have taken photographs of the European Parliament sitting , to keep as mementoes .
I cannot go up there to take photographs as I am a Member of Parliament , and , obviously , I am entitled to take home mementoes for my own use .
Madam President , rules are rules and I think Mr Seppänen should hand over his film .
Mr Cox wishes to raise a point of order .
Madam President , I wonder why the honourable Member did not find the Liberal Group photogenic .
We are so upset we were not included .
( Laughter and applause )
I would say that that resolves the matter .
We can now continue with our work .
That concludes the votes for today .
Madam President , I would ask for the attention of the House for a moment .
We concluded our discussion of the Marinucci report this morning .
There is no need to postpone it as we can certainly vote on it .
It should not take long , given your very capable chairmanship .
Today 's sitting lasts until 8 p.m. and we cannot simply go on beyond then .
Tomorrow we have a whole series of votes on women 's issues , and so it would have made sense to group them all together .
I shall now ask the House if it wishes to vote on the report now .
Your wish is my command !
( Parliament decided to continue voting )
Madam President , could you tell me whether or not the roll-call votes that took place during the votes this evening will be taken into consideration for Parliamentary allowances . If they are , all those who left straight after the votes at midday will be surprised next week .
The rule is , Mr Happart , that all the votes on a Thursday are taken into account .
Each and every Member is aware of the implications of that .
Madam President , we agree with the rapporteur .
I would like to propose an oral amendment because we have been misunderstood .
We are not calling for legislation to establish the right to part-time work , but for legislation to regulate voluntary part-time work .
Therefore , the text would read as follows : ' Calls urgently on the Member States to provide legislation on voluntary part-time work and calls on the Commission to encourage and coordinate action in this field ' .
We cannot , in fact , ask that everyone everywhere has the right to part-time work .
Companies would no longer function .
It is unrealistic .
But the House must understand what we mean , as I think the rapporteur does .
The rapporteur has signalled to me that she agrees to that .
I do not believe that is the same .
The question is whether firms should be forced by a specific individual right to take the relevant organisational measures .
That is something quite different from what Mrs Lulling has proposed .
Mrs Lulling is only calling for provision of legislation on the issue .
But here it is a question of a clear individual right .
That is something different .
We really must not confuse the two .
A request was made to which the rapporteur agrees .
But if this is to be approved , I also need the agreement of the House , in other words if there are objections , they must be respected .
If 12 Members object , I cannot put this to the vote , since because an objection has been raised and must be respected , the text must be put to the vote in its original form .
( More than 11 Members rose to object and the amendment was thus not approved )
Madam President , my colleague in seat 10 A is speaking into a mobile phone .
In my opinion it is inappropriate from the point of view of other MEPs here to use a mobile phone in this Chamber , and I would hope the President takes note of the matter .
The use of mobile telephones is not allowed here .
I hope that no one is now going to ask for a recording to be made .
I really would ask Members to stop behaving in this way , which is becoming quite ridiculous .
Madam President , I think I should tell Mr Seppänen that I have just used my mobile phone , because this telephone is out of order , to warn the secretary-general of my group to find out what has happened to Mr Seppänen 's film .
That may once again be a reason , but I would point out that all the political groups have telephones here for making urgent calls and they should be used in such cases .
I should like to make that quite clear again .
Madam President , thank you for having taken the vote , and I thank my colleagues for having adopted the report .
I would however say that the vote against the possibility of earmarking a part of the Structural Funds to tackle women 's unemployment is highly regrettable .
I know it is not true that Mr Flynn said as much in Porto , but if he had done so he would have been right , because now it is Parliament which chooses not to request these funds .
You did not say so in Porto , Commissioner , and you told us as much this morning .
The press said it but you denied it - and I believe that - but now you could say it : regrettably , this House has told you today - and I do not know why - that it is not right to earmark a part of the Structural Funds to tackle women 's unemployment .
I do not know who voted that way , or why , but I believe that it was a mistake .
Madam President , it is an incredible disgrace for this House that , due to the intransigence of some parliamentary groups , we were not in a position to adopt a text on Kosovo , and this in the dramatic situation of unutterable misery which currently exists there .
In my opinion , we must in the near future concentrate vigorously on two points .
The first is to demilitarise Kosovo and to replace the mercenaries and groups of soldiers marauding there with an international peacekeeping force , and the second is to put police , administration and jurisdiction back into the hands of the elected authorities in Kosovo .
We should be able to reach agreement on this minimal programme .
We should concentrate on this , and then we can avoid disgraces such as we have seen today .
Madam President , I agree with Mr Posselt that it is a disgrace that we cannot reach agreement .
However , I would like to request that Mr Posselt and his friends look for the common ground in this difficult issue .
If you think that a majority can only be achieved by taking a tough line , you have seen today that this is not possible .
Please seek the common ground with the social democrats in the House on this important issue , and then we will be able to reach agreement .
A review of the VAT system is to be welcomed .
The Commission also proposes application on a trial basis of a reduced rate to certain labour-intensive activities .
There is no need , however , for any immediate approximation of rates .
Several countries with high levels of value added tax put the accruing revenue towards public sector expenditure .
The French socialists , as they said during their election campaign a year and a half ago , are in favour of a general reduction in VAT .
It is an indirect tax and affects people regardless of their income ; I would even go so far as to say that it damages the most disadvantaged social categories , since they represent the group that spends the highest proportion of its income on consumption .
At the same time , we know all too well that we must do everything in our power to ensure that the launch of the euro takes place under conditions that inspire confidence , particularly as regards budget balance .
So what should we do ?
In my opinion , we must find pragmatic and prudent responses to the problem that are also effective , in other words , implement reductions in VAT targeted at certain goods or services which we believe are essential , as Annex H of the Sixth Directive on VAT provides .
I am thinking firstly of a reduction in the rates applied to CD-ROMs , with a view to both ensuring that this product receives the same treatment as books , and promoting a technology of the future , in which it is essential for the European Union to be competitive .
That is why we voted in favour of Amendment No 4 tabled by the Group of the European Radical Alliance .
We also believe that lower rates should be envisaged for the construction and refurbishment of local authority housing , collective refurbishment , and access to justice for the most disadvantaged .
Such provisions already exist - or , in the case of low cost housing , are about to be completed - in France , but we believe that we need to go even further . We need to go further in lowering rates , and further in coordination with our European partners .
To guarantee the single market and fiscal harmonisation , and to prevent unfair competition , we must move forward together and with consensus on these issues .
We are also in favour of the ideas behind Amendments Nos 3 , 5 and 6 by the ARE Group that stress the desirability of such a coordinated reduction .
Finally , I would like to say that I support , in particular , the request from the European Parliament to the Commission in paragraph 6 of the resolution of the report by Bernard Castagnède for a directive that would allow reduced VAT rate to be applied to certain labour-intensive services ' on a trial basis ' .
I am thinking particularly of the provision of home-based services , a category which forms part of the French National Plan for Employment drawn up in the wake of the Luxembourg European Council . The Commission stated that it was prepared to support this category in its communication of 12 November 1997 on labour-intensive services .
But I must add that , in this field , we cannot be satisfied with experiments .
We must move as quickly as possible to a binding legislative text .
The Commission and the Council must be aware of our determination to move forward on this issue .
It is of extreme importance and reflects a long-standing concern of French socialists , who are convinced that such a measure would not only benefit consumption but also employment .
This report contains a comprehensive proposal to harmonise VAT rates in the individual Member States and for a new common VAT system based on taxation in the country of origin , something we are unable to support .
In our opinion , tax and excise duty policy is a purely national matter , and the Union therefore should not interfere in the Member States ' ability to pursue an independent economic policy .
The report emphasises that reduced rates of VAT may be desirable on social grounds , with a view to avoiding the regressive consequences of VAT .
It is also indicated that lower VAT may have beneficial effects on employment and limit the extent of ' black ' working .
We agree with these points , not least because the rates of VAT on food , for example , impose the same burden on high and low income groups and thus have an unequal financial impact on different groups in society .
However , we believe that it must be left to the individual Member States to decide what kind of social and labour market policy they wish to follow .
Social policy considerations should not be used as a pretext for further integration within what are separate areas of cooperation .
The report also states that rationalisation and updating of the scope of the reduced rates of VAT must not have any significant impact on the level of public revenues .
This is an important point .
In Denmark , we have a standard rate of VAT of 25 % , which is substantially higher than that in other Member States .
The proceeds from this source of revenue provide a major part of the financing for the Danish welfare state .
It is therefore important to point out in this context that it appears from a background note from the Danish Tax Ministry to the European Committee of the Folketing on the proposal for a Council directive amending the Sixth VAT Directive that a change in the rules on allowances and the establishment of a system of rebates , with reimbursement of VAT on purchases made in other Member States , ' would involve a loss of yield to the Treasury of between DKR 1 and 2 billion ' ( Tax Ministry ref .
5.98-221-29 ) .
Implementing the proposals in the report would inevitably have considerable economic consequences for Danish society and thus affect the level of public revenues .
We regard these economic consequences as unacceptable .
We also believe that it is the people and the elected Members of Parliament in the individual Member States who should take the sovereign decision on economic targets and the resources for developing their societies .
Such measures should not be dictated by the EU .
This report is therefore a step in the wrong direction .
I cannot vote in favour of this report since I do not share the view that value added taxes should be approximated ( paragraph 8 ) .
Neither do I believe that our VAT system should be based on the principle of country of origin ( paragraph 1 ) .
It is by now undisputed that small and medium-sized enterprises , or SMEs , play a key role in the European Union .
They play a leading role in economic growth in Europe and are one of the main sources of job creation , which is highly significant in view of the current situation in the Union where we have 20 million unemployed .
And we should not forget that at the 1997 Luxembourg jobs summit the heads of state or government set themselves the task of improving this intolerable situation .
I should mention that SMEs currently make up 99.8 % of companies currently in existence in the EU - with small and medium-sized enterprises making up over 80 % - in which 66 % of Europe 's working population are employed ; their turnover accounts for 65 % of the EU total .
The importance of these companies in the EU is also highlighted by the fact that , firstly , they react quickly to market developments and are thus particularly useful in promoting new technologies , and , secondly , they can concentrate on economic niches and thus increase Europe 's competitiveness by creating highly-skilled technology-related jobs .
They also play a considerable role in supporting regional development .
I can say this as a native of South Tyrol , as I come from a small region which has a healthy economy based exclusively on the performance of small and medium-sized enterprises .
In my opinion , support from the EU should concentrate in particular on standardisation and training networks , environmental management and access to sources of finance .
It is in these particular areas that SMEs come up against hurdles and obstacles .
For this reason , the Commission should develop specific programmes for young entrepreneurs which promote and support training in administration , the use of new technologies and above all the creation of networks between companies .
What I hope to highlight in this speech is that the creation of several capital markets in the EU in favour of SMEs is highly desirable , partly because SMEs often find it very difficult to obtain capital for start-up and investment .
In brief , I fully agree with the comments made by the rapporteur , Mr Hendrick .
I must congratulate our colleagues on these two reports on the fifth annual report of the European Observatory for SMEs and the communication from the Commission on European capital markets for SMEs : prospects and potential obstacles .
SMEs have , in fact , represented this year the greatest source of job creation .
However , unfortunately , the large European institutional investors and the banks are all too often cautious towards small and medium-sized companies that , for them , represent a risk .
Nevertheless , the European market has certain capital markets for certain categories of SMEs , often the most innovative and the most competitive .
The fact remains that the number of European SMEs quoted on the markets is very low in relation to their potential to generate wealth and employment .
The communication from the European Commission is therefore a step in the right direction .
Nonetheless , the points highlighted by our rapporteur are fundamental and I hope that the Commission will be able to give them greater consideration .
I would emphasise , in particular , the importance of completing the single market as soon as possible ; it must form the basis of the new European capital market for SMEs .
Moreover , we welcome the fact that the fifth annual report of the European Observatory for SMEs for 1997 concentrates mainly on assessing the effects on SMEs of the completion of the internal market .
The report also proposes new and interesting ideas that should be explored , particularly in the fields of the environment and tourism .
These two specific areas are the subject of a very interesting analysis that highlights the issues that are unavoidable for our SMEs from now on : taking account of the competitiveness of companies when establishing environmental legislation , new markets for ecological products , etcetera .
Mr President , I voted for both of these reports and I am happy that the House has adopted them with such a large majority .
On reading the fifth report of the European Observatory for SMEs , we are pleased with the structured overall view of SMEs and craft enterprises in the European Economic Area provided by the European Network for SME Research .
In fact , although the report is quite general and includes many topics , we welcome its independent character .
We also support the report since it once again views the Commission 's activity in the context of combating unemployment ; we must remember that SMEs are still a source of growth and employment .
In this respect , we agree with the Committee on Economic Affairs : there is still a great deal to be done to improve and simplify the administrative environment of SMEs , and to effectively target Community aid , with a view to avoiding ' waste ' .
We have paid particular attention to the issues highlighted in the report : general reduction in bureaucracy ; improvements to the fiscal environment ; professional training ; and the development of research and technological innovation .
However , in our opinion , it is essential to state our commitment to respecting the principle of subsidiarity , particularly since the companies involved are , in general , intrinsically private companies .
It is important to ensure that they do not come to expect and passively accept Community aid , for that would encourage ' easy charity ' .
The managers of SMEs must retain their spirit of enterprise .
They must be capable of coming up with innovative ideas : we must avoid turning them into civil servicelike ' administrative machines ' .
It is essential , too , to lighten the administrative , legislative and regulatory burdens that enterprises are subjected to on a daily basis and that are becoming more and more difficult for them to handle .
As regards fiscal measures , which vary from country to country , we must not forget , in the light of recent debates in the House , that the power to modify these still lies with the Member States .
To conclude , Mr President , I must say that I am surprised that the report remains silent on the euro , while it devotes a detailed section to the tourism sector .
Thank you , Madam President .
Despite certain positive elements , my group has not been able to vote for your report , Mrs Marinucci .
Our first amendment states , on behalf of freedom of choice , that women must be able to choose between immediately finding a job or delaying entering the labour market in order to devote a number of years to having children and bringing them up . This amendment was , in fact , rejected .
The report does contain certain positive points , particularly where you recognise that we need to discuss whether family dependant care should be given recognition in national accounts . However , in spite of such points , I cannot support the general philosophy of your text , which represents a collectivist socialist option for the care of children .
Mrs Marinucci , children do not only need to be looked after ; they are not only a problem for the organisation of their parents ' professional life .
They also need to be educated , more than they ever did before , and there are men and women who wish to educate them .
I met many young women during the run-up to the Beijing Conference .
You say that you are sorry that women in Europe are forced to give up their careers .
That is all very well , but I would also point out that , at the moment , many young women in Europe are saying that they regret having to give up having more children because there is no genuine family policy worthy of the name in Europe .
This has negative repercussions on demography , which is currently a structural cause of Europe 's unemployment .
But that is currently a taboo subject in Europe 's institutions .
Madam President , I would have preferred not to have to give an explanation of vote and I understand Mrs Marinucci 's disappointment after having made such efforts to find some common ground with me as far as the amendments are concerned .
She agreed with our amendment to paragraph 4 .
But , unfortunately , Mr Wolf got the wrong end of the stick and succeeded in misleading many of our colleagues .
Neither Mrs Marinucci nor I want that , any more than those who voted in favour of it without knowing why they were voting .
They voted to ensure that Member States are from now on forced to regulate the right to a voluntary job , anywhere and at any time .
If someone wants a voluntary job , an employer must provide him with one .
You are calling for such legislation within the Community . But this is totally absurd .
We want part-time voluntary work to be regulated , and to be well regulated , as is the case in my own country .
Other countries also have rights concerning voluntary work , under certain conditions .
But if everyone can just demand the right to part-time work , anywhere and at any time , as I said , companies will no longer function .
But we want companies to function .
Mrs Marinucci had understood this very well ; she said that that was not what she wanted to see .
I am very sorry , but this was why we had to abstain because , quite honestly , people can ask us to do many things , but we cannot be expected to vote for such absurdities .
I hold Mrs Marinucci in very high regard , but I have had to reject this motion because it was ideological , it infringed completely the principle of subsidiarity and more or less stated that all young women in the European Union should pursue a career after their education .
This is completely absurd !
Mrs Seillier proposed that we should leave it up to the women themselves to decide whether they devote themselves to their family and the home or to professional life .
This was rejected .
This is an ideological delusion and I really must say that we in the European Parliament are making complete fools of ourselves with reports of this kind .
In my opinion , we should approach such important issues as women and the family with much greater care .
The motion for a resolution drawn up by Elene Marinucci is an excellent summary of the demands the House should be making in the present context .
I would like to draw your attention to the points concerning parttime work , which , in my opinion , are at the heart of the problem .
Part-time work has represented the most important element of the development of the female workforce in the 1990s .
Today , women hold the majority - 83 % - of these jobs .
Part-time work is traditionally presented as a positive element that allows women to reconcile their professional and family lives .
However , Eurostat statistics show that many women with part-time jobs would prefer to have a full-time job , and that the benefits often mean they have to work late hours or during weekends .
This penalises women in their attempt to reconcile their job and their family and contradicts this idyllic view .
The reorganisation of working time has led to a considerable increase in the number of precarious or atypical forms of employment : part-time jobs , temporary work or agency work . It has also led to a reduction in social protection and to a deterioration in the quality of life of many women .
Contrary to a hackneyed cliché , part-time work is not the choice of women , but most often represents the choice of employers ; and for the women who hold such posts , it is a real constraint .
There are very few part-time jobs in industry and very few posts with responsibility ; in addition , part-time work is limited to low-skilled jobs and is linked to very specific sectors .
Moreover , part-time workers can only rarely invest in training due to the demands of the working hours involved in part-time jobs .
Danièle Meulders , a lecturer from the Université libre de Bruxelles , has demonstrated the difficulties part-time workers experience in terms of social benefits .
Almost half of them do not receive any protection if they become unemployed .
Mrs Marinucci rightly points out that the 1997 Directive on part-time work does not cover social security and expressly authorises the Member States to maintain national thresholds that exclude so many part-time workers from the scope of the directive .
The rapporteur believes that if we have to encourage part-time work in today 's labour market , it is essential that it be extended to skilled jobs , that men be encouraged to take up part-time work , and that training and social security cover be made available to all part-time workers .
I would , however , like to point out that these wishes risk going unheeded , for nowhere do I see the political will to turn them into a reality .
The most radical proposal for the promotion of female employment in Europe would be the drastic reduction of part-time work and an overall reduction in working time for everyone , women and men , with full employment for all , without exception .
We will not arrive at such a situation without a struggle and without progressive reforms . Therefore , if the European Union wants to convince public opinion of its determination to truly progress towards equality between men and women on the labour market and to reduce the differences in the levels of unemployment between the sexes , it must first look systematically at the discriminatory effects that each employment policy might produce .
For the next European summit on employment , we should ask each Member State to provide the following information :






1.breakdown of part-time jobs by sex and age ; 2. reasons why part-time work is chosen by companies and in national policies ; 3. hourly pay for part-time work ; 4. levels of segregation by profession for part-time work in comparison with full-time work ; 5. skills required for part-time jobs ; 6. relation between part-time work and poverty ; 7. effects of part-time work on pensions and other replacement incomes ; 8. effect on income throughout working life ; 9. access to early retirement.This information would provide us with accurate statistics on the extent to which part-time work discriminates against women .
But we could go even further and question each of the Member States presenting their action plan on the following points :
1.What are the potential effects of each of the policies proposed on the situation of women in terms of volume and quality of work ? 2 . What measures are taken in relation to training policies to ensure that women receive equal treatment to men and , in particular , what proposals are put forward for part-time work ? 3 .
How do countries that believe that part-time work is the best solution to sharing employment ? Do they plan to extend this part-time work to include men and to skilled , well-paid jobs , and what measures are taken to ensure that part-time workers receive adequate pensions and unemployment benefits ? In conclusion , I would like to make a general comment .
Commissioner Monti has shown that the Member States that wanted to keep capital on their territory were subject to market forces and had to reduce taxation on capital by 10 % in 12 years .
And since they had to find revenue to offset this , they increased labour taxes by 20 % during the same period .
These labour taxes , also according to Commissioner Monti , are responsible for a third of Europe 's unemployment . I will leave you to contemplate this statistic , linked as it is to the development of information technologies and to the fact that of the four freedoms set out in the Single Act , the free movement of capital , contrary to the wishes of the founders of Europe , was the first to be achieved .
In view of the increase in unemployment among women in Europe , this own-initiative report by Mrs Marinucci is particularly important .
In February 1998 , the rate of unemployment was 12.3 % among women and 8.9 % among men .
The unemployment rate is higher among women in all European countries except Sweden .
Therefore , in its resolution , the Committee requests that the Commission provide more precise statistics on employment figures , which are broken down according to sex .
The Committee calls on the Member States to provide legislation on the right to part-time work ; the social partners are to conclude a framework agreement on all forms of atypical work and the Commission is to submit a proposal for a framework directive on childcare services in the Member States .
Women who are not registered unemployed are also to be entitled to participate in the training programmes .
I am pleased that , in implementing the EU 's Employment Guidelines , Austria has included , in its National Action Plan for employment , special measures to create equality , measures which are taken into account not only in Chapter IV of the NAP but , in the spirit of the gender mainstreaming programme , also in the other chapters .
We will try , therefore , to give greater consideration to this aspect in the discussion on developing the Employment Guidelines and measures relating to structural policy , and to force it to be included in all policy areas of the European Union .
Mr Fabre-Aubrespy has a point of order .
Madam President , I had asked to speak during the votes .
I did not insist on doing so because you did not allow me . However , just now , during the vote on the resolution on Sudan , and more particularly on Amendment No 1 to paragraph 6 , I wanted to speak , since someone had at least to point this out for the Minutes , because there is a striking contradiction .
You held a separate vote on the original text and on the amendment .
You put the original text to the vote , then the amendment , and finally returned to the original text .
You therefore held three roll-call votes instead of two , which is very expensive for us since one roll-call vote costs FF 8 000 .
In addition , you contradicted yourself in that you led the House to vote against the first part of what you called Amendment No 1 , that is , the original text of paragraph 6 , before holding another vote on this paragraph 6 and allowing it to be adopted .
Therefore , in terms of the roll-call votes , the Minutes will contain two contradictions , two contradictory votes , and I just thought that someone should point this out . We need to understand that an amendment is not the original text .
When we ask for a separate vote on the amendment , that means that we vote first on the amendment alone and then on the original text .
That is a misunderstanding , Mr Fabre-Aubrespy .
We voted first on the amendment .
That was rejected , one part after the other - the two parts were each put to the vote separately and rejected , and then the amendment in its original form was put to the vote , since some people wanted just the one part and some people just the other .
But then - if that is rejected - there must be another vote on the original text .
Only the parts were rejected , and not the whole text .
Role of cooperatives in women 's employment ( continuation )
The next item is the continuation of the debate on the report ( A4-0270 / 98 ) by Mrs Colombo Svevo , on behalf of the Committee on Women 's Rights , on the role of cooperatives in the growth of women 's employment .
Madam President , Commissioner , I would like to thank Mrs Colombo Svevo for her contribution to the joint effort that the whole of the European Union is making to promote and create employment .
Such an effort implies the search for new types of employment as well as new forms of employment organization , and orients social protection towards employment .
This report rigorously researches and sets out in a socio-economic and innovative spirit how cooperatives and firms in the social economy can help integrate women into the labour market , in particular those that have no professional experience or who have been absent from the labour market for family reasons for a number of years .
These firms enable women to reconcile work and family life and , at the same time , provide high quality , affordable services which are largely aimed at lessfavoured groups .
Because of their flexible and intangible nature - and because of the urgent demands of the service sector , in particular social and public health services - the cooperatives can convert jobs that were traditionally done by women alone and which afforded them no social status or financial remuneration , into paid business ventures .
Our society has set itself specific demographic and social targets which focus on the elderly , handicapped children and the lack of financial independence for women , with the subsequent feminization of poverty .
The rapporteur calls on the Committee to produce a White Paper which draws on both the very positive experiences observed in several European countries and the role of gender in these experiences .
She also calls for support from the European Social Fund in order to channel female business potential towards this new system of cooperatives and encourage the creation of consortia , networks and social economy agencies that provide advice and offer training and organizational support as well as legal help , access to credit and financial and fiscal incentives .
Commissioner , the Amsterdam Treaty gives the European Union a new remit to combat social exclusion with innovative measures .
This report puts forward measures which we support .
We hope that you will too .
Thank you .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , demographic surveys show that the population is ageing and that , as a result , the need for certain social services is increasing .
This applies in particular to women who have not had a good education and who are probably those most affected by conditions on the labour market .
However , there are often very high non-wage labour costs involved in employing these women in the service sector , thus the danger arises that these women may drift into the black economy .
For this reason , any models which differ from this , such as cooperatives , associations and relief organizations , should be used to counteract these problems .
In its 1993 White Paper on Growth , Competitiveness and Employment , the European Union defined a job creation strategy and recommended an active labour market policy .
A new White Paper is a welcome development .
The European Commission considers domestic services to be an area in which a high number of jobs could be created .
One possibility would be service contracts which facilitate work in private households , where the employee would automatically have social insurance as a result of the contract , even where a low number of hours are worked .
This model offers an opportunity to many women , particularly in social economy services .
The disadvantage in this is certainly that wages are low .
However , it should not be overlooked that these social services constitute a good start for unemployed women who are less qualified .
I hope , therefore , that the models described represent a significant step towards fairer integration of women into the labour market .
Mr President , I wish to begin by congratulating Mrs Colombo Svevo on the quality of the report .
She has stressed the important role that cooperatives and the social economy in general play and will continue to play in job creation and in promoting equal opportunities .
The social economy will enable us to tackle a number of tomorrow 's economic and social challenges and will create new jobs that are very often more secure and longer lasting , with better social and working conditions , whilst generating profits that are redistributed and reinvested .
This report points out that the social economy can respond to unmet needs that should be viewed as potential new sources of employment , in particular for women .
It should be noted that the 1998 employment guidelines contains a separate pillar which deals with equal opportunities for women and men .
Strengthening the equal opportunities policy is a full but completely new component of policy , aiming at creating employment and fighting unemployment .
The approach outlined in this report fits in very well with our employment strategy and , in particular , with the equal opportunities aspect of the strategy .
It is a very good example of the mainstreaming that we have been talking about here in the House .
I should like to deal with a few of the main points raised .
The report raises the need to adapt European statutes for these sectors .
European statutes remain a priority for the Commission , even though the proposals for directives and regulations have been on the table with the Council since 1993 .
I agree that this sector needs a clear-cut legal and fiscal framework in order to evolve within the single market .
The Commission will look very closely at the proposal for a study to be carried out on the size and impact of the social economy , the impact it has on employment and , in particular , on female employment .
The Commission is going to draw on the work of the Consultative Committee for cooperatives , mutual societies , associations and foundations established by the Commission on 13 March this year .
The Consultative Committee is , and will remain , one of the Commission 's main sources of advice and information on the situation on the ground .
We can also draw on the experience gained from NOW , Horizon , Integra and other such programmes .
We will present a full report on voluntary organisations and foundations next year .
The report will contain recommendations on how to enhance the social and economic role of voluntary organisations and foundations .
A European conference on cooperative entrepreneurship in the year 2000 is going to be held in Bologna on 30 November and 1 December .
It will be very useful because the conclusions of that conference will enable us to decide on the best way to respond to your demand for the White Paper on cooperatives and social enterprises .
The Commission will also look at possible ways of allocating funding , specifically to help women set up their own businesses , particularly in the social economy area .
I take Mrs Bennasar Tous ' point there that the Social Fund has a role and perhaps could be used more effectively in that area .
Within the third multiannual programme for small and medium-sized enterprises this year , we launched one call for proposals for pilot actions concerning training for spouses ' partners .
We also launched a call for tenders concerning , amongst others , women entrepreneurs and aiming to determine the requirements they have when creating and running enterprises .
At the same time , together with the Swedish National Board for Industrial and Technical Development , we are preparing a conference on women entrepreneurs to be held in Stockholm from 30 November to 2 December next .
So the Commission would lend its support to the establishment of a European network on social economy agencies and it could be managed jointly by the public authorities and by the social economy sector .
They could provide information , documentation , training and assistance in project development and in the establishment in particular of partnerships for funding and financial guarantees .
The Commission intends to pursue its efforts to promote the development of the social economy in the various policies and initiatives undertaken by the Union .
It will strive to ensure that equal opportunities for women and men become a reality and that entities in the social economy , particularly those managed by women , get the maximum support to enable them to play a full part in the social and economic life of the Union .
There is considerable potential and we will give full support to the efforts to achieve it .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 9 a.m.
Single mothers and one-parent families
The next item is the report ( A4-0273 / 98 ) by Mrs García Arias , on behalf of the Committee on Women 's Rights , on the situation of single mothers and one-parent families .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I would firstly like to point out two amendments to the text .
When we voted for this report in the Committee we removed references to two countries , the United Kingdom in recital F and the ' United States model ' in paragraph 12 .
I ask you bear this in mind when it comes to the vote .
We are talking here about a sizeable group of families within the European Union .
Demographic changes together with changing trends in cultural and social patterns have given rise - albeit in some countries more than others - to the phenomenon of the single-parent family .
Although there are also men who , for various reasons , are solely responsible for the care of their children , this report mainly focuses on women who are alone , single , separated , divorced , widowed or who have been abandoned and face life on their own , endeavouring , in the face of a great many difficulties , to give their children a good start in life and in some cases help other family members .
This debate is particularly relevant because , at a time of economic growth and - somewhat contradictorily - of budget cuts and cuts in social expenditure , a lot of talk about concepts such as competitiveness and employability and work ethics in societies where there are high rates of female unemployment and insecure jobs , some models are beginning to make an impact . These models - obviously imported from across the Atlantic - appear to call into question the social benefits which protect these women and their families , and in some cases label them as social parasites who deliberately abuse the social welfare system .
Strangely enough , some of these accusing voices - as we have heard this morning - are those who sing the praises of motherhood , who defend the family as the nucleus of society and on some occasions champion the cause of a wage and social security for housewives , naturally at the expense of social welfare budgets .
This debate follows on from the excellent reports by our colleagues Mrs Marinucci and Mrs Colombo Svevo , who have clearly outlined the situation of women in relation to employment , the difficulties they face in terms of training , the lack of an affordable childcare infrastructure , discrimination in gaining access to jobs and the need for partners to fulfil their responsibilities as regards childcare and housework .
If this is indeed the situation for the majority of women , we cannot begin to imagine the additional difficulties faced by those families that do not receive either an extra income from another partner , or have this person present to share the burden of housework .
I do not think I would be exaggerating if I said that we are referring to one of those socially vulnerable groups that are exposed to poverty , failure at school in the case of the children , and social exclusion .
For this reason single-parent families need specific help and attention as well as the support of governments in general , even though some of these women might have found jobs .
Unfortunately , more often than not , the jobs are poorly paid and insecure .
This report calls on the Commission and the Member States to consider in detail the obstacles that many women come up against and to develop political and economic measures that contribute to the social integration and economic independence of women , including the use of Structural Funds . It also specifically calls on the Commission to look into the reluctance and discrimination that many employers display when faced with an applicant who has children .
If this is already happening , Commissioner , we should also bear in mind the particular difficulty some of these women must face in looking for employment when the employer knows that they are the head of the family .
But the report - and this is my last point - also calls on absentee fathers and , to a lesser extent mothers , to take on their responsibilities , and urges that divorce arrangements and other legal practices and systems be improved to ensure that both parents fulfil their parental obligations .
Mr President , the report by Mrs García Arias must be seen in an overall context , like the report by Mrs Marinucci , which we have already voted on today .
I hope that the Council of Ministers for Social Affairs , which is meeting on 5 October , will incorporate the conclusions of the House in its decisions , as the single mothers on whom this report concentrates need action to be taken urgently .
We realise , of course , that it is primarily up to the Member States to fulfil their responsibility ; the social partners must also do more for single mothers .
However , the European Union also has a great deal of responsibility in this area .
The risk of poverty is increased in the Union when men and women divorce , as can be seen from statistics , particularly in Germany .
Those who then become single parents drift very quickly into a situation where they survive on social benefits and find it very difficult to escape from this .
This is why the measures proposed here , particularly regarding good and affordable childcare facilities , are indispensable .
There are still large gaps in this area in the European Union .
I would like to make a further comment .
Paragraphs 16 and 18 propose working towards joint custody for parents in the case of divorce .
However , I fear that , in issues on which the parents disagree , this may be to the detriment of the children .
I would urge that clear regulations be drawn up to ensure that children are not treated unfairly .
On the issue of reform of the Structural Funds , it has become quite clear that we must include gender mainstreaming .
The Marinucci report did not stipulate a percentage figure for the inclusion of women , but in accordance with the Employment Guidelines it is not just equal opportunities that need to be considered : specific emphasis is required for single parents .
We must be open to new models , for example the introduction of reduced working hours into wage agreements for single parents .
Mr President , I wish to thank the rapporteur for her work and for having taken account of the various positions put forward in the committee .
We are dealing here with a phenomenon which is already significant and is increasing constantly : 10 % of families with children are in this situation .
Their circumstances vary considerably : divorces , separations and the birth of children outside marriage .
All such circumstances reveal a weakness of family structures , which should be the subject of careful thought , unless we wish to reduce ourselves to a sort of neutral observatory of change .
We wish , on the contrary , to understand the causes , the tensions that exist within the family - still a cherished institution in Europe - and the conduct which often weakens it .
Although well aware of the deep differences between ourselves and the rapporteur on this issue , I believe that we must back her ultimate objective , namely to ensure support - be it social security , welfare or economic - for single-parent families , whose weaknesses are all the greater given that 85 % of them are headed by women .
They experience psychological , economic and social difficulties , which call for a well-focused mix of policies as different as the situations concerned .
The report lists such possible measures , and I shall not repeat them .
I would nevertheless stress the wisdom of rejecting benefits as a solution , as the report does , providing instead for parents to shoulder their personal responsibilities .
Yet , at the same time , the report rejects the preconceived view that anyone in need of an income is merely a parasite , who should simply be forced to work and get by on their own .
Often people simply cannot get by on their own ; hence the need for these measures .
Europe has standards of civility in this field : I believe that this strong , commonly held sense of responsibility and solidarity forms an integral part of its identity .
Mr President , being a single-parent family does not have to be miserable .
You and I know many loving , happy households where the mother goes out to work .
But single-parent families , the subject of this excellent report by Mrs García Arias , make up a large and vulnerable group in which , as has already been pointed out , 80 to 90 % of the single parents are women .
A minimum income might appear to be the best solution in the short term both for the government and for the parents , but in the longer term it helps no-one .
It simply creates financial and social dependence which benefits neither the parents nor the children .
This is why we , and I think all the groups feel the same , are calling not for paternalism but for active support , good childcare facilities , encouraging parents to attend training courses with childcare provided and helping them to find work .
This is the only way that these families are going to recover their financial and social independence in the long run and the only way to prevent them from being marginalised in society .
We will also be helping the children to grow up in an environment that gives them the security they need and sets an example for their own lives , so that they do not end up in a vicious circle .
My group takes the view that social security must be individualised .
I would recommend Amendment No 1 tabled by my colleague Mimi Kestelijn to paragraph 19 .
We feel , however , that paragraph 20 is dangerous in calling for improving the situation of single-parent families to have priority over public budget deficit considerations .
Reducing budget deficits and applying the EMU criteria in full is in everyone 's interests , including those of single families .
We too reject the United States model .
The British model at least gives us a starting point for a structural approach , because we must stop thinking of mothers of single-parent families as helpless victims .
We need to use structural measures to ensure that they can play an active role in society .
This is the way we need to go , in the European Structural Funds too .
Commissioner Flynn , do not fix any quotas , we do not need them at the moment because we want to give mainstreaming a chance first .
But we are counting on you to ensure that many single mothers are given opportunities through the Structural Funds .
Mr President , Mrs García Arias ' report sets out demographic changes and changes in social structure in Europe today and the need to adapt services and resources to this new reality .
In discussing this report we are in fact talking about the increasingly insecure nature of female employment , the lack of services to facilitate women 's integration into the labour market and the failure of both national and Community policies to promote equality through concrete and effective measures .
The amendments to this report represent two different approaches : the first , which could be termed conservative or traditional , that protects the family and considers the single-parent as something to be tolerated but not accepted as the norm ; and the second , that I would term ' progressive ' , which accepts this new family model as a result of the development of society and the economy , and as such , one that should be protected and respected .
The amendments that we and other progressive groups have tabled , in my opinion , adequately address the vulnerable situation of single-parent families and force public authorities to acknowledge their problems and offer solutions .
They also take into account the fact that single-parent families could be the result of personal choice and in the same way need a strong support structure .
I would like to congratulate Mrs García Arias on her report and for the progressive vision she has demonstrated . She has also managed to accommodate other views , which I believe will encourage the majority of the House to vote in favour .
I too , of course , should like to offer our support .
Mr President , firstly I should like to compliment Mrs García Arias on an excellent report .
It is very comprehensive and has a vision about how Member States and the European Union could help the position of single parents , who are one of the most vulnerable groups in our society .
However , I want to pick up on her reference to the United Kingdom , which , interestingly , she wants to remove from the text .
I understand the embarrassment of my Labour ex-comrades and can see that they would like this removed .
The truth is that it is absolutely accurate .
The UK has cut benefits for single parents as part of its budgetary saving procedures but also because of its ideological commitment to a workfare model .
That is to say there is an element of compulsion in the UK now : you either accept training , education or work or you may have your benefits cut off or reduced .
That is moving towards the other alteration that Mrs García Arias made , which is to remove the United States .
I have taught and researched in the United States .
I have seen workfare at first hand .
I have seen women getting up at 5 o 'clock in the morning to take their children to day care facilities in order then to go on to work or to education or training. because the alternative is to be cut off from benefits altogether .
The United States President , Mr Clinton , is in trouble over a little sexual problem , but the real complaint I would have against him is that he is the most reactionary American president when it comes to welfare and single parents .
He has cut the AFDC programme and limited it to two years .
This has had a crucial impact on single parents , most of whom are women , and force them into low-paid , slave labour employment , or sometimes into training schemes which are very inadequate .
So I think you should leave these references in .
They are both very relevant .
Finally , this is the sixth report I have spoken on today on behalf of the Green Group .
Perhaps you could ask you services to check whether this is a record .
Mr President , the situation of many widows and widowers in Europe with young children in their care calls for a necessary progression in our legislation in order to help them .
For divorced women or men caring for children , the situation is also very difficult and must be looked at ; the law must be changed to take account of the different situations .
But I cannot allow it to be said that there is no longer a family model and that all family models are equally valid .
This is an irresponsible adult concept ; for children , it is always preferable to have a father and a mother and for the two to take on the responsibility not only of their material needs , but also of their education .
Yes , single-parent situations do result from accidents of life : death of a spouse , divorce , etcetera . But I cannot accept as an alternative model elective single-parenthood - often involving women - or that the sort of life someone chooses should require society to reorganise itself as a consequence .
Mr President , Mrs García Arias , I am very pleased to approve your report , but in discussions on family policy we almost always make the mistake of discussing the rights of mothers and even the rights of fathers , but not the rights of children .
I believe that children brought up by single mothers have exactly the same right as children who have two parents - and they must have this right - to be brought up , looked after and cared for by their mother .
What I find lacking in this report , therefore , is any reference to the fact that single mothers must have the right to stay at home with their small children if they wish to do so . They should have just the same rights as mothers who are in a happy marriage and have no financial worries .
I am very proud of the fact that Austria offers single mothers a real choice .
Married mothers in Austria receive a maternity allowance for 18 months of ATS 5 700 , the equivalent of over BEF 17 000 .
Single mothers receive approximately BEF 24 600 per month .
I would recommend that all Member States do the same .
However , the current report also shows , Mrs García Arias , that single mothers are often unemployed , poorly educated or perhaps are not even entitled to maternity allowance because they may not have worked .
I would like to point to the example of the current Presidency on family policy .
We in Austria are currently trying to introduce maternity allowance entitlement for all mothers , including students , farming women , entrepreneurs and women who are too poorly educated or too young to have worked .
These women should also receive the necessary financial support , should also have the right to stay at home with their young children , as do prosperous women who are happily married .
I call upon all Member States to stop talking big and , instead , to follow suit .
Mr President , I am delightedly to have the opportunity to speak on this subject at this particular time . The election campaign in Sweden is on its final lap ; the country goes to the polls on Sunday .
And , lo and behold , people are belatedly waking up to the fact that single mothers have a vote !
First of all though , let me say how much I appreciate this report .
I particularly like the emphasis on preventing single mothers from becoming Aunt Sallies in these days of savings and cutbacks . The rapporteur rightly calls for policies based on a spirit of solidarity rather than recrimination .
My time is short , so I have chosen to concentrate on one issue only : childcare . Admittedly a much discussed topic , but I hope to broach it from a slightly new angle .
When we talk about combating unemployment , there is a tendency to focus on investment in infrastructure .
We build railways , roads , bridges and airports : big , capital-intensive projects , funded by the taxpayer and involving more machines than human beings .
Meanwhile , putting money into health and welfare is seen as burdensome .
How misguided we are !
Each pound spent from the public purse has a veritable multiplier effect .
People are free to work ; job opportunities are created ; parents and children find their social horizons widened ; better parenting skills across the board enhance society as a whole .
I very much regret not having more speaking time , Mr President .
I should like to thank all those who have contributed to this debate .
European society is changing and the interest in the situation of families and its implications for employment and social policy has been expressed in different forums .
There appears to be a growing conviction of the need for increased international cooperation on family issues as part of the global effort to advance social progress and development .
Although the Community has no direct competence in the area of family policy , it has increasingly turned its attention to social and economic trends in society as they affect families .
Member States have different ways of looking at the role of the state in economic and social life , the family 's place in society and its rights and duties , the roles of men and women in the family and children 's rights .
I thank Mrs García Arias very much for her report on all these matters .
The family is and always has been of essential value for European citizens , although its form varies and is changing .
New models are developing .
Single parent families represent one form and raise the entire range of equal opportunities issues .
The report makes clear something that we all know : that the vast majority of single parents are women .
Community policy on equal treatment for women and men does not contain a specific component for single parents but it has a crucial impact on their situation , especially with regard to the reconciliation of work and family life , a challenge central to the whole range of social issues .
Changes in the composition of the labour force , new forms of work organisation , the restructuring of social protection , changes in the distribution of caring work between women and men , all have a very important bearing on the lives of single parent families and , in particular , single mothers .
The Maternity Directive , the Parental Leave Directive and the Part-Time Work Directive are all good examples of the European Union 's commitment to supporting both women and men in their role as parents .
The recommendation on child care , suggests that action should be taken to provide child care for parents in employment or training , to make the workplace more responsive to the needs of workers with children and to involve men more as carers .
We paid particular attention to that when ministers and interested groups came together , particularly in Belfast and then in Innsbrück .
The 1998 employment guidelines are important here because they give a very important impetus to the objective of reconciling work and family life which should benefit all parents .
A further important aspect of the lives of single parents , also dealt with in your report , Mrs García Arias , is the fact that twice as many single parent families fall into poverty and social exclusion as two-parent families .
This is a very disturbing statistic which has also been referred to by other speakers .
Thus I would see them as one of the groups who will be very much in our minds as we prepare to take action against exclusion .
I intend to be doing something positive about that when the Treaty is ratified under the new Article 137 .
That will happen as soon as we have the ratification process cleared .
I am happy to report that our plans took a very important step forward just yesterday .
I was able to secure the agreement of my colleagues in the college to a relaunch of spending under three of the 1998 budget lines which had been blocked following the Court 's judgment in May , so that we can have preparatory actions leading to programmes under Article 137 later on when the ratification process is complete .
But I would like to start doing something in preparation this year .
I hope that in 1999 we can use our new Treaty powers to put the fight against exclusion where it deserves to be - right at the heart of Community policy .
Interestingly enough the Treaty has given us the authority to do that without fear of being challenged later on , which can only be to the benefit of lone parents .
The social and political situation has undergone profound changes in the past decade or so .
New family patterns , new concepts of the role of men and women have emerged .
The European Union has an important role to play in identifying the similarities and the differences in the way the Member States react to these changes .
We can also stimulate Union-wide debate on the family by encouraging the Member States to share information and pool their experiences whilst at the same time respecting the principle of subsidiarity .
Poverty is the real threat here .
Good child care , as Mrs Gröner says , is absolutely essential and is being highlighted now as a key issue for attention by the Member States .
They are all committed to it .
Let us put them to the test now .
Finally , Mrs Larive summarised what we have to do when she said that we should give mainstreaming a chance .
That will be the focus of the 1999 guidelines : to give mainstreaming a real chance by utilising the European employment strategy to the full , making the funds more receptive to that concept and using the Treaty support .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 9 a.m.
Fisheries monitoring
The next item is the report ( A4-0277 / 98 ) by Mr Provan , on behalf of the Committee on Fisheries , on the communication from the Commission to the Council and the European Parliament on fisheries monitoring under the common fisheries policy ( COM ( 98 ) 0092 - C4-0134 / 98 ) .
Mr President , first of all I welcome this report we are discussing from the Commission .
It is helpful in the debate we are always involved with in the European Parliament 's Fisheries Committee .
I had a telephone call from Commissioner Bonino this afternoon apologising for not being able to be here .
She has a number of portfolios to deal with , and I quite understand the difficulty she found herself in with having to be recalled to Brussels .
We have no complaints about that and we welcome you , Commissioner Flynn , instead .
This report will be followed by Mr Teverson 's report , implementing some of the ideas that we in Parliament want to discuss regarding fishing control .
We believe , as the Parliament , that we are at the forefront of driving the Commission forward in trying to achieve better control of the Common Fisheries Policy .
We recognise that control needs industry support , and that , at present , we do not have that support from the fishermen themselves .
They see control as excessive and bureaucratic and they do not really accept it .
We therefore believe that extraordinary measures are required and we find it amazing that the Commission does not have the power of direct on-line and instant access to databases within the Member States regarding fisheries policy .
This must be put right .
We do not believe the data should be generally available inter-Member State but that the Commission certainly should have access to those files and those bits of information which are necessary if we are to have proper implementation of control of the Common Fisheries Policy .
Common penalties for common offences are another thing Parliament feels strongly about .
I hope the Commission can start taking some action to ensure that the jurisdiction of the individual member courts are coordinated to such an extent that we get common practice for common offences .
The main problem with control mechanisms within European Community waters is driven by the fact that we have excess fishing capacity in our fleets .
This creates pressure on fish stocks and is an incentive for fishermen to break the rules .
That cannot be a good thing .
That is the main problem we have to combat .
The Commission argues quite correctly that effective monitoring is only part of the overall picture and that the excess capacity in the Community fleets results in the problem I have just described .
There are a number of failures in the present situation which the Commission recognises and which we recognise in Parliament .
We do not have real common standards within the individual Member States so that we know what is what .
For instance , no standardised measurement of engine power , no common definition of what constitutes a proper inspection at sea or what are fraudulent trans-shipments of catches and how they should be monitored , no common definition of what constitutes proper inspection in port .
We have inequalities in the checking system between Member States , and that does not bring respect to the Common Fisheries Policy .
We have inadequate controls to enforce and recognise the proper landing of fish once it is caught at sea and following it through to the marketplace and therefore to the consumer .
We have a wide divergence of penalties in the individual Member States .
What has the Commission done to enforce control mechanisms within the Member States - what has it done where a Member State does not comply with the existing regulations ?
I am not aware - and the Fisheries Committee is not aware - of how the Commission is actually trying to enforce the regulation that we currently have .
If we could start getting some answers to those questions , we can actually achieve something together .

Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to thank Mr Provan for his comprehensive report on fisheries monitoring under the Common Fisheries Policy .
In my opinion , and in the opinion of our group , it is a very good report .
It is a pity , therefore , that we are discussing it before an almost empty House .
I am sure that today will not be the last time we will discuss the problems which arise concerning effective monitoring of the Common Fisheries Policy .
The importance of comprehensive controls can be seen in the communication of the Commission .
Those who have read it carefully will recognise how great the difficulties actually are , particularly in the critical areas .
One weakness of the monitoring system lies in the fact that not all Member States apply it in the same way .
This is not only our point of view ; in this , we agree fully with the rapporteur .
Direct responsibility for monitoring lies with the Member States , while the problems arise at Community level .
The Commission assessment shows clearly the main source of the problems .
There is no doubt that the Commission plays an important role in coordination at Community level .
In our opinion , its powers should not only extend to supervising national monitoring and to guaranteeing transparency and fairness , but should also require Member States to impose penalties for similar infringements .
Factors which are important in ensuring the effectiveness and acceptance of the monitoring system include : involvement of fishermen 's associations , access to national data in suspicious cases , effective networking of monitoring agencies in the various Member States , and , in particular , equal treatment .
A particularly explosive issue is the monitoring of third country vessels .
There are also specific problems in this area .
We know that the monitoring that takes place is not watertight and will not be so in future .
The current system could be improved if instruments currently available were used effectively and improved .
We are very much in support of the rapporteur 's demands but see a great need for further action , despite the considerable progress already made .
Mr President , today 's fisheries debate is the first we have had in the House without our friend Allan Macartney .
We extend our deepest sympathy to his family .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , my congratulations to you , Mr Provan , on your excellent report .
It is analytical , critical and positive .
Our main problem in fisheries policy is the inefficient management of fish as a resource .
Despite all our efforts over the years , we have not succeeded in striking a sustainable balance between resource and allowable catch .
With some exceptions , practically all types of fish are subject to overfishing .
We have identified excess capacity in fishing fleets as the greatest obstacle to proper management of our waters .
We will have to wait and see whether MAP IV , the last multiannual guidance programme for the period 1997-2000 , has solved this problem .
In the meantime , we must use other methods .
The European Community 's control policy , for which Member States still have primary responsibility , plays a crucial role in the management of our waters , and for a long time this was the focus of our criticism .
In its report the European Commission identified existing weaknesses .
For example , there are problems in standardising the measurement of engine power between the Member States .
There is wide divergence between Member States in the way in which inspections at sea are implemented .
Member States do not comply with requirements concerning registration of landings .
The list is very much longer and would require more than the three minutes I have available , but what it boils down to is that we sometimes have the impression that the Member States do not comply with the requirements of a strict and consistent control policy .
From our delegation visits on the ground and from talks with the fishermen concerned in the Committee on Fisheries , we know that the fishermen feel they are treated extremely unfairly because they are treated differently from each other .
This is not a good basis .
We have always been of the opinion that a good control policy can exist only with the help of the producer , and Mr Provan emphasises this in his report .
I therefore support the proposals in the report to allow greater involvement of the fishing industry and producer organisations in control policy .
The report includes positive elements and also calls for the use of positive experiences from the past , for example experience which international fishing organisations such as NAFO recently had with controls .
In addition , the report provides further constructive ideas for an even more effective monitoring of the fisheries policy .
I would therefore ask you , on behalf of the Group of the European People 's Party , to approve this inspired report .
Mr President , I also wish to congratulate Mr Provan on his very important report .
The common fisheries policy is one of the few common policies we have in the European Union and so the European Parliament , the Commission and the Council of Ministers have a very important role in terms of legislation .
It seems to me that the requirements for good legislation are that we can measure what needs to be measured ( which is not often the case ) , that the law should be applied equally throughout the Union ( which it is not in the common fisheries policy ) , that there is the same chance of contraventions being identified wherever they occur and that the penalties for contravention are roughly the same throughout the Union .
That does not occur in the common fisheries policy and this document and the legislation that I hope will follow are all about making that happen .
At the beginning of the year the British presidency stressed that things have to change .
The Commission document is slightly less strong but still says ' yes , let us make things better ' .
In a couple of months we will be moving to the Commission proposal which is even slightly weaker .
I call upon the Council of Ministers - who , of course , are not here - and also the Commission to remain strong and determined and tackle the problem .
There are two key areas : the first is equal enforcement right through the supply chain to the market .
Secondly we must make sure that our own inspectors have real powers equivalent to those of national inspectors and can enforce the uniformity that we all want .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , in my opinion , measures to monitor the application of fisheries policy will only have tangible effects in ensuring the exercise of responsible fishing which duly respects stocks if they are incorporated in a much broader series of practical measures for the sector .
Monitoring alone will not suffice .
All the interested parties must participate in the discussion , dissemination and implementation of monitoring measures .
In addition to policing compliance , the stability of the sector must be guaranteed by introducing social and financial measures to compensate for the reduction in fishing , the current status quo must be maintained regarding access to stocks and greater transparency and fairness must be introduced into the system as regards landing , import , first point of sale , transportation and marketing of fish .
In this connection , and to demonstrate that a global rather than an isolated approach to monitoring is essential , I would point out that a highly regrettable incident occurred two days ago in my home town in Portugal , which culminated in the destruction of a Spanish fish lorry .
In my view , what happened can only be explained - of course , it cannot be justified - by the mistrust that exists regarding the effectiveness and transparency of monitoring measures .
Because , not only are incomes declining , but there is growing suspicion about where fish really comes from ; people do not understand , for example , nor do they readily accept that it is legal to catch 12 cm horse mackerel in the Mediterranean , but not in the Atlantic where they must measure 15 cm .
Therefore , the outrage of the Portuguese fishermen was triggered by mistrust .
If the controls between landing and the point of sale were reliable and efficient , if the minimum size of fish were harmonised , such mistrust would not exist and this highly regrettable incident would not have occurred .
We must therefore give further consideration to monitoring measures , with a view to making them transparent , effective and fair , without forgetting that we must simultaneously implement other practical measures to guarantee the stability of the sector and the income of those who work in it .
Mr President , we should not forget that the problem of the fishing industry worldwide is overfishing and overcapacity .
I remind you of Patricia McKenna 's report last year which concluded : ' Fishermen are forced to cheat in order to meet their financial obligations . ' Mr Provan said it in more diplomatic language by talking of incentives for fishermen to break the rules .
The concept of inspection has been rightly mentioned .
There is unequal implementation by Member States , inadequate controls of proper landing , and grossly unequal , I would say iniquitous , sanctions for breaking the rules .
Therefore , consequently , effective surveillance and control is one of the fundamental pillars of the CFP .
Both the annual report and control have shown there are many changes which need to be made before control is adequate .
We welcome in particular the Commission 's discussion paper which is the subject of Mr Provan 's report .
It clearly points out the ways in which control has improved over the past several years and also note the milliard failures .
We broadly support what the Commission says in this paper , as well as the specific proposals for amending the control regulation which it has put forward recently .
We will support the Provan report .
We further agree with Mr Provan that effective control will continue to be problematic as long as there is such an excess of capacity in the EU fleets for boats are built to go fishing and not to sit at the dockside .
However , this discussion has tended to focus too much on control in EU waters , with insufficient attention paid to control of EU activities in international waters and in the waters of third countries .
For instance we should exert fully and consistently our flagstate responsibility .
The FAO code of conduct for responsible fishing requires states authorising fishing and fishing support vessels to fly their flags to exercise effective control over those vessels so as to ensure the proper application of this code .
We should also help coastal states to exert their rights of control .
We should not just give them money and paper but give them real capacities .
Mr President , as the rapporteur rightly points out , the European Parliament has for a long time stressed that the effectiveness of the common fisheries policy depended to a large extent on improved monitoring .
However , I would point out that the best form of monitoring is a system that is reliable , fair and inexpensive , and one that entails only minimum additional constraints for fishermen , since the constraints with which they are currently burdened are already extremely heavy .
In the comments he makes at the end of his explanatory statement , the rapporteur makes another relevant observation that in its communication , the Commission forgets what is perhaps the key point .
For a monitoring policy to function , it must win and maintain the support of fishermen .
They must be convinced of the validity of the monitoring measures that apply to them and that these measures are implemented fairly and justly .
In the report I presented , on behalf of the Committee on Fisheries , on satellite monitoring , I stressed how such monitoring was needed , how reliable it was and the improvements it would bring , but I also pointed out that fishermen needed to be given genuine guarantees that such monitoring would be applied fairly if they were to be convinced of its relevance .
It is also important to involve the fishermen as much as possible in the drawing up and definition of monitoring measures , which , as far as possible , should not just be thrust upon them .
The first amendment I tabled to this report with my colleague , James Nicholson , is aimed at underlining the importance of ensuring that monitoring is fair .
Many fishermen in the Member States are regularly forced to fish in the same waters , drawing from the same resources .
The fishermen of one Member State must not be allowed to have any doubts or suspicions as to the effectiveness of checks carried out on fishermen belonging to another Member State ; if this happens , uncertainty feeds fears which are not always well-founded .
It is therefore essential to perfect the monitoring arrangements , but I do not believe , unlike the rapporteur , that in order to do this we need to recruit an army of Community monitors .
I think that the Member States should continue to carry out the checks and that the strengthening of Community monitoring must relate to the actual system of national controls and the methods used .
It is essential to fine tune and harmonise the monitoring arrangements .
Some fishing grounds are actually overmonitored , whilst others certainly are not .
Some essential readjustments must be made .
That is the reason for the second amendment that I tabled to a report that is , in general , satisfactory .
Mr President , I welcome the Commission 's document .
As a representative of Irish fishermen I have no difficulty with it at all .
I thank Mr Provan for his report , which is a fair representation of the almost unanimous opinion of the Fisheries Committee .
Regarding the problems he raises such as the different standards of horse power , I have heard complaints by our own fishermen .
This leads to serious misunderstanding and mistrust .
The necessity to follow up the catch into the marketplace to make sure that we know exactly where the fish that are marketed in a given market are coming from is extremely important .
That is good for the market , good for prices and will lead to a more orderly situation in which prices will be easier to maintain .
We know about the problem of black-market fish and what they can do to a market situation at a given time .
The big difficulty is , as always , the trust of the fishermen .
I imagine it is the same in Scotland as it is on the west coast of Ireland - a serious mistrust exists .
That mistrust is to some degree - and maybe unintentionally - fostered by the national authorities and departments who represent the Commission as the oppressive force which is responsible for all the regulation .
They do not own up to the fact that it is mainly unanimous agreements in the Council of Ministers that lead to the making of the regulations that the Commission tries to supervise and enforce .
Often that is not made very clear .
Very often when there is bad news and restrictions it comes from the Commission .
But when you have a situation like we had in Ireland recently where a ECU 60 million package is announced for the development of the white fish fleet we have national ministers in the limelight , not people from the Commission or Parliament who provide the money and design the plans .
That is part of the problem that exists .
Finally , since we would like to have a sort of regionalisation , a 30-mile limit would be immensely helpful to employ the goodwill of fishermen in the business of reorganising .
Mr President , I should like to say that my colleague Emma Bonino sends her apologies .
She would like to have been here .
I am pleased to take the report .
I have a personal interest and I know just a little about it coming as I do from the fishing coast on the west of Ireland .
The Commission welcomes Mr Provan 's positive response to our communication .
With regard to fishing monitoring , the Commission 's main concern is to avoid any new amendments to the existing regulations which might not be strictly necessary and would not fit in well with the overall strategy .
A strategy for improving fisheries monitoring firstly requires strong political will and then adequate human and material resources .
It requires an efficient organization and increased awareness on all sides as to what is at stake .
The Commission 's objective was , therefore , to carry out a detailed examination that went beyond the limits of the annual monitoring reports , which do not allow us to take a step back and take a good hard look at things .
That is the aim of the communication we are discussing here today .
The Commission would therefore like firstly to highlight the significant progress that has been made .
The implementation of recent decisions , notably in the use of satellites would speed up that progress quite a lot .
However , if we look at the implementation of the different parts of the common fisheries policy , from the fleet monitoring which is mentioned , to the markets , which were also mentioned , it all shows that some major improvements are still needed in various areas .
It will not be enough simply to implement what has already been decided on .
So technical details aside , two main problems are emerging .
They have been referred to but it is as well that I should mention them .
They are : a lack of transparency between the Member States , and a lack of cooperation often within the individual Member States themselves .
With these thoughts in mind the Commission has already proposed two documents to try to bring together and shape up an overall strategy and policy .
The proposal for an amendment of the regulation establishing a control system and , secondly , the action plan to improve application of the common fisheries policy cover the main points that have been mentioned in this communication .
The Commission is extremely appreciative of the positive reception that Parliament has given to the communication . We take note of the new suggestions that have emerged during the course of the debate and they help give us a key to a constructive form of support .
I noticed what Mr Provan said about action against the Member States .
We need legally unassailable evidence here and we lack good powers to get it .
The powers of inspection are poor , and the Commission 's work will be much more effective if , in addition to their recognized right to dispense with giving advance notice , Community inspectors could gather information more freely with a view to establishing any shortcomings in the national control systems .
That would greatly advance the situation .
Secondly , you make the point of access to information and to the databases .
In the proposal which has followed on from this present one , we are taking that on board and I think it would be very useful .
I feel Mr Teversen has a very good handle on this in that we are not acting in an even-handed way across all the parameters .
That is where the problem arises .
Personally , I very much like the whole question about following the chain of events right to the market .
That is not done well .
Mr McCartin also mentioned that point .
That would be a good way of checking back in the whole system .
We would like to think we could do something about that .
Finally , there are some initiatives over and above this which have been considered .
We should take full account of the great potential available with the use of new technologies .
Data processing and satellites are not yet fully utilised .
Something could be done there .
Perhaps we might consider finance of research in that area and some studies .
In the future fifth programme we could put controls in as a bigger priority .
I would like to see that happen .
Finally , there is the possibility of having an international conference on this next year and that could lead on to a lot of good conclusions and recommendations that would fill out the strategy for what everybody seeks , namely creating the level playing field that Mr Teversen refers to .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 9 a.m.
( The sitting was closed at 8.45 p.m. )
Approval of the Minutes
The Minutes of yesterday 's sitting have been distributed .
Are there any comments ?
Madam President , in yesterday 's Minutes I am not registered as having been present .
Please could that be corrected , because I was here all day .
You did indeed chair the sitting .
I think we can all testify to that .
Are there any other comments ?
Madam President , I should like to congratulate the House on the completely unfathomable decision it took yesterday evening on the Scarbonchi report to increase the number of jobs by 12 million from 1995 to 1996 .
I am now curious to see whether the European Parliament decides to put the millennium back a year .
Madam President , a photograph was taken in this House yesterday .
I do not wish to make an issue of this , but could we have an assurance that the photograph will not be used for any public purpose and , if it is , could the Bureau make certain not only that it does not happen again but also that the Member is punished because he has given an assurance to this House that the photograph was only for personal use .
Our colleague told us yesterday that it was a private photograph .
Madam President , in the light of that , could we also have an assurance that no private telephone calls made from mobile telephones in this Chamber will be used for any purpose like that either ?
I have taken note of your suggestions .
Mr Kerr wishes to speak on the Minutes .
Madam President , you will notice from yesterday 's Minutes that I spoke six times on behalf of the Green Group on six different reports .
I asked whether this was a record .
Have the services had time to count yet ?
It is very good of you to help us with something that is not always done automatically .
( The Minutes were approved )
VOTES
The rapporteur has informed me that the words ' such as the United Kingdom ' have been mistakenly included in recital F and should be deleted .
Madam President , I am a member of the Committee on Women 's Rights and coordinator of the Greens .
It is my recollection that this alteration was not made at the meeting .
I would request that it is not removed from the report and that we take the report with the words ' the United Kingdom ' and ' the United States ' in it .
This is an attempt by my New Labour colleagues to save the British Government embarrassment .
We should leave the report as it is and vote on it as it is .
If not , I will request that full tapes of the committee proeedings are heard and I will prove that this amendment was not made at the committee .
I suggest we leave the report as it is and vote on it as it is .
What is the rapporteur 's opinion ?
Madam President , I am extremely surprised at Mr Kerr 's reaction because he should clearly recall the day when we agreed , and subsequently voted , in the committee to remove references to countries .
The text of the original proposal , not only of these two paragraphs but also of other paragraphs , had been agreed , but the agreement to which I referred was reached in the committee and should have been included in the minutes .
This is why I call on Mr Kerr to think back to the day of the vote .
I remember it perfectly well , Madam President .
So recital F and paragraph 12 should be corrected to show that we are criticising ' models ' and not ' the model ' and as a consequence the reference to the United States should be removed .
Thank you , Mrs García Arias .
This deletion therefore has nothing to do with the United Kingdom , Mr Kerr , since no references to any countries are being made .
Madam President , I suggest the best way to deal with this is to treat it as an oral amendment from the rapporteur .
If the House accepts the oral amendment it can be voted on in that way .
If twelve Members object it is not accepted .
No , that suggestion is not appropriate .
As the rapporteur has explained , the committee found a clear solution which is in accordance with what has been said here , and no further amendments can be accepted .
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
It seems that in order to respond better to the real needs of our societies , we need to clarify certain concepts , such as that of the single-parent family : are we talking about a widow or widower responsible for children , a divorced man or woman with children , a single mother with a child or children ... ?
Whether it is the result of the hardships of life or of a woman 's personal choice , being a single parent family is always difficult to cope with , both from a financial point of view and for the children 's education , as the rapporteur points out several times .
This is why I do not understand why our amendments have been rejected , when they are acting in the financial and moral interests of children in calling for a policy to prevent single parent families as much as possible , by educating people to be responsible .
Indeed , thirty years on from 1968 , the disastrous consequences of ' sexual liberation ' are becoming ever clearer .
Provan report ( A4-0277 / 98 )
I congratulate Mr Provan on an excellent report which reflects the commonly held view that fisheries monitoring must be improved if we are to conserve fishing stocks and provide a livelihood for future generations of fishermen .
In this report , Mr Provan has underlined an important point of strategy which too often seems to be lacking from Commission thinking , that point being the need to get the fishermen themselves on side .
In doing so we will be making the fishermen equal partners in the monitoring process rather than what can sometimes seem to be the subject of a spying operation .
Fisheries monitoring will only become fully successful once the fishermen themselves can feel fully confident in the process .
I have to say that it is difficult to deal in one 's mind with this subject without also giving thought to the political direction of EU fisheries policy .
Those of us who represent areas in which the fisheries industry has suffered from decision making at political level cannot help but wonder whether clever monitoring cannot make up for the damage caused by opening our fishing waters to all and sundry .
Having said that I certainly welcome the proposals to tighten monitoring of third country vessels operating in EU waters .
This is a useful report which gives further substance to Parliament 's continued insistence that the Commission does more to address weaknesses in the CFP .
I hope that we are seeing the beginning of a Commission attitude of listening to Parliament in this subject .
This report contains many good ideas and suggestions .
Yet I would like to see a more critical stance taken on the EU 's fisheries policy as such .
It is , after all , this policy that has led to the exhaustion of fish stocks in the waters off the coast of Africa , a state of affairs that cannot be remedied by improved monitoring , but only by a different set of policies .
EC-Madagascar fishing agreement
The next item is the report ( A4-0282 / 98 ) by Mr Gallagher , on behalf of the Committee on Fisheries , on the proposal for a Council Regulation on the conclusion of a Protociol setting out the fishing opportunities and financial contribution provided for in the agreement between the European Community and the Republic of Madagascar on fishing off Madagascar for the period from 21 May 1998 to 20 May 2001 ( COM ( 98 ) 0390 - C4-0456 / 98-98 / 0217 ( CNS ) ) .
Madam President , at the outset I wish to say how extremely grateful I am to all those who have assisted me in the preparation of my report and , in particular , the secretariat of the committee , the members of the Committee on Fisheries who actively participated in the debates in committee , the personnel from the Commission and , of course , those who prepared the opinions on behalf of the Committee on Budgets and the Committee on Development and Cooperation .
This report is based on the Commission 's proposal to renew the protocol attached to the fisheries agreement between the EU and the Republic of Madagascar for the three-year period from May 1998 to May 2001 .
The first protocol with Madagascar was concluded in 1986 and this protocol is the fifth .
It deals exclusively with tuna and it will involve 45 freezer vessels and 30 longliners .
The authorised catch will be 9 500 tonnes .
The overall cost of the agreement to the Community will be ECU 2.28 over a three-year period .
The financial compensation will be ECU 912 000 , which is 40 % of the overall cost .
The remainder will be used to finance measures to aid the Malagasy fishery sector by funding scientific research programmes and monitoring programmes such as inspection and surveillance operations .
It is vitally important that funding is provided to assist in the development of small-scale coastal fisheries .
This will also involve training grants to assist the fishermen in the coastal states of Madagascar .
It is important to note that , for the first time ever , the funding is linked to a legal obligation on the part of the Malagasy authorities .
They must provide a detailed annual report to the Commission on the funds allocated to the scientific programmes , the monitoring programmes and technical assistance .
The payment of the funds is tied to the implementation of these measures , which is a welcome development .
Additional information may be requested by the Commission and payments may be blocked by the Union if it is not satisfied with the further information .
This is very much in line with Parliament 's thinking and will also ensure total transparency , which is absolutely essential .
To ensure that the Malagasy authorities and the people of Madagascar benefit from this , Community vessels must obtain the services and supplies they need from the Malagasy authorities .
This protocol provides that the agreement may be extended to other fishery activities .
These are not specified , but there is a very clear reference to shrimp , which have considerable economic value and are at the moment governed by private agreements .
This international fisheries agreement provides some of the Union 's vessels with opportunities to explore for fish outside the Union zone , giving our vessels a right to fish stocks in third-country waters and alleviating the pressure on many of our stocks within the Union .
The opportunity to fish in third-country exclusion zones should not be confined to the vessels of only some Member States .
It should be open to vessels from any Member State which are capable of steaming long distances and fishing the stocks concerned .
Countries without traditional rights must have the same opportunities and should not be prevented from exploring the fishing grounds for tuna and migratory species that move in the waters off several coastal states between March and June each year .
Only a cooperative regional management system will ensure proper conservation .
I do not have to remind this House of the importance of conserving renewable resources .
We are the custodians and we must ensure those resources are available to future generations .
Indeed , those who understand this most are our fishermen who want to ensure that stocks are there for their generation and future generations .
In conclusion , I have tabled a number of amendments .
This is in line with Parliament 's thinking , calling for detailed , coherent information to be supplied to Parliament .
I commend the report to the House and ask the House to give serious consideration to my amendments , which I believe , will make it a better report .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , on behalf of the Committee on Budgets I should like to congratulate Mr Gallagher on his report , and I should also - which is not often the case - like to congratulate the Commission .
It is always good to see civil servants who are willing to learn , and with Madagascar the Commission has for the first time succeeded in concluding negotiations two months before the protocol expires instead of at the eleventh hour .
Of course , it would have been nice if they had been concluded 4-6 months in advance to allow time for the entire legislative process to be completed , but two months is a step in the right direction , certainly as far as the code of conduct is concerned .
However , we would have preferred to avoid having to apply the protocol provisionally , since we would then have avoided a situation where we are once again simply rubber stamping what has already been decided , which , as we all know , considerably limits our rights as part of the budget authority .
One further point .
We in the Committee on Budgets naturally have a different view on the matter of classification .
We continue to regard the expenditure on international fishing agreements as non-compulsory , even if some of our colleagues in the Committee on Fisheries think otherwise .
I just wanted to make this clear .
It also applies to the agreement with Gabon , of course , but we are to debate this later .
We will certainly not be able to clear up this dispute later in the legislative process , so it is really a question of waiting for the next Interinstitutional Agreement .

Madam President , I would firstly like to congratulate rapporteurs Mr Gallagher and Mr Girão Pereira who presented their reports to the House this morning , for the excellent work they have done on the fisheries agreements with the Republic of Madagascar and the Gabonese Republic .
I should like to point out that both agreements provide for the continuation of the European Union 's Common Fisheries Policy as regards international fishing agreements , and they help to consolidate these agreements as one of the fundamental pillars of the Common Fisheries Policy which , as was pointed out in the Crampton own-initiative report , continues to be a fundamental condition for attempting to reduce the European Union 's trade deficit as well as both directly and indirectly safeguarding jobs in fishing and in the Community fisheries sector . This is something that chiefly affects peripheral regions that are both economically backward and heavily dependent on the fishing industry .
As regards Mr Girão Pereira 's report , I wanted to mention that the fisheries agreement with the Republic of Gabon is a new agreement that exclusively applies to tuna fishing over a five-year period and which will mean the funding of 9 000 negotiated tonnes .
But it should also be pointed out that , for the first time , the financial contributions that shipowners have to make are being increased - which is quite incomprehensible and worrying - from ECU 20 to ECU 25 per tonne and , as a consequence , Community contributions are being reduced from ECU 80 to ECU 75 per tonne .
I do not see how this can be justified and if it were , I think that such an increase should always be accompanied by a similar increase in both the fishing opportunities and the participation of the vessel owners in negotiations , in view of their larger contribution .
On the Gallagher report on the conclusion of a new Protocol on relations with the Republic of Madagascar , attention must be drawn to the fact that this is also a new agreement that exclusively applies to tuna fishing , in which the number of tuna seiners remains the same and the number of surface longliners has been increased along with the size of the annual catch from 9 000 tonnes to 9 500 tonnes .
The total cost of the agreement has slightly increased , but it is worth noting that , unlike the observations we made in relation to the Gabon agreement , the Commission has kept the same level of contributions for vessel owners that have been applied in agreements of this type up to now .
This means that vessel owners will contribute ECU 20 to the cost of each tonne and the Commission will contribute ECU 80 per tonne .
Lastly , I would like to say that the amendments to Mr Gallagher 's report approved by the Committee on Fisheries were very positive , particularly because they call for the Commission to submit a general assessment report to Parliament in the final year of the Protocol , on the application of the agreement and on the progress of negotiations with a view to its possible renewal .
On the basis of this report , Parliament can then adopt recommendations to be taken into account before the negotiations are concluded .
Despite improvements in interinstitutional communication since the previous Protocol , thanks to the implementation of the Interinstitutional Agreement on improving the provision of information to the budget authority on the 1996 fisheries agreements , much more needs to be done .
Mr Gallagher 's report sets out new ways of collaborating which would strengthen the European Parliament 's contribution and potentially lead to substantial improvements in the procedure for applying and implementing international fisheries agreements .
Madam President , when the House discussed the last fisheries agreement with Madagascar more than two years ago , the European Parliament heavily criticised both the content and the procedure because we had not been given any chance to have our say .
The rapporteur called for the agreement to be rejected , but the majority in the House did not agree with him .
Mr Baldarelli , on behalf of the socialists , said that this was the last agreement that they would approve .
They have supported every single agreement since then .
What is actually happening in practice ?
If we compare the two agreements we can see that there is still no appropriate regional management structure , that there are still no effective control measures and that Parliament is still only being consulted .
We welcome the fact that the zone where fishing is permitted has finally been extended from two to twelve miles , and high time too , since this was included in many other agreements long ago .
As this is yet another agreement which mainly concerns tuna fishing , we need to focus attention on the fact that the use of a particular type of net - bag nets - presents a considerable problem with by-catch , though not in this case dolphins , which are not found in the area .
A very recent study by French scientists has shown that many other species are caught , such as bream , mackerel and skipjack , to name but a few .
There is also the problem of very young tuna being caught far too early .
As a number of these species are also caught by non-industrial vessels , this means that our fishing concerns have a considerable impact on the livelihoods of local fishermen .
It is also noticeable that whereas most of the other tuna agreements require two local fishermen to be employed on each vessel , this agreement provides for only two for the entire fleet .
So in our view the whole question of controls needs to be tightened up .
We therefore support the liberal amendment which is heading in the right direction in calling for the vessel owners to be more involved .
Madam President , the debate we are having today on two European Union fishing agreements , one with Madagascar , the other with Gabon , is concerned , exclusively in the case of Gabon , and mainly in the case of Madagascar , with tuna-fishing agreements .
This discussion comes two days after the meeting of the intergroup on conservation and sustainable development which highlighted the beneficial effects of our fishing agreements both for the European-ACP tuna network and for the signatory developing countries , especially those which have ports used by licensed vessels .
This is particularly the case with Diego-Suarez in Madagascar where , as in Abidjan , Dakar , Mahé , Ghana and Mauritius , the fishing agreements have made it possible to set up major industrial activities on the ground and to create a significant number of jobs .
The tropical tuna network in the ACP countries of landing has therefore come to play a central role in local economic development .
The smooth functioning of this whole economy depends on the fishing agreements section of the Common Fisheries Policy and the tariff provisions of the Lomé Convention , which allow duty-free imports of tinned tuna produced in ACP countries into the Community .
The development of this tuna network in the Indian and Atlantic oceans also depends on the moderate fishing of deep sea resources , which are particularly abundant and are closely scientifically monitored , notably by France 's Orstom and Spain 's IEO .
This type of fishing is therefore not going to compete with the food-producing activities of local small-scale fisherman , who can continue to use their driftnets freely and legitimately .
The European-ACP tuna network is one of the great successes both of our fisheries policy and of our cooperation policy .
Everyone in the industry and all the contracting national authorities are pleased with the way these agreements have worked and have asked that the current economic balance of the tuna network should not be upset or weakened in the new Lomé Convention .
They quite rightly want to see special rules introduced during the transitional period for the new convention , to maintain the preferential Lomé market for processed tuna , especially with regard to the GSP , as this is what has allowed our network to develop in competition with the Asian giants of Thailand , the Philippines and Indonesia , which is Asia 's main tuna producer .
Parliament will therefore have to keep a close eye on things here , and on the Commission 's tendency to agree to exemptions willy-nilly without thinking about the consequences for the fishing sector : GSP is addictive , and annual quotas and trade agreements with various regions such as Mercosur are in danger of creating direct competition that our ACP partners in the Lomé Convention cannot withstand .
We need to prevent such initiatives from destroying what we have achieved through the CFP and the Lomé agreements .
It is essential that we carry out detailed studies of the impact on both the interests of the European economy and those of the Lomé signatory countries before each of these negotiations , especially for the fisheries sector .
Finally , like the rapporteurs I too am extremely interested in the provisions of the new agreements with Madagascar and Gabon on monitoring , training and scientific studies , which account for 60 % of the total financial compensation and are increasing .
I also think it is a very positive step that a section for the development of small-scale fishing has appeared for the first time in a fishing agreement .
All in all , Madam President , these are two excellent reports which should be approved by the House .
Madam President , I should like to thank Mr Gallagher for his report .
He certainly gives a lot of very detailed information which enables us to evaluate the situation .
It is normally argued that these fisheries agreements are a favour to a particular region of the Community .
I agree with Mr Gallagher that it is mainly the Spanish , French and Portuguese that exploit the possibilities , but I do not think people in the more northerly Member States are in a position to exploit them , even if they had full information and the opportunity to do so .
I note from the figures that the cost per tonne seems to have gone down .
I wonder why we are paying less in this agreement than in the earlier one and why we have increased the number of ships by something like 30 longliners , in addition to the freezer ships that were part of the first agreement .
Nevertheless we welcome the improvements that have been made to this agreement in order to conserve fish in the area and move from a 2-mile limit , which we never should have allowed , to a 12-mile limit .
This gives greater protection to local fishermen , who are quite capable of exploiting every resource within that limit .
If we did not have this agreement this migratory species would not be conserved for the benefit of the local fishermen and would probably be exploited in any case .
Madagascar makes a profit out of this that it would not otherwise receive , so its economy does benefit to some extent .
It is a relatively small amount of money when you consider it as regional aid to fishing ports in any part of the Community .
This agreement gives us approximately ECU 10 million worth of fish .
When you deduct the cost of catching them , it is obviously not an immense amount of regional aid but all these little agreements have to be taken in the context of the whole .
I would prefer the number of vessels going into these waters to be more transparent .
It is very hard to know what is happening when licences are granted to 70 or 80 vessels to catch such a small amount of fish .
Madam President , I should like to thank Mr Gallagher , the rapporteur , for this report on the Commission proposal for the renewal of the tuna agreement with Madagascar for a further three years .
Whilst the Republic of Madagascar should be entitled to use the proceeds of this agreement as it sees fit , I am pleased to see that the major part - 60 % - of the total remunerative package of ECU 2.28 million is to be used for scientific research , conservation and training and therefore will be of direct benefit to the coastal regions and the people who live there .
Direct financial aid and the transfer of technology and expertise to developing countries are the hallmarks of the European Union 's development policy .
I am glad to see that our fishing agreements with developing countries combine some financial aid with a commitment to improving structures and training facilities and providing better opportunities for local fishermen .
However we can and should do more , as part of both the fisheries agreements and our overall development policy .
Very often third countries such as Madagascar are not able to monitor or police the fishing activities of the EU fishing fleets .
Indeed many Member States ' authorities are not able to control their activities either .
However we must find a system that will allow the countries concerned and the Commission to monitor fishing agreements effectively and ensure that there is no over-exploitation of the limited resources .
Over-fishing or over-exploitation of any limited resource will damage that resource to the detriment of all and therefore is absolutely unsustainable .
There is one area where we could help third countries more .
We should give local fishing boats a larger exclusive zone in which to fish .
The current practice of providing a 10-mile zone could and should be extended to 15 miles without serious disadvantage to the EU deep-sea fleets .
This would give the local fishing interests a wider scope and a more solid basis on which to plan their investments .
Madam President , the Commission would like to thank the Mr Gallagher , for this excellent report on the new terms for fishing agreed by the Community fleet in the waters off Madagascar .
I also thank the Members who have complimented to the staff on their hard work on these agreements and the success they are having .
The Commission considers that these measures will permit a more efficient exploitation of the agreement in line with the fundamental principles of resource conservation .
The Commission also considers that the new protocol with Madagascar contains significant innovative features aimed at promoting sustainable fishing in coherence with the Union 's development policy .
The new procotol to the agreement opens up fishing in Madagascar 's exclusive zone to Portuguese and Italian tuna boats for the very first time .
It assigns 60 % of the financial compensation , i.e. about ECU 1.368m over the three years , to targeted actions , namely scientific research , fisheries monitoring , training and the development of traditional fisheries .
It also allows the Malagasy authorities to monitor the movements of Community vessels in the zone , thanks to new provisions in the protocol annex on control procedures , including notification of entry to and exit from the exclusive zone .
The Commission accepts the substance of the amendments proposed by the Committee on Fisheries , but not the form in which they are put .
It would point out that Parliament is already regularly informed about take-up levels for fishery agreements through statements and reports to the committee .
So the Commission cannot accept Mr Teverson 's amendment .
Fishery agreements are concluded at Community level and it is up to the Community to pay the financial compensation , and to vessels fishing in the waters concerned to pay the fees .
We thank the House for its consideration .
Thank you , Commissioner Flynn .
The debate is closed .
We shall now proceed to the vote .
( Parliament adopted the legislative resolution )
I cannot vote in favour of this report .
It effectively endorses the EU 's fisheries policy , which has led to the exhaustion of fish stocks in the waters off the coast of Africa . Madagascar is the country affected here .
What is more , the EU 's policies are impoverishing local fishing communities .
A thoroughgoing review of the whole system is needed .
EC-Gabon fishing agreement
The next item is the report ( A4-0283 / 98 ) by Mr Girão Pereira , on behalf of the Committee on Fisheries , on the proposal for a Council Regulation on the conclusion of the agreement between the European Community and the Gabonese Republic on fishing off the coast of Gabon ( COM ( 98 ) 0376 - C4-0458 / 98-98 / 0212 ( CNS ) ) .
Mr President , I am deputising for Mr Girão Pereira , who was to present his report yesterday .
Since it was postponed until today and it is impossible for him to be with us , I will replace him as best I can .
Before us we have the first agreement with Gabon to reach the implementation stage .
An earlier and broader agreement was concluded in 1988 relating to tuna and demersal species but was never ratified on account of political developments in Gabon at that time .
In 1995 , Gabon approached the European Union , as did Madagascar , about concluding an agreement on tuna .
Other agreements are in force in that region , specifically with São Tomé and Principe , Cote d 'Ivoire and Equitorial Guinea , where Community vessel owners , particularly French , Spanish and Portuguese , now operate .
Given that tuna are a migratory species , it is of particular interest that this agreement should be concluded so that vessel owners can operate throughout the entire region , thereby maximizing their effectiveness .
It should be emphasised that , unlike some agreements , in this instance there is no particular clash with the local fishermen , since the activities of these vessels are conducted on the open sea , 12 miles off-shore , while the small-scale fishing fleet of Gabon comprises vessels with which we are all familiar , particularly the Portuguese .
This agreement has a relatively long time frame of five years , with financial compensation of ECU 810 000 for the first three years for a total catch volume of 9 000 tonnes per annum .
The Community will also pay ECU 1 215 000 in respect of measures relating to resource conservation in the area , and to scientific and technical aid for the fishing sector in Gabon , particularly scientific and technical programmes intended to promote better understanding of resources , programmes for the protection and monitoring of the fishing zones and , finally , study grants and practical training courses .
Allow me here to add , as a comment of my own , that frequently these programmes do not work because the European Union does not always have the courage to draw up reports which carefully and accurately reflect what is happening on the ground or , in this case , in the sea .
Much of the problem of money ill-spent may be attributed to the Community 's lack of care and courage in this regard .
The government of the Gabonese Republic undertakes to submit an annual report to the Commission on the application of these measures and the results achieved , with failure to comply resulting in discontinuation of payments .
Substantial funding ( some 60 % of the financial compensation ) is allocated to the management and conservation of resources and to scientific and technical training in the Gabonese fishing sector .
Another significant aspect of the agreement is the increase in the financial contributions of vessel owners , from ECU 20 to ECU 25 , representing a rise of over 25 % per tonne , with a simultaneous reduction from ECU 80 to ECU 75 per tonne in payments from the Community budget .
Finally , I would also like to say that the new agreement is in line with the Council 's conclusions of 30 October 1997 , for which reason we support it .
Mr President , I would firstly like to congratulate the rapporteur Mr Girão Pereira for his magnificent report and also , on this occasion , the Commission , for having negotiated a thoroughly satisfactory new fisheries agreement .
I would like to draw your attention to a matter which I believe is of great interest , and one that we are following with the utmost concern - it is indeed a shame that our colleagues from the Committee on Budgets have already left the room , Mr President - since the agreement with Gabon marks a turning point in our policy on agreements .
This Protocol is the first in which the Commission carries out its intention of sharing out the costs of these agreements , with the result that vessel owners will pay more and the Community budget less .
The background to this initiative is highly debatable given that we believed the Common Fisheries Policy was inextricably linked to international relations .
Although this is an exceptional step to take , I perfectly understand why part of the cost should fall to the direct beneficiary of a common policy .
However , I fail to understand why a high proportion of the financial cost of the agreements remains the responsibility of the vessel owners when they receive no compensation , since - as we are well aware - the Commission continues to have sole responsibility for the negotiations .
If this is the path we choose to follow , and if they do indeed rebalance payments - to use Commission terminology - all other initiatives should receive the same treatment , giving Community vessel owners responsibilities in negotiating agreements , especially bearing in mind that the Commission does not always negotiate with the sector 's interests at heart .
This is a sector , let us remember , which in the agreements to which we are referring here - access to resources in return for financial compensation - is already paying approximately one third of the total cost of the agreements .
Neither should we forget the discrimination that exists between vessel owners in the different Member States , and on this point I should like to contradict what some of my colleagues said earlier .
This is not discrimination in the sense that we have spoken about , but quite the opposite , since whereas vessel owners in certain fleets - as in this case - are paying increasingly more , in other kinds of agreement they benefit from fishing possibilities at no cost to themselves whatsoever - and here I am referring to agreements with Nordic countries in which southern fleets are not involved .
These are agreements which are the exclusive preserve of certain fleets , preventing the rest of the Community 's fleets from having any access whatsoever , for example in the case of Greenland .
Yet the new Protocol with Mauritius - and the Commission will correct me if I am wrong - provides for pelagic fishing possibilities for countries such as Germany or the Netherlands .
This is why , at its meeting in October 1997 , the Council asked the Commission to carry out a study - a cost-benefit analysis - on fisheries agreements .
And while it waits - in accordance with Council guidelines - for the Council to deliberate on the basis of this study , it has asked the Commission to study how and with what means vessel owners benefitting from fisheries agreements with third countries could share the financial costs of these agreements with the Community in a fair and nondiscriminatory manner , taking account of the interests of the Community and its vessel owners as well as of the third countries affected .
I therefore think , Mr President , that the Commission has gone too far too quickly in this matter and so we ask it to make the same careful considerations to which the Council also refers .
Mr President , when I spoke previously , I discussed the need to balance economic , environmental and development interests .
This time I wish to focus on the issue of subsidies - and , of course , to congratulate the rapporteur for producing a good report .
It behoves us to remember the role played by fishing and agriculture in times gone by . These traditional activities financed the beginnings of industrialisation .
The yield from their labour fed and educated the people who went on to work in manufacturing and the service trades .
Subsidies actually went from agriculture and fisheries to the other sectors .
We are now still living through the intervening period of interregnum which followed . Increased efficiency has led to increased production .
Fear of food shortages drives us to maintain production at levels slightly above the optimum . As a result , the world market goes into surplus and prices fall .
If we are to avoid massive structural transformation of a senseless and unnatural kind , the less affected sectors of society must contribute towards keeping the best parts of these traditional activities alive .
And I refer here to both agriculture and fisheries , since the two are comparable , as are our policies for them .
In the long term , we should of course be aiming to eliminate the differences between world and national markets . We need to create a new equilibrium , with involvement of more than just a few countries .
Once this has happened , subsidies can go .
Mr Teverson somewhat jumps the gun . In his amendment , he says that the fisheries sector should bear the costs itself .
I confess to being too close to the realities of the situation to be able to support this ELDR proposal - although I understand the thinking behind it .
I will therefore abstain when it comes to the vote .
Thank you very much Mr Olsson .
Ladies and gentlemen , in its other capacity as paediatrician the Presidency of the House would like to welcome to Parliament a young child , a young European of just a few months old , and we hope that our speeches do not make him cry , but instead dream sweet European dreams .
Mr President , a study carried out in April this year by the World Bank describes the effects of subsidising the fisheries sector very clearly .
According to the World Bank subsidies mean considerable reductions in fishing opportunities for local fishermen , and in most cases the compensation paid does not reflect the full economic value of the fish .
Second , the study draws attention to the fact that local food requirements may be affected , and that long distance fleets now tend to fish the most profitable species .
Third , trade is also affected , since trading opportunities that should be open to the developing countries with all their raw materials are almost certainly reduced .
It therefore remains a dubious practice and one that we should deal with very cautiously .
As Mrs Fraga Estévez said , the Council issued a number of guidelines in October , but if we look at them more closely they appear extremely vague .
There are no clear criteria which agreements have to meet .
Something is said about the need for a fairer distribution of costs between the vessel owners and the Community , but as we can see from the Gabon Agreement , the owners ' contribution is to increase from ECU 20 to ECU 25 per tonne , while the Community is to continue to pay ECU 75 .
So in our view we still need more specific details , a more cautious approach and better monitoring in line with sustainability .
Mr President , I want to thank Mr Girão Pereira for his report and to say that I support this deal made on behalf of European fishermen .
Firstly , we are dealing with a country that is not exactly the same as the other countries in sub-tropical Africa .
It has oil and forest resources and a GDP per capita double that of the average African country .
So its representatives are in a better position to stand up for themselves and make their own deal .
Nevertheless , I am still concerned about the limited means at the disposal of the European Union to police such deals .
There 9 000 tonnes are a relatively small amount of fish .
Nevertheless , we are talking about licences for 70 boats - 120 tonnes per vessel , if all of them go in .
We do not know whether they catch 120 tonnes or double that figure .
Nevertheless , I agree with Mrs Fraga on the whole matter of whether or not it is right to charge the fishermen for the privilege of fishing .
The European Union has a resource which we hand out without cost or charge to our fishermen , and we extend that resource through these agreements .
As long as the agreements are designed in such a way as to do minimum damage to stocks which would not be utilised by the local fishermen in any case , it is reasonable for the Union to pass on the benefit of that , just as we pass the benefits of our own stocks in our own waters to the fishermen that get the licences to exploit them .
So I accept the principle as reasonable , but when fishermen from a particular region go to exploit these resources , in some instances we should consider whether we should rebalance the resources within our own waters .
Thank you , Mr Flynn .
The debate is closed .
We shall now proceed to the vote .
( Parliament adopted the legislative resolution )
I cannot vote in favour of this report .
It effectively endorses the EU 's fisheries policy , which has led to the exhaustion fish stocks in the waters off the coast of Africa . Gabon is the country affected here .
What is more , the EU 's policies are impoverishing local fishing communities .
A thoroughgoing review of the whole system is needed .
EC-Azerbaijan trade agreement
The next item is the report ( A4-0287 / 98 ) by Mr Schwaiger , on behalf of the Committee on External Economic Relations , on the proposal for a Council Decision on the conclusion by the European Comunity of the interim agreement between the European Community , the European Coal and Steel Community and the European Atomic Energy Community , of the one part , and the Republic of Azerbaijan , of the other part , on trade and trade-related matters ( COM ( 96 ) 613-5467 / 97 - C4-0315 / 98-96 / 0299 ( ACC ) ) .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , in spring 1997 the European Parliament gave its assent to the partnership and cooperation agreement with the Republic of Azerbaijan by a large majority .
The procedure for ratifying this agreement , which governs all the European Union 's relations with Azerbaijan , is likely to take some time .
As is usual with such agreements , therefore , an interim agreement will be used to bring into force those sections of the agreement which do not require ratification , such as the democracy clause , the provisions relating to trade in goods and competition and various institutional provisions .
On behalf of the Committee on External Economic Relations I am today proposing that the European Parliament give its assent to this interim agreement .
In the 1997 own-initiative report on economic cooperation with Azerbaijan the House approved the following guidelines which I proposed : first , the need for closer economic and political cooperation between the European Union and Azerbaijan ; second , the strategic importance of Azerbaijan as an oil-rich country and as a link in the European Union 's economic relations with the central Asian republics ; third , the need for the European Union to support closer regional cooperation between the transcaucasian republics , in other words between Azerbaijan , Georgia and Armenia ; and finally , support for the process to find a peaceful solution to the Nagorno-Karabakh conflict .
The Azerbaijan economy is now looking very encouraging .
Inflation is under control , with prices increasing by only 3 % a year .
Trade figures and the budget are almost in balance , and for a number of years the gross domestic product has been increasing by some 5 % a year .
The only economic weak link is agriculture , where attempts at modernisation have yet to bear fruit .
In the field of political cooperation technical aid from the European Union for the development of a modern administration and an independent judiciary should be stepped up .
Azerbaijan 's framework legislation on the freedom of the press and freedom of expression needs to be fleshed out and greater media plurality ensured in practice .
European aid through ECHO and from the Member States , which accounts for more than 75 % of the world 's total aid to Azerbaijan , must continue .
More than 20 % of the territory of Azerbaijan is still occupied by foreign troops , and over a million refugees are being cared for under the most difficult conditions .
Azerbaijan is potentially a wealthy country , but until its oil resources can be fully exploited in a few years ' time it certainly cannot afford to support a million refugees .
The interim agreement therefore marks an important stage in the development of our cooperation with the transcaucasian republics , and we also see it as an incentive for a speedy resolution of the Nagorno-Karabakh conflict .
It will certainly stimulate improvements to the transcaucasian transport and energy networks , in which Azerbaijan is heavily involved .
The opening of the pipeline across Georgia which is scheduled for October 1998 will give Azerbaijan greater economic independence and also greater independence from its neighbours to the north and south .
The road and rail project to open up the whole of the central Asian region via the transcaucasian republics , project Racika , which is co-funded by the European Union , will further boost Azerbaijan 's economy .
Closer cooperation between Moldavia , Ukraine , Georgia , Azerbaijan and the central Asian republics on establishing further economic links with Europe will also play a part here .
The interim agreement and the special financial aid for Azerbaijan are also vital if we are to ensure that Azerbaijan receives a similar level of support to that provided by the European Union for Armenia and Georgia .
We hope that the further steady development of democracy will form a basis for close , trusting and lasting cooperation between Azerbaijan and the European Union in the interests of both .
We are hoping to see the development of close regional ties in Transcaucasia and we are helping the region to help itself now that it has begun the process of building closer political , economic , cultural and social links with Europe .
Thank you , Mr President .
Mr Schwaiger , I should like to congratulate you on the excellent sauce and accompaniments you have served up , and the care you have taken with your preparations .
Unfortunately , carrying on this morning 's theme , the fish itself is not very fresh and leaves a rather bitter taste in the mouth .
The interim agreement is designed to implement the trade elements of the partnership and cooperation agreement first .
Given the history of the last 500 years it is simply hypocritical to claim that free trade somehow automatically generates democracy and human rights , or else it shows a cynical disregard for the problems of the people involved - not on your part , I hasten to add , but by those who have negotiated the agreement and who use the safety clause so one-sidedly .
There are sure to be misgivings about this in the Member States too , which this interim agreement is designed to circumvent .
The human rights situation is disastrous .
Despite the OECD 's insistence that a peace agreement had to be reached the war with Armenia is still continuing .
I do not wish to go into detail here and would simply mention a few salient facts . On 12 September the police assaulted 34 journalists on the fringes of a demonstration organised by the opposition and confiscated their equipment .
On 1 September the journalist Tai Hamid was dragged from his car and assaulted .
In such a situation we should use the existing CIS agreements to provide aid and to develop relations , instead of allowing trade to monopolise our attention .
We therefore intend to abstain in the vote on your report .
Mr President , if we look at the map we can see just how important Azerbaijan is to us .
You would sometimes think that our political leaders had no maps in their offices , only paintings , yet they should really be looking at the geographical details over and over again .
A glance at the map should give us serious cause for concern : the risk of war is mounting around the world .
Think of what is still going on in Africa , and the tension between Iran and Afghanistan that could so easily spill over the borders .
In Azerbaijan there is still the problem with Armenia over Nagorno-Karabakh and the Armenian-occupied areas of the country , a problem which needs to be resolved before it is too late .
All too often problems have been put off and put off until they become completely intractable , as could well soon be the case in Bosnia .
You only have to watch what is happening in Kosovo .
Azerbaijan is also important to us for other reasons .
It is a country with enormous economic potential , and even if its problems have meant that its economy has not developed as it should - the farming sector in particular leaves a lot to be desired - it still remains of considerable importance to us in the long term .
There is another reason why Azerbaijan is of interest to us : its close relations with Turkey .
When I visited Atatürk 's mausoleum there was a book in which visiting heads of state could write their thoughts , and Azerbaijan 's president had written ' Atatürk , your Turks are back ' .
This was when the Soviet system collapsed , and it shows how important Turkey is in the region and how vital it is to cooperate with Turkey , yet we keep doing all sorts of things that prevent us from cooperating , which is politically very short-sighted .
The tension between Iran and Afghanistan shows the sort of long-term risks that we need to prevent from arising in the first place , because once things have started it is too late to turn the clock back .
This is why I believe we need to recognise the importance of Azerbaijan .
The negotiations that we have allowed to drag on and all these little details that may help to solve small issues fail to get to grips with the main problem .
Our overall relations with this whole area are symptomatic of enormous weakness , are causing major irritation and are simply further proof of the need to make rapid progress in this field .
Although it is only one small step , I should nevertheless like to offer my warmest thanks to Mr Schwaiger for his report , and I can only hope that his dynamism will help to ensure that considerable further progress is made in relations with Azerbaijan .
I too should like to join with the Members in thanking Mr Schwaiger for his report on the interim agreement with Azerbaijan .
We especially welcome the positive view of the need to deepen our relations with that country .
The interim agreement is the first overall agreement between the European Union and Azerbaijan .
It will provide us with an important platform to regulate and consult with Azerbaijan on all trade and trade-related matters .
Azerbaijan is an important strategic partner for us due to its geographical location and its significant petroleum resources .
Mr von Habsburg 's point is well-taken here .
Azerbaijan is expected in the coming years to realise its potential as a major energy producer and as a transit point for trade passing between Europe and Central Asia .
Our bilateral trade last year rose by 59 % , albeit from a low base , with a significant surplus in the EC 's favour .
The interim agreement will help to set the right conditions for EC companies to compete in Azerbaijan .
European companies need to work hard in order to maintain their economic presence there given the keen competition from the United States , Turkey , and Far Eastern and other Asian countries .
This competition will increase even further once oil exports increase to their full potential .
The EC is also a major donor to Azerbaijan .
At the end of last year we had allocated more than ECU 220 million to Azerbaijan , not including important TACIS regional cooperation projects , for which Azerbaijan is a key player .
The Commission is proposing to provide Azerbaijan with financial assistance to help with social reconstruction .
As you are aware , the proposal is currently under discussion in the European Parliament .
This report is of great importance to Azerbaijan .
Currently the country is facing a very difficult economic situation , with 70 % of the population on or below the poverty line .
As a result of low oil prices , revenue from the oil sector has been reduced .
The country is unlikely to become a major oil exporter for at least another five years .
The Nagorno-Karabakh conflict has been referred to and it has made the economic situation in Azerbaijan even more difficult .
About 20 % of the country is occupied by Nagorno-Karabakh Armenian forces .
Furthermore , the country has to support nearly one million refugees and internally displaced persons .
However , the governments of both Armenia and Azerbaijan have recently made some conciliatory statements , in particular in the margins of the Baku Transport Conference , to which Armenia was specifically invited at the Commissi